6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 1/528
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to
the left, have been passed, but have not been incorporated in
the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there
are any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary
from the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the
official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2179
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO, AMENDING SECTION 2(C) TO
CHAPTER 6, TITLE 1, REGARDING REGULAR DATES AND TIMES OF CITY COUNCIL
MEETINGS, AND PROVIDING FOR THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF SAID CHANGE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
BLACKFOOT, IDAHO AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1: That Chapter 6, Section 2(C) of Title 1 be amended as follows:
1-6-2(C) Regular Meetings: The city council shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Tuesday
of each month, unless that date conflicts with a national holiday, election day, or other event
necessitating a meeting be cancelled. Regular meetings will be held at city hall at the hour of seven
o’clock P.M. Special meetings on other dates or times may be scheduled as provided herein. The
mayor shall preside at council meetings.
SECTION 2: That the effective date of this Ordinance shall be after passage and publication as
provided by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED by the Mayor and City Council this 7th day of May, 2019.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 2/528
CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO
By: __________________________
Marc Carroll, Mayor
ATTEST: ________________________________
City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary
from the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the
official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2180
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO, ADDING SECTION (9)
(G) TO CHAPTER 4, TITLE 11, REGARDING THE ADOPTION OF A PROJECT
REDEVELOPMENT OPTION (“ProZone”), AND PROVIDING FOR THE EFFECTIVE DATE
OF SAID CHANGE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
BLACKFOOT, IDAHO AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1: That Chapter 4, Section 9(G) of Title 11 be added as follows:
11-4-9: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
G. Project Redevelopment Option (PROZone)
a. Intent. Thischapter creates a regulatory framework to govern the enactment of regulations to further the
intention of the Comprehensive Plan, particularly,but not exclusively, in older, densely developed areas of the
City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 3/528
b. Purpose. The purpose of the Project Redevelopment Option ("PRO") zone is to create a regulatory tool
that permits initiative and flexibility in creating well-planned, architecturally designed development that meets the
needs of the community. More particularly, the intent of the City Council in enacting this Chapter is to:
. i. Encourage creative and efficient utilization of land.
ii. Encourage assemblage of property to create harmonious and efficient development patterns and
projects.
iii. Provide land use and design standards tailored to specific geographic areas so that new development
outcomes are more predictable and compatible with surrounding land uses.
iv. Coordinate property development and design, including large-scale facilities, with development, both
existing and as envisioned by the City of Blackfoot Comprehensive Plan, on adjoining and nearby
property.
v. Minimize the effect of additional traffic.
vi. Improve parking and air quality.
vii. Encourage new development that fosters a sense of community.
viii. Better manage the location, timing, and sequencing of new development.
ix. Provide an opportunity to involve the public.
1. Zone Establishment
(a) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to every PRO zone created under the authority of this
chapter.
(b) To establish a PRO zone, an applicant shall submit a petition (application). The application shall
then be considered for approval as provided in this Title.
2. Optional Schematic Development Plan
a. Schematic Plan Submittal. An applicant may, before submitting a proposed PRO application as required by
this Chapter, submit an application showing a proposed schematic development plan for the
subjectproperty. A schematicdevelopment plan shallbe considered by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council as provided in this section.
b. What to include in a Schematic Development Plan: A schematic development plan application
shall include thefollowing:
1. A review fee of five hundred (500) dollars.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 4/528
i. Fifty percent (50%) of the schematic development plan application fee may be
applied to the application fee for a PRO zone if the City Councilrecommends that an
applicantapply as provided in subsection (4) of this section.
2. A public hearing notice fee as required by The City Codes, and Administrative policies
of The City of Blackfoot.
3. A statement detailing efforts by the applicant to assemble property to achieve logical
boundaries for the proposed development.
4. A schematic development plan which shows how a property could be developed under
proposed PRO zone regulations. A schematic development plan shall be drawn to scale and
must show a realistic layout reflecting how the property reasonably could be developed
considering the development standards of a proposedPRO zone, and existing and
envisioned conditions on the subject property and adjoining property. A schematic
development plan should show at least the following; whatever is shown shall be construed
as the intent of theplan:
a. Location of proposeduses, including dwellingunit density and occupancy.
b. Height, location, bulk and preliminary elevations of buildings.
c. Location, arrangement, and configuration of open space, landscaping, and
building setbacks.
d. Location, access points, and design of off-street parking areas.
e. Number, size, and location of signs.
f. Street layout, andtraffic and pedestrian circulation patterns, including
proposed access to the property.
g. Relationship of the property to adjoining and nearby properties and uses.
5. A schematic development plan is not intended to permit actual development of
property pursuant to such a plan but shall be prepared merely to represent how the
property could be developed. Submittal and review of an application for a schematic
development plan shall not create any vested rights to development.
a. Neighborhood Meeting. A neighborhood meeting shall be held at least two (2)
weeks prior to presenting a schematic development plan at a meeting of the
Planningand Zoning Commission.
b. Process Leading to the Public Hearing. Pursuant to the notice and hearing requirements of
the State and Blackfoot City Code, the schematic development plan shall be first submitted
to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a recommendation and thereafter to the City
Council for consideration. After a public hearing, the Council may vote to recommend that an
applicant:
1. Apply to a PRO zone that would allow development:
i. As shown on the schematic development plan; or
2. As amendedto address issuesidentified by the City Councilto accomplish the goals and
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan; or
3. Not submit a PRO zone application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 5/528
3. PROZone Application Requirements
a. Requirements. The following materials shall be included with every application for the establishment of
a PRO zone:
i. Proposed zone name and location.
ii. A statementshowing how the proposed PRO zone relates to the Comprehensive Plan and furthers
the intent of the Plan.
iii. A statement detailing efforts by the applicant to assemble property to achieve logical boundaries
for the proposed development.
iv. Proposed zone text, including:
1. Permitted, conditional, and accessory uses (individually listedand defined).
2. Proposed development standards, including:
a. Land use standards are establishing land use types, occupancy, location,
density,buffering and anyother element envisioned by applicable sections of the General
Plan.
b. Lot standards are establishing requirements for minimum lot area, depth, coverage,
and dimensions.
c. Building setback standards for the front, side, and rear yards.
d. Design standards addressing building height, building orientation, commonand
private open space, naturalresource protection, architectural design, and any other
provisions proposedto be included in the PRO zone.
e. Landscaping and buffering standards.
f. Parking.
g. A statement that the PRO zone will conform to all applicable chapters of Blackfoot
City Code, except as may be specifically amended by the adopted PRO zone text.
h. Evidence of justification for requested changes to such standards. Deviations from
parking and street standards outlined in Blackfoot City
Code is intended to be rare and shall be approved by three (3) members of the
City Council.
v. A preliminary project plan as provided in this Title and including the following additional information:
I. Relationship of the property to surrounding properties and uses.
2. Number, size, and location of all proposed signs.
vi. A review fee of one thousand (1,000) dollars plus a fee of:
1. Thirty (30) dollars for each dwellingunit proposed in a residential project; or
2. Ten(10) dollars for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area in a non-residential
project.
vii. A public hearing notice fee as required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 6/528
4. Review of PROZone Application - Approval
a. Neighborhood. A neighborhood meeting shall be held at least two (2) weeks prior to presenting a PRO
zone application at a meetingof the Planning and ZoningCommission.
b. Considering an Application. When considering an application for a proposedPRO zone, the Planning
and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may adopt, modifications to PRO regulations and
standards proposed by an applicant who, in the opinion of the approving authority, is needed to meet the intent
and requirements of this chapter.
c. Approval. A proposed PROzone application and associated preliminary project plan shall be approved
only if, in the opinion of the approving authority, development proposed on the property will:
i. Further applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Plan and any applicable master plan,
particularly provisions which establish density limitations.
ii. Conform to applicable chapters of this Title and except as may be specifically amended by the
adopted PRO zone text.
iii. Preserve and enhance the subject property and neighborhood by achieving integrated planning
and design.
iv. Be compatible with development on adjoining and nearby property, both existing and as envisioned
by the City of Blackfoot Comprehensive Plan.
v. Minimize the effect of traffic congestion and improve parking and air quality, including providing
opportunities for alternative modes oftransportation such as walking, bicycling, or transit.
d. Development Agreement. When deemednecessary or desirable by the City,application and approval of a
PRO zone and any development within a PRO zone may require the submission and support of a development
agreement.
5. Zone Designation
a. Adopted PRO zone. Upon approval, each adopted PRO zone shall be listed in Section
9 of this Chapter and shall be independent of any other PRO zone.
b. Text Amendment. A text amendment to this Title which establishes regulations for a particular PRO zone
shall be adopted as a separate chapter of this Title and shall be identified sequentially. Each such chapter
shallhave a uniquename combined with the designation "PRO" followed by a code categorizing the PRO by
project type as (B)
Business, (A) Apartment or other multi-family, or
(R) Residential - One family, then followed by a sequential number without regard to project category,
corresponding to the chapter number for the zone, the first of which shall be "1."
6. Permits Required
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 7/528
After approval of a PRO zone and an associated preliminary project plan, and beforethe issuance
of any building permits, a final project plan shall be submitted as required by this Blackfoot City
Code. Applications for subdivision approval and any other neededpermits shall be submitted as
needed to implement an approved preliminary project plan.
7. Project Plan Variations and Amendments
After a PRO zone is adopted and a preliminary project plan for the subject property has been
approved, no material variations shall be made to the preliminary project plan and the development
standards adopted in the applicable PRO zone unless the zoning text or map, as the case may be,
is amendedby the City Council to permit such variation. Such amendments to an approved
preliminary project plan shallbe obtained only by followingthe procedures required for first approval
set forth in this chapter.
8. Reversion of Zoning
Substantial action shall be taken to obtain needed additional approvals and begin construction
authorizedby such approvals within one (1) year afterthe support of a PROZone.If a final project
plan has not been approved within one (1) year after a PRO zone has been applied to a specific
property, action shall be initiated to rezone the property to the zone previously existing on the
property or such other zone as may be deemed appropriate by the City Council.
9. PROZones Adopted
The followingProject Redevelopment Option zones are anticipated to be adopted(example):
Blackfoot Southgate Project Redevelopment Option Zone (Southgate PRO Zone)
10. PRO Zone Reserved
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 8/528
11. Uses Must Be in Conformity
Land or premises shall be used, unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, in conformity with
regulations herein set forth for the zoning district in which said land or premises is located.
12. Building in Conformity
No buildingor structure shall be erectedor used unlessin conformity withinthe regulations herein set
forth for the zoning district in which said building or structure is located.
13. Architectural Design Standards
Architectural design requirements are found in Supplementary Regulations under Commercial
Design Standards.
14. Commercial Lighting Standards
Commercial Lighting Standards are applicable as described in Supplementary Regulations.
SECTION 2: That the effective date of this Ordinance shall be after passage and publication as provided by
law.
PASSED AND APPROVED by the Mayor and City Council this 7th day of May, 2019.
CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO
By: __________________________
Marc Carroll, Mayor
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 9/528
ATTEST: ________________________________
City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary
from the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the
official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2181
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO, ADDING SECTION (9)
(F) TO CHAPTER 4, TITLE 11, REGARDING THE ADOPTION OF A DOWNTOWN
HISTORIC BUSINESS ZONE, AMENDING SECTION 12 OF CHAPTER 4, TITLE 11,
REGARDING THE DEFINITION OF COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS, AND PROVIDING FOR THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF SAID CHANGE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
BLACKFOOT, IDAHO AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1: That Chapter 4, Section 9(F) of Title 11 be added as follows:
11-4-9 : COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
F. Downtown Historic Business Zone (DHB): The purpose in establishing the community commercial zone
is to provide a district in which the primary use of land is for business purposes and promotes the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 10/528
development of retail shopping stores and service establishments. Encouraged in the district will be
residential apartments, except in the story abutting street level.
SECTION 2: That Chapter 4, Section 12(A) of Title 11 be amended as follows:
11-4-12: SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS:
A. C1 district and Downtown Historic Business Zone regulations:
1. No front yard or side yard shallbe required, exceptwhen a building or group of buildings abut upon a
residential district. A yard of not less than ten feet (1O') in width or a sight obstructing fence shall be
provided on the side of the lot abutting the residential district.
2. There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than fifteen feet (15'), or a sight obstructing fence
whenabutting upon a residential zone. The back yard may be used for off-street parking and loading. If there
exists an alleyway behind the said property, no back yard is required.
3. There is no minimum lot width or minimum area requirements.
4. Residential usage in commercial areas shall follow the area requirements as set forth in the R3
residential zone regulations. Residential usage in the Downtown Historic Business Zone shall have no
minimum or maximum area requirements.
5. Height limit is not more than sixty feet (60').
. Off street parking is delineated in section 11-4-14 of this chapter.
7. Signs are controlled by the international sign code. No animated signs that are deemed to have a
deteriorating influence upon surrounding properties may be used. Questions should be directed to the
zoning administrator, the planning and zoning commission or the city council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 11/528
SECTION 3: That the effective date of this Ordinance shall be after passage and publication as provided by
law.
PASSED AND APPROVED by the Mayor and City Council this 7th day of May, 2019.
CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO
By: __________________________
Marc Carroll, Mayor
ATTEST: ________________________________
City Clerk
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Blackfoot, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including
ordinance 2178, passed March 5, 2019. Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance
supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2112
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO, CITY CODE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 12/528
BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the city of Blackfoot, Idaho as follows:
Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city code of the city of Blackfoot,
Idaho prepared by Sterling Codifiers, containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature
together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the
city, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law of the city as enacted
by the mayor and city council.
Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of
binding together with the continuous supplement service, provided by Sterling Codifiers, whereby
each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or
deleting provisions of the official city code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the
proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the
city clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office is
regularly open.
Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city code shall be considered as
a continuation of said ordinance provision and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately
eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special nature, such
as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances
shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the city
code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of such code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter
or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict,
hereby repealed.
Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded and shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
PASSED this 4th day of December, 2012
APPROVED this 4th day of December, 2012
/s/
Mayor Mike Virtue
ATTEST:
/s/
City Clerk, Suzanne McNeel
Roll Call Vote:
AYES: Councilman Brown, Councilman Jensen, Councilman Woodfin
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 13/528
NAYS: None
ABSENT: None
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
BLACKFOOT CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute
the official city code of the city of Blackfoot. This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the
THIRD REVISED CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT, and may be referred
to as simply "this code", "code of ordinances", "Blackfoot code" or "city ordinance". This code is
hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most
recent legislation of the city as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number
of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to
the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any legal documents. (2003 Code § 1-
01-01; amd. 2012 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all
courts and in administrative tribunals of this state as the ordinances of the city of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this title. (2003
Code § 1-01-02; amd. 2012 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section
or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute sufficient compliance with Idaho Code section 50-
901 et seq. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each
copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in
each individual copy of this code. (2003 Code § 1-01-03; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 14/528
1-1-4: ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section
or any page of this code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed
or omitted. Said code, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the city clerk when directed so to
do by order of the city council. (2012 Code)
1-1-5: MAINTENANCE OF THIS CODE:
Upon receipt of each published ordinance from the codifiers, the city clerk shall promptly forward a
copy of each page thereof to each person having an official copy of this code. The city clerk may
collect a fee for each copy of this code and an annual fee for maintenance thereof, provided such fees
shall be established by resolution or ordinance duly passed by the city council. (2003 Code § 1-01-04)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
A. All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed,
except such as are included in this code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from
repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances;
ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances
granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing
the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement
ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer
or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; sign ordinances; economic development; urban
renewal; public utilities; and all special ordinances.
B. The repeal of the ordinances as provided in subsection A of this section, shall not affect any debt or
fee which is accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding
commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office of any person
holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor shall the repeal of any ordinance have
the effect of reviving any ordinance heretofore repealed or superseded. (2003 Code § 1-02-01;
amd. 2012 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the
conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this
code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 15/528
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in
respect to such provisions only. (2003 Code § 1-02-02; amd. 2012 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former
ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance
or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act
so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued
or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter
shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such
provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the
new ordinance takes effect.
B. This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is
in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by
virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new
enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person,
firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2012 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code or any part
thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this
code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section,
subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any
one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2003 Code § 1-02-03; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
A. Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this code
shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council
may be fully carried out.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 16/528
B. Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any provision of this code, it shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and
general welfare.
C. Computation Of Time: Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to
be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day
is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded.
D. Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some
other city officer to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of
the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise.
E. Gender: Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.
F. Singular And Plural: The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
G. Tenses: Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa,
unless manifestly inapplicable.
H. Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.
I. May/Shall, Must: The word "may" is permissive; the words "shall" and "must" are mandatory.
J. Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed according to the
common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others
as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and
understood according to such peculiar and meaning.
K. Officers And Employees: Whenever any officer, employee, department, board or commission is
referred by title, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the city of
Blackfoot".
L. Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed in the
content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or "subsection", or words of like import for
organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2012 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this code and the ordinances of the city, shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 17/528
construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless
a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words and
phrases:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by
implication.
BUSINESS: Any trade, profession, calling, activity, operation or enterprise for which a license is
required by any ordinance of the city.
CITY: The city of Blackfoot, Idaho.
CITY CLERK: The individual appointed to act as the city clerk.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Blackfoot, Idaho.
CODE: The city code of the city of Blackfoot, Idaho.
COUNTY: The county of Bingham, state of Idaho.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation
or other activity subject to city regulation, authorization or limitation.
HIGHWAY, ROAD: Means and includes public bridges, and may be equivalent to the words "county
way", "county road", "common road" and "state road".
LICENSE: Any certificate or license issued by the city.
LOCATION: Whenever any act, conduct or offense is prohibited or required and no reference is made
to location, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the act, conduct or offense prohibited or
required shall be within the boundaries of the city.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUISANCE: Unless such term is otherwise defined within any applicable section of this code,
"nuisance" shall mean any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can reasonably be said to have a
detrimental effect on the property of a person or persons within the community.
OATH: An affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for
an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm"
and "affirmed".
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any
part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act, action or conduct prohibited by this code, or the failure to perform any acts
required by this code.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL: Any elected or appointed person employed by the city, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 18/528
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: A natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club,
company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or
employee of any of them.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Lands, tenements and hereditaments.
REASONABLE TIME: In all cases where any ordinance requires that an act be done in a reasonable
time or that reasonable notice be given, such reasonable time for such act or notice shall be deemed
to mean such time as may be necessary for the expeditious performance of such duty or compliance
with such notice.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for
the use of pedestrians.
STATE: The state of Idaho.
STREET: All streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public
ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other
public property so designated in any law of this state.
TENANT AND OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the
whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WEEK: Any seven (7) day period.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code, unless
otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles
or things to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters,
but when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond,
it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year. (2012 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 19/528
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed
to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2012 Code)
Chapter 4
PENALTIES; OFFENSES CLASSIFIED
1-4-1: CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES:
There hereby are declared four (4) classes of offenses under this code as follows:
A. Misdemeanors;
B. Infractions;
C. Parking violations; and
D. City code violations. (2003 Code § 1-09-01)
1-4-2: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATIONS:
Unless otherwise provided, the violation of any ordinance of the city, or any section of this code,
hereby is declared to constitute a misdemeanor and punishable as such. (2003 Code § 1-09-02)
1-4-3: PENALTY FOR MISDEMEANORS:
Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by ordinance or limited by state statute,
every public offense and every unlawful act declared by ordinance to be a misdemeanor is punishable
by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment in the county jail not to
exceed six (6) months. (2003 Code § 1-09-03; amd. 2012 Code)
1-4-4: INFRACTIONS:
A. Penalty: Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by ordinance, every public
offense and every unlawful act declared by ordinance to be an infraction is punishable by a fine not
to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 20/528
B. Failure To Appear On Citation Or Summons: If the defendant fails to appear before the clerk at or
before the time stated in an infraction citation or summons, the court shall enter default judgment
against the defendant for the infraction as provided by law without giving further notice to the
defendant.
C. Failure To Appear After First Appearance: If a defendant fails to appear at the time fixed by a trial
date notice or continuance notice served on the defendant as provided by law, the court shall enter
default judgment against the defendant for the infraction without giving further notice to the
defendant. (2003 Code § 1-09-04)
D. Notice Of Default Judgment: If a default judgment is entered against a defendant for an infraction
pursuant to law, the clerk shall mail a notice of judgment to the defendant at the address stated in
the citation advising the defendant that the defendant must pay the judgment by a date, which shall
not be less than fourteen (14) days after the date of the notice. The notice shall state that failure to
pay the judgment will result in suspension of the defendant's license. (2003 Code § 1-09-04; amd.
2012 Code)
1-4-5: PARKING VIOLATIONS:
Parking violations, penalties and procedures shall be as set forth in title 7, chapter 4 of this code.
(2003 Code § 1-09-05)
1-4-6: CITY CODE VIOLATIONS:
A. Penalty: Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by ordinance, every public
offense and every unlawful act declared by ordinance to be a city code violation is punishable by a
civil violation penalty not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
B. Procedure For Payment: Payment for a city code violation shall be made directly to the city clerk
within ten (10) days or within the time prescribed on the ticket or citation, but in no event shall the
time so prescribed be less than ten (10) days.
C. Contesting Citation: In the event that the citation for a city code violation is contested, the person
charged shall appear at the city clerk's office within the time prescribed on the citation and sign a
document contesting the violation charged. In the event that a contest is made, the city attorney
may do one or more of the following: 1) set the matter for an informal conference with the
contesting individual; 2) dismiss the citation; 3) amend the citation to another applicable city or
state code infraction or misdemeanor charge and file an amended citation or a misdemeanor or
infraction complaint with the magistrate division of the district court.
D. Failure To Contest And Failure To Pay Penalty: Failure to timely contest the citation as set forth
above shall be deemed an admission to the violation and the city clerk shall enter a default.
Subsequent failure to pay the applicable penalty within fourteen (14) days after the entry of default
shall constitute a misdemeanor and, in addition to the penalty for the city code violation, will
subject the violator to up to a three hundred dollar ($300.00) fine and/or six (6) months in the
county jail. Upon entering the default for the violation, the city clerk shall notify the violator that the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 21/528
penalty must be paid within fourteen (14) days or a misdemeanor citation for failure to pay penalty
will be filed in the magistrate division of the district court subjecting the violator to penalties of up to
a three hundred dollar ($300.00) fine and/or six (6) months in the county jail. (2003 Code § 1-09-
06)
1-4-7: FAILURE TO OBEY CITATION:
A. Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to appear in court at the time promised on a
misdemeanor or infraction citation or to fail to appear at the time indicated on a misdemeanor or
infraction citation served upon the defendant or, to fail to appear at the time indicated on a
misdemeanor or infraction summons served upon the defendant, regardless of the disposition of
the charge upon which such citation or summons was originally issued.
B. Appearance By Counsel: The duty to appear in court at the time indicated in a misdemeanor or
infraction citation or summons may be complied with by an appearance by counsel in the manner
prescribed by rule of the supreme court.
C. Misdemeanor Violation: Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor. (2003
Code § 1-09-07)
1-4-8: FAILURE TO PAY FINE OR RESTITUTION:
A failure to pay any civil fine or other fine, penalty or court ordered restitution, after having opportunity
to contest and exhaust all default grace periods, shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) and/or imprisonment in the county
jail not to exceed six (6) months. In addition to the fine and/or jail time, the defendant shall be ordered
to pay restitution to the applicable entity in the amount of the original fine, penalty or restitution
attributable to the original charge, citation or violation. (2003 Code § 1-09-08)
1-4-9: RESTITUTION FOR JAIL TIME FEES:
Any criminal defendant who is incarcerated for violating this code shall, in addition to any fine or
penalty imposed by the court, reimburse the city in the form of restitution for all charges incurred by
the city for such incarceration. Failure to pay such restitution to the city shall be a violation of section
1-4-8 of this chapter. (2003 Code § 1-09-09)
Chapter 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
1-5-1: ORDER CREATING MUNICIPALITY:
The municipality known as the city of Blackfoot hereby is recognized as being created on January 17,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 22/528
1901, under the laws of the state, and hereinafter shall be known as the city of Blackfoot. (Ord. 2120,
3-4-2014, eff. 3-4-2014)
1-5-2: CORPORATE SEAL:
A. Design:
1. The corporate seal of the city of Blackfoot, Bingham County, Idaho, shall be circular in form with
inner circle of solid silver band design and outer circle of rope design. Within the circle are three
(3) silver stars over the image of an eagle. Under the eagle are the words, "BINGHAM COUNTY,
IDAHO". The words, "GREAT SEAL OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT", appear in a circular
pattern in silver color with blue background between the outer circle of rope design and the inner
circle of solid silver band. At the bottom of the seal is a ribbon and the following, "Incorporated
1901".
2. A facsimile of the above described seal is as follows:
B. Adoption Of Seal: The seal described in subsection A of this section hereby is adopted as the
corporate seal of the city of Blackfoot, Bingham County, Idaho.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 23/528
C. City Clerk Custodian Of Seal: The city clerk shall be the custodian of the corporate seal of the city
and shall affix said seal's imprint upon all official documents, records and licenses. (Ord. 2120, 3-4-
2014, eff. 3-4-2014)
1-5-3: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The Morning News, a daily newspaper published at and within the city, hereby is designated and
appointed as the official newspaper of the city. (Ord. 2120, 3-4-2014, eff. 3-4-2014)
Chapter 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1-6-1: MAYOR:
A. Duties Of Mayor: The Mayor is the Chief Executive Officer of the City. He shall devote full time to
the duties of his office so that he may efficiently and faithfully discharge the same. He shall
maintain his office at the City Hall. He shall from time to time give the City Council such information
and recommend such measures as he may deem beneficial to the City. He shall examine the
grounds of all complaints against any of the officers to determine existence of a violation or neglect
of duty, and report the evidence thereof, if deemed sufficient for the removal of said officer to the
City Council. He shall require that every officer, on the expiration of his term of office or resignation
or removal from the same, deliver to his successor all monies, books, papers, maps, plats,
furniture, fixtures, apparatus, machinery, tools and instruments and appurtenances belonging to
such office. He shall perform all other duties imposed by the State. (2003 Code § 1-06-01)
B. Additional Powers And Functions Of Mayor: The Mayor, in addition to the powers, duties and
functions vested in him by statute as the Chief Executive Officer of the City and those specifically
vested in him by the provisions of this Code, shall have authority to act, or designate the officer
who shall act, in the enforcement of any provision of this Code in all cases where this Code fails to
specify the officer who shall be charged with the duty of enforcement. The Mayor also shall have
the following powers and functions:
1. Mayor To Sign Contracts: The Mayor is authorized and empowered to sign his name officially for
and in behalf of the City on all contracts, including deeds, bonds, bills, notes, obligations and
other agreements, documents and papers, to which the City is a party, and to require that the
conditions in the said instruments are faithfully performed, and to borrow money on the credit of
the City when authorized by the City Council.
2. Accounts And Reports Of Officers: The Mayor shall have the power, when he deems it
necessary, to require any officer of the City to exhibit his accounts or other papers, and to make
reports to the City Council in writing, touching any subject or matter he may require pertaining to
his office.
3. Police Power Of Mayor: The Mayor shall have jurisdiction over all places within five (5) miles of
the corporate limits of the City for the enforcement of any health or quarantine ordinance and
regulations thereof, and shall have jurisdiction in all matters vested in him by ordinance,
excepting taxation, within one (1) mile of the corporate limits of said City and over such
properties as may be owned by the City without the corporate limits. (2003 Code § 1-06-02)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 24/528
4. Mayor May Require Aid: The Mayor is hereby authorized to call every resident of the City over
twenty one (21) years of age to aid in enforcing the laws. (2003 Code § 1-06-02; amd. 2012
Code)
5. Other Powers: The Mayor shall have all other powers granted by the laws of the State.
6. Appointment Of Council Members: The Mayor may appoint Council members to special projects
and/or to watch over, oversee, review and give advice to the Mayor and City Council on one (1)
or more City departments. (2003 Code § 1-06-02)
C. Duties As Administrator Of City: The Mayor, as Administrator of the City shall:
1. Manage the City administration and personnel.
2. Coordinate management functions of the various departments or agencies to effectuate the
directions and programs of the executive as defined or directed by the Mayor and City Council.
3. Coordinate with the City Treasurer to draft a two (2) year preliminary budget plan to be
submitted to the City Council for review and comment by June 30 of each calendar year.
4. Oversee and ensure that procurement regulations are implemented pursuant to State law and
City policy.
5. Provide reports as required by State law.
6. Provide a state of the City report to the City Council by the last day of February of each year.
(2003 Code § 1-06-03)
D. Majority Required For Election: A majority of the votes cast for the Office of Mayor shall be required
for election to that office. In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast in the
general election, there shall be a runoff election between the two (2) candidates receiving the two
(2) highest numbers of votes cast in said general election. Such runoff election shall be conducted
as in a general election, and shall be conducted within thirty (30) days after said general election,
in accordance with Idaho Code section 50-612. (2003 Code § 1-06-04; amd. 2012 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2179 - CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.
Go to new ordinance.
1-6-2: CITY COUNCIL:
A. Parliamentary Rules: Except as may be inconsistent with the provisions of this section, the
parliamentary rules and law for the conducting of regularly scheduled Council meetings shall be
guided by "Robert's Rules of Order", current edition. The failure to comply with "Robert's Rules of
Order" shall not invalidate any action taken by Council. (Ord. 2176, 3-5-2019)
B. Quorum: A majority of the Council members elected shall constitute a quorum. A less number may
adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members. (2003 Code § 1-07-02)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 25/528
C. Regular Meetings: The City Council shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Tuesday of
each month. Meetings will be held at City Hall at the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. The Mayor
shall preside at Council meetings. (2003 Code § 1-07-03)
D. Special Meetings: A special meeting of the City Council may be called at any time by the Mayor or
a majority of the members of the Council in the manner provided by statute. (2003 Code § 1-07-04)
E. Election Of President Of Council: At the time of taking office, the City Council shall elect one of its
members President of the Council, who shall preside at all meetings of the Council and perform all
other duties of the Mayor in the absence of the Mayor; and, in the absence of the President of the
Council, shall elect one of their members to occupy his place temporarily and who shall be styled
Acting President of the Council, and the President and Acting President, when occupying the place
of Mayor, shall have the same privileges as other members of the Council and all acts of the
President and Acting President, while so acting, shall be binding upon the Council and upon the
City as if done by the Mayor. (2003 Code § 1-07-05)
F. Order Of Business: The business of the City Council shall be presented in the order as set forth by
the Mayor. (2003 Code § 1-07-06)
G. Presiding Officer: The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, may speak to points of
order in preference to other members, and shall decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal
to the City Council, on which appeal no member shall speak more than once without leave of the
Council. (2003 Code § 1-07-07)
H. Priority Of Business: All questions relating to priority of business shall be decided without debate.
(2003 Code § 1-07-08)
I. Recognition By Presiding Officer: When two (2) or more members happen to request recognition at
once, the presiding officer shall name who is to speak first. (2003 Code § 1-07-09)
J. Privileges Of Members: No member shall speak more than twice on the same question without
leave of the City Council, nor more than once until every member choosing to speak shall have
spoken. (2003 Code § 1-07-10)
K. Motions: When a motion is under debate, no motion shall be received except to adjourn, to lay on
the table, to postpone to a day certain, to refer or amend, to postpone indefinitely, which several
motions shall have precedence in the order in which they are stated. (2003 Code § 1-07-11)
L. Adjournment: A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, except when once put and voted down;
the same shall not again be in order until some other business shall have been taken up, and shall
be always decided without debate. (2003 Code § 1-07-12)
M. Members Addressing Chair: When any member is about to speak in debate or deliver any matter to
the city council, he shall respectfully address the presiding officer, and shall confine himself to the
question in debate and avoid personalities. (2003 Code § 1-07-13)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 26/528
N. Members Must Vote; Exceptions: Every member who shall be present when a question is put shall
vote for or against the same, unless the city council shall excuse him; but no member shall be
permitted to vote on a question when the yeas and nays are called for, unless present when his
name is called in its regular order. (2003 Code § 1-07-14)
O. Motion Recorded: No motion shall be considered unless the same shall be recorded by the city
clerk. When a motion is recorded, it shall be stated by the presiding officer before debate. The
mover may withdraw it at any time before a decision or amendment is made to it. (2003 Code § 1-
07-15)
P. Reconsideration: When a question has been once decided, it shall be in order for any member who
voted in the affirmative to move for a reconsideration thereof, but no motion for a reconsideration
of a vote shall be made after adjournment of the next regularly scheduled meeting following the
final reading of any ordinance or resolution to be reconsidered or any vote to be reconsidered. No
motion for such reconsideration shall be made more than once. (2003 Code § 1-07-16)
Q. Suspension Of Rules: No rule of order shall be suspended except by an affirmative vote of threefourths
(3/4) of the members of city council; provided, however, that no formal motion to suspend a
rule of order shall be required if the council member requesting suspension of the rule of order
receives unanimous consent for the suspension of the rule of order. Standing rules (those rules
adopted without previous notice and by a majority vote) may be suspended by an affirmative vote
of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the city council. (2003 Code § 1-07-17)
R. Questions: All questions shall be put in the order in which they are moved. (2003 Code § 1-07-20)
S. Lay On The Table: The motion "to lay on the table" shall be decided without debate. (2003 Code
§ 1-07-21)
T. Ordinances And Resolutions:
1. Classifications: All actions of the city council involving the exercise of the city legislative and
police power functions, or actions otherwise required by law to be in ordinance form, shall be
designated as ordinances and appear in the form required by law. All other actions of the city
council of a ministerial nature relating to the administrative business of the city and/or requiring
written findings or statements, shall be designated as resolutions.
2. Reading Ordinances And Resolutions: Ordinances shall be read on three (3) different days, two
(2) readings of which may be by title only and one reading of which shall be in full, unless onehalf
(1/2) plus one of the members of the full council shall dispense with the rule. In preparation,
passage and publication, ordinances shall contain no subject which shall not be clearly
expressed in the title, and no ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended unless all
ordinances, which are intended to amend existing ordinances, shall have the words which are
added to such ordinance underlined; when the amendment is to strike out or repeal any part of
an existing ordinance, the letter, figure, word or words stricken or repealed shall be printed with a
line through such letter, figure, word or words in the printed bill to indicate the part stricken or
repealed; provided, however, that when an ordinance includes or consists of the repeal of an
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 27/528
entire section or chapter, or a substantial revision of an entire title, it shall not be necessary to
print such repealed section or chapter. (2003 Code § 1-07-18)
3. Passage: The passage of every ordinance and resolution shall be by roll call of the city council
with the yea or nay of each member present being recorded, with the majority vote of the council
members constituting a quorum being required for passage. For purposes of such passage,
however, it shall be permissible for any council member to move for the roll call, recording of
votes, and passage of all or any number of ordinances or resolutions appearing on the agenda
for final passage. The maker of such a motion must specify by agenda number or classification,
which ordinances or resolutions appearing on the agenda are to be included for purposes of the
motion. Upon the objection of the mayor or any council member, any ordinance or resolution so
included may be removed from the motion and considered separately. In the absence of such an
objection, all ordinances and resolutions included in the motion shall be subject to consideration
for final passage, and upon such consideration, the minutes shall reflect the yea or nay votes of
each Council member on each ordinance or resolution so considered. (2003 Code § 1-07-19)
U. Duties Of Council Members Generally: The members of the City Council, the legislative and policy
making branch of the government of the City, shall devote so much of their time to the duties of
their office as an efficient and faithful discharge thereof may require and act as a liaison between
the body of the City Council and the departments to which they are assigned by the Mayor, and
give advice to the Mayor and City Council with respect to the operations of such departments.
They shall attend all meetings of the City Council unless excused therefrom by the Mayor or by a
majority of the remaining members, and perform all duties which by the nature of their office they
should reasonably perform, such as the passing of ordinances, resolutions and the investigation
and study of work done for the City according to the character of committee upon which they may
severally be appointed by the Mayor. (2003 Code § 1-07-23)
V. Examination Of Accounts Of Fiscal Officers: Pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-708, at least once
in each quarter of each year, the City Council shall examine the accounts and doings of all officers
or other persons having the care, management or disposition of monies, property or business of
the City. (2003 Code § 1-07-24)
1-6-3: ELECTION OF MEMBERS BY DESIGNATED SEAT:
A. Purpose: The City Council does, by this section, find that the citizens of the City would be best
served by providing for the election of Council members by designated Council seats pursuant to
Idaho Code section 50-707. (2003 Code § 1-08-01)
B. Council Membership: The City shall have a City Council composed of four (4) members. During
each general City election, two (2) of the four (4) members of the City Council shall stand for
reelection for a four (4) year term of office. (2003 Code § 1-08-02)
C. Residency Requirement: Each candidate for the City Council shall meet the residency
requirements in the City as set out in Idaho Code. (2003 Code § 1-08-03)
D. Assignment Of Council Seats: Each of the Council seats shall be designated by the numbers 1
through 4 inclusive. The City Clerk shall assign said numbers to the Council seats. Any candidate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 28/528
seeking election to the City Council shall file for one (1) of the assigned Council seats and so
designate that number upon his petition for candidacy. (2003 Code § 1-08-04)
E. Plurality Vote Required For Election Of Council Members: Where an election for an office of a City
Council member involves more than two (2) candidates, the candidate that receives the greatest
number of votes from qualified electors shall have a plurality of the votes and shall be declared the
winner. (Ord. 2100, 1-3-2012, eff. 1-3-2012)
F. Filling Vacancies: In the event an office of Council shall become vacant, through death, moving out
of the City, or for any other cause, the Mayor shall appoint, with the approval of a majority of the
City Council, a resident of the City to fill the unexpired portion of the term to serve until the next
general election, at which time the unexpired term shall be filled by regular election. (2003 Code
§ 1-08-06)
1-6-4: MAYOR AND COUNCIL; SALARIES:
The annual salaries of the Mayor and the members of the Council of the City of Blackfoot shall be as
follows:
A. The Mayor of the City of Blackfoot shall receive an annual salary of sixty five thousand dollars
($65,000.00) beginning January 1, 2018.
B. Each member of the City Council shall receive an annual salary in the sum of six thousand dollars
($6,000.00) beginning January 1, 2018. (Ord. 2156, 8-1-2017)
Chapter 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-7-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all municipal employees, including those under civil
service, unless otherwise fixed by collective bargaining agreement. (2003 Code § 1-11-01)
1-7-2: DEPARTMENT HEAD DEFINED:
"Department head" shall mean any appointed person who has direct supervision and responsibility for
personnel, records, funds, maintenance and service to be performed by a municipal department.
(2003 Code § 1-11-02)
1-7-3: APPOINTMENT, CONFIRMATION AND REMOVAL OF APPOINTIVE
OFFICERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 29/528
A. Appointment: The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint the city treasurer, the
city clerk, the city attorney and such other officers as may be deemed advisable for the efficient
operation of the city. (2003 Code § 1-11-03; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Confirmation: If the city council shall refuse to confirm any nomination, the mayor shall then, within
ten (10) days thereafter, nominate another person to fill the office and he may continue to so
nominate until his nominee is confirmed. If the mayor fails to make another nomination for the
same office within ten (10) days after the rejection of a nominee, the city council shall appoint a
suitable person to fill the office. The affirmative vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the full city council
shall be required to confirm any nomination made by the mayor.
C. Vacancy: Whenever a vacancy shall occur in an appointive office, the vacancy for the unexpired
term shall be filled by appointment in the same manner as the original appointment.
D. Removal: Any department head, the city treasurer and the city clerk, may be removed by the mayor
for any cause by him deemed sufficient, but such removal shall be by and with the affirmative vote
of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full city council; provided, that the city council, by
the unanimous vote of all of its members, may upon their own initiative remove any appointive
officer. (2003 Code § 1-11-03)
1-7-4: TERM OF APPOINTMENT:
All appointive officers shall hold office for the term for which they are appointed and qualified. (2003
Code § 1-11-04)
1-7-5: EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONNEL:
The department head, in accordance with the established personnel policies, practices and
procedures of the city, shall have the authority to employ the necessary personnel to perform the
necessary duties of their respective departments. It shall be the department head's duty to:
A. Be responsible for the effective administration of their respective departments and all activities
assigned thereto;
B. Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of
the mayor and city council, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the city and to the
public;
C. Establish and maintain records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary
for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for reports required by the mayor
and city council;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 30/528
D. Dismiss, subject to personnel regulations, personnel and subordinates under him for just cause;
E. Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in his
department. (2003 Code § 1-11-05)
1-7-6: PERSONNEL POLICIES, PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES:
The personnel handbook of the city, as amended from time to time, is incorporated herein and made a
part hereof by reference. Such handbook shall be the rules, regulations and standards governing
terms, conditions, tenure and benefits of employment. If any conflict or repugnancy exists between
this chapter and the aforesaid handbook, this chapter shall prevail. (2003 Code § 1-11-06)
1-7-7: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
A. City Clerk, City Treasurer: The city shall furnish surety bonds to cover the city clerk and city
treasurer. (2003 Code § 1-11-07; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Blanket Bond: All other officers and employees of the city not required by law to be bonded, except
the mayor and city council, shall, nevertheless, be bonded by a blanket bond to be secured by the
city, which bond shall be in an amount to be determined by the city council, and shall extend to and
cover all officers and employees of the city, except the mayor and council members. (2003 Code
§ 1-11-08)
1-7-8: INSPECTION, COPIES OF CITY DOCUMENTS; FEES:
Every officer having the custody of an instrument, paper or document which is required by statutes of
this state or by ordinance of this city to be made, kept and maintained, shall upon the request and
demand of a citizen, permit a citizen to inspect such instrument, paper or document, under the
supervision and such reasonable rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by that officer having
custody of such instrument, paper or document. Unless otherwise specified, department heads shall
be the custodians of all records, reports and documents within their respective departments. At no
time shall such officer of the city ever authorize a citizen to remove such instrument, paper or
document from his immediate presence. Requests for copying or inspection of documents shall be
processed in a manner consistent with provisions of Idaho Code regarding public records. No
instrument, paper or document shall be inspected or copied by the public, which is exempted from
disclosure by Idaho Code. Fees charged the public for copies of public records shall be promulgated
pursuant to Idaho Code section 9-338(8). The city council shall adopt the fee schedule by resolution if
it finds that it is consistent with said Idaho Code section 9-338(8), or as that section may be amended.
(2003 Code § 1-11-09)
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK
1-7A-1: APPOINTMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 31/528
The mayor shall, with approval of the city council, appoint a city clerk, who shall hold office for the
duration of his appointment, or until such time as he may be removed pursuant to subsection 1-7-3D
of this chapter. (2003 Code § 1-11-10)
1-7A-2: DUTIES:
A. Clerk To Keep Seal, Ordinances And All City Records: The city clerk shall be custodian of the city
seal and affix the same to documents as provided herein. The city clerk shall also be custodian of
all public records, documents, ordinances, resolutions and orders of the city council, and such
other papers and documents as may be delivered into his custody.
B. Attend Meetings Of Council And Keep Minutes And Records: The city clerk shall attend all sessions
of the city council, keep a correct journal and shall keep in a separate book a record of ordinances
passed by the city council and of the titles of such ordinances; and all ordinances not published in
book form shall be carefully indexed alphabetically. The city clerk shall see that each ordinance is
published as required by law, and he shall keep on file the proof of such publication. (2003 Code
§ 1-11-10)
C. Report To Council: The city clerk shall present to the city council, a full and complete statement of
the financial transactions of his office during the month preceding.
D. Furnish Copies Of Records: It shall be the duty of the city clerk to furnish any officer with a certified
copy of any record, paper or public document on file in his office or in his custody, for the use of
such officer in the discharge of his official duties, and he shall also furnish a certified copy of any
such record, paper or document to any person not an officer of the city upon the payment in
advance of a fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council. (2003 Code § 1-
11-10; amd. 2012 Code)
E. Keep Books And Records: The city clerk shall keep such books and permanent records of the
transactions and business of his office as may be necessary to accurately disclose all transactions
and business of his office. He shall also countersign all warrants, and keep a "warrant register and
abstract of expenditures", showing the number and amounts of warrants issued and the person to
whom issued, the date redeemed, the interest paid, and the several funds against which each of
said warrants is drawn. (2003 Code § 1-11-10)
F. Issue Licenses: The city clerk shall issue all licenses, a duplicate of which shall be kept on file, but
no license shall be issued to any person unless fees and charges fixed by either ordinance or
resolution shall have first been paid, for which payment the city clerk shall issue a receipt in
duplicate. The city clerk shall endorse upon the receipt and duplicate receipt the number of the
license issued, the number of the application for license, and the duplicate of such receipt so
issued shall be kept on file with the duplicate license. (2003 Code § 1-11-10; amd. 2012 Code)
G. Keep Record Of Municipal Bonds: The city clerk shall keep records of outstanding bonds of the
city, showing the number and amount of each, for what and to whom said bonds were issued, and
when any of said bonds are purchased or paid or canceled, said record shall show the fact, and in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 32/528
his report at the close of each fiscal year he shall describe particularly the bonds issued and sold
during the year, the terms of sale, and itemize each and every expense thereof.
H. Turn Money Over To Treasurer: Within ten (10) days after the filing of his monthly report as
provided herein, the city clerk shall deposit with the city treasurer all funds collected by him during
the preceding month, less refunds of money paid on applications for licenses which are disallowed
by the city council.
I. Warrants:
1. Fund Drawn Upon And Amount Appropriated To Such Fund: Each warrant shall show the fund
upon which the same is drawn and if against any fund based upon an appropriation shall show
the amount appropriated to such fund and the amount expended therefrom after deducting the
amount of such warrant.
2. When Called: Outstanding warrants shall be called for payment in their order whenever the city
treasurer shall have on hand in the fund upon which such warrants are drawn one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or more; provided, that if the aggregate of such warrants is less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), they may be called at any time that money is available to pay the
same.
3. Order Of Payment; Registration: Every fund in the hands of the city treasurer will be paid out in
the order in which the warrants are presented for payment; provided, that applicable to the
payment of any warrant when presented, the city treasurer shall endorse on the same "not paid
for want of funds" and enter the same in a book to be kept for such purpose known as the
"warrant register", and thereafter said warrants shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent
(7%) per annum until there are funds in the hands of the city treasurer with which to pay the
same. (2003 Code § 1-11-10)
ARTICLE B. CITY TREASURER
1-7B-1: APPOINTMENT:
The mayor shall appoint or contract, with approval of the city council, a city treasurer, who shall hold
office for the duration of his appointment or contract, or until such time as he may be removed
pursuant to subsection 1-7-3D of this chapter, or pursuant to contract. (2003 Code § 1-11-11)
1-7B-2: DUTIES:
A. Receive And Safely Keep Funds: It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to receive and safely keep
in designated depositories, as required by law, all monies or funds belonging to the city which may
come into his hands; to disburse the same upon an appropriation by ordinance or resolution of the
city council after audit and allowance by the council of claims therefor, and upon warrant of the
mayor, countersigned by the city clerk, and not otherwise. Securities belonging to the city,
incapable of deposit in a checking account, shall be kept by the city treasurer in a safety deposit
box in some banking institution designated by the city council. All bonds or securities delivered to
the city treasurer by any designated depository of city funds as security for such funds shall be
deposited with the county auditor or other public official as may be provided by law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 33/528
B. Keep Proper Records And Books: The city treasurer shall keep in a suitable book or books a full
and accurate account of city money and funds received by him, showing the date of the receipt
thereof, the person from whom received, on what account, and to what fund the same is credited
with the date of disbursement, the person to whom disbursed, on what account and against what
fund.
C. Deliver All Paid Vouchers And Warrants To Clerk: All warrants or orders paid and redeemed and all
vouchers shall be delivered to the city clerk immediately upon payment or redemption and such
redeemed warrants shall have written or stamped on the face thereof, the word "paid".
D. Issue Duplicate Receipts For Money Received: The city treasurer shall execute and deliver to every
officer or other person paying money or funds into the treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the
date of payment, the amount thereof and upon what fund or account the same is received.
E. Deliver Books And Papers To Successor: The city treasurer shall deliver to his successor in office,
all books, money, papers and other property pertaining to his office.
F. Publish Quarterly Reports Of Receipts And Expenditures: It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to
cause to be published for at least one insertion in some newspaper in the city, between the first
and third Mondays of May, August, November and February of each and every year, a full
statement of the receipts and expenditures of the city, giving the source from whence received, to
what purpose applied and to whom paid.
G. Collect All Monies: The city treasurer shall receive and all officers or other persons shall forthwith
pay to the city treasurer, except as otherwise provided by this code, all money due the city on any
account whatsoever.
H. Make Monthly Report To Council: The city treasurer shall, at the end of each and every month, and
at other times when required by the mayor or city council, render an account under oath, showing
the condition of the treasury at the date of such account, including in said statement the balance of
money in the treasury with a detailed statement of the specified amount in each designated
depository and of the amount and class of security held to guarantee each deposit. Such account
shall also contain a statement of receipts and disbursements and of all warrants redeemed and
paid by him, which said warrants, with all vouchers held by him, shall be filed with his accounts in
the city clerk's office. The mayor, city attorney or any member of the city council shall have free
access to any and all books or papers in the office of the city treasurer for the purpose of
inspection or examination. (2003 Code § 1-11-11)
ARTICLE C. CITY ATTORNEY
1-7C-1: APPOINTMENT:
The mayor shall appoint or contract, with approval of the city council, a city attorney, who shall hold
office for the duration of his appointment or contractual term, or until such time as he may be lawfully
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 34/528
removed. Nothing herein shall limit the mayor and city council's ability to appoint or contract with other
attorneys on a case by case basis as the need may arise from time to time. (2003 Code § 1-12-01)
1-7C-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the council and the chief law enforcement officer of the
city. He shall have, in addition to those necessarily or fairly implied in or incidental to or essential to,
the powers and duties hereinafter expressly authorized and specified:
A. Advise the body of the council, when required or requested to do so, in all matters arising in the
conduct of city business.
B. Prepare or revise ordinances and resolutions when so requested by the body of the council.
C. Give his opinion upon any legal matter or question submitted to him by the body of the council or
mayor.
D. Attend regularly scheduled city council meetings for the purpose of giving the city council legal
advice.
E. Prepare for execution of contracts and instruments to which the city is a party and shall approve, as
to form, all contracts and bonds required to be submitted to the city.
F. Prepare and direct all charges and complaints against and appear in the appropriate court in the
prosecution of every person charged with violation of ordinance or any regulation adopted under
authority of law and over which the city attorney has jurisdiction.
G. Have independent prosecutorial discretion to charge or not charge, prosecute or not prosecute,
dismiss or not dismiss, negotiate and settle any and all misdemeanors, infractions, and other
offenses, and violations of this code and the state code over which the city attorney has
jurisdiction. (2003 Code § 1-12-02)
ARTICLE D. SEXTON
1-7D-1: APPOINTMENT, REMOVAL:
The Grove City Cemetery shall be managed by a sexton, who may be appointed by the mayor, subject
to the approval of the city council, and who shall perform such duties and receive such compensation
as shall from time to time be provided by the city council, and shall hold office for the duration of his
appointment or until such time as he may be removed by the mayor. (2003 Code § 1-11-12; amd.
2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 35/528
1-7D-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the sexton to take charge of the cemetery and improve the grounds thereof,
under the direction and subject to the approval of the city council; to dig or cause to be opened all
graves required for the burial of the dead therein, and to keep a record of the same in books provided
for that purpose. (2003 Code § 1-11-12)
Chapter 8
CITY DEPARTMENTS
ARTICLE A. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
1-8A-1: CREATED:
There hereby is created an administrative department of the city to be known as the department of
public works. (2003 Code § 3-09-01)
1-8A-2: DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT:
There hereby is created the office of director of public works, who shall superintend, direct and
manage the department and all officers, assistants and employees assigned to and employed for the
department and its various divisions. Said director shall be appointed by the mayor, with the consent
of the city council. (2003 Code § 3-09-02; amd. 2012 Code)
1-8A-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The director of public works, in addition to those necessarily or fairly implied in or incidental to or those
essential to the powers, duties and functions hereinafter expressly delegated and specified shall
supervise, and be in charge of:
A. Sewer System, Treatment; Drainage: The planning, design, construction, management,
maintenance and operation of the sewer system and sewage treatment facilities, and storm drains
and drainage systems.
B. City Equipment: The condition, maintenance and repair of all motor vehicles, trucks and other
equipment of the city.
C. Garbage Collection: The collection and disposal of garbage, refuse and rubbish.
D. Communication, Alarm Equipment: Maintenance and repair of all communications and alarm
equipment and systems.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 36/528
E. City Conducted Work: All survey, design, construction, repair or maintenance work conducted by
the city, unless specific directions to the contrary are made by the city council.
F. Water: All city wells, water lines, water towers.
G. Other Duties: Assume and perform such other duties, functions and services as may be required
by ordinance or the mayor or city council.
H. Streets, Rights Of Way: The planning, design, construction, management, maintenance and
operation of the city streets, alleys, rights of way and easements.
I. Construction Projects: All city construction projects. (2003 Code § 3-09-03)
1-8A-4: DIVISIONS:
A. Specified: The department of public works shall be divided into the following divisions:
1. Water department;
2. Sanitation department;
3. Street department;
4. Airport department;
5. Water pollution control (sewer). (2003 Code § 3-09-04; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Water Department: There hereby is established a water department in the city consisting of such
personnel as may from time to time be deemed necessary. The water department shall operate
under the direction of the department of public works. The rules and regulations governing the
water department and the water usage in the city are codified in title 9 of this code. (2003 Code
§ 3-01-01)
C. Sanitation Department: There hereby is established a department of sanitation in the city,
consisting of a superintendent and such additional personnel as may from time to time be deemed
necessary. The sanitation department shall operate under the department of public works. (2003
Code § 3-05-01)
D. Airport Department: There is hereby created an airport department for the city. An administrative
officer for such department may be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city
council. (2003 Code § 3-08-01)
E. Street Department:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 37/528
1. Organization: There hereby is organized and created a street department for the city. The
administrative officer shall be known as the superintendent of the street department. The street
department shall operate under the department of public works. (2003 Code § 3-06-01; amd.
2012 Code)
2. Supervision: The superintendent of streets shall have general supervision over all public
thoroughfares within the city. (2003 Code § 3-06-02)
ARTICLE B. PARK AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
1-8B-1: CREATED:
There hereby is created a park and recreation department for the city. An administrative officer for
such department may be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council. (2003
Code § 3-07-01)
1-8B-2: SUPERVISION:
Said appointed officer shall at all times be under the direct supervision of the governing body. (2003
Code § 3-07-02)
ARTICLE C. POLICE DEPARTMENT
1-8C-1: MEMBERSHIP:
The police department shall consist of a chief of police, a captain and other officers as may be, from
time to time, prescribed by this code or by the chief of police, mayor or city council. (2003 Code § 3-
02-04)
1-8C-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
The head of the police department shall be the chief of police, who shall be appointed by the mayor
and confirmed by the city council. He shall have such powers, functions and perform such duties as
may be prescribed by this code, civil service rules and regulations, and statutes of the state, as may
be imposed upon him by the mayor or city council. In the carrying out of the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the chief of the police department, the chief of the police department shall report to
and coordinate with the mayor. (2003 Code § 3-02-01)
1-8C-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Administration Of Department: The chief of police shall exercise all of the powers and duties
necessary to carry out the proper administration of the police department and may delegate duties
to employees and officers of the police department.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 38/528
B. Enforcement Of Laws:
1. The police department shall have the power to enforce all penal and regulatory laws of the state
and the city and to preserve order and exercise any and all powers, duties and authority of any
sheriff or other peace officer anywhere in the state within the limits of the boundaries of the city,
in the same manner and with like authority as the sheriff of any county of the state. The police
department may employ, from time to time as authorized by the mayor and city council, such
officers as may be deemed necessary to carry out these duties and powers, which officers shall
be under the direction of the chief of police as the head of the department, in accordance with
the established policy of the city as duly authorized by the city council. (2003 Code § 3-02-02)
2. It shall be the duty of each police officer within the police department to enforce the provisions of
this code, other laws of the city and the statutes of the state, and to perform such duties as may
be prescribed by his superior officers and by the mayor and council. (2003 Code § 3-02-05)
1-8C-4: SPECIAL POLICE:
Special police may be appointed and upon appointment shall be assigned to such functions, area of
operation, duties and powers of police as may be designated by the chief of police. (2003 Code § 3-
02-06)
1-8C-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of the police department may propose such rules and regulations, as he may deem
advisable subject to approval by the mayor and city council. Such rules and regulations may cover
conduct of the members of the police department, uniforms and equipment to be worn or carried,
hours of service, vacations, employee conduct, grievance procedures and all other matters necessary
or desirable for the better efficiency of the department. (2003 Code § 3-02-03)
1-8C-6: LOST OR ABANDONED PROPERTY:
A. Custody: All lost or abandoned property found upon property belonging to the city shall be
deposited with, and transferred to the custodial possession of, the police department. All other
property, lost or abandoned, turned in to the police department shall become the property of the
city until the true owner is ascertained and claims the property or the procedure for disposal of
such property set forth in this section has been followed. (2003 Code § 6-05-01)
B. Disposition: All lost or abandoned property coming into the possession of the police department
shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Idaho Code section 55-403. (2003 Code
§ 6-05-02)
C. Public Use: Any lost or abandoned property that has come into the possession of the police
department and has been held for a minimum period of six (6) months, may be put to a public use,
rather than be sold at public auction. Prior to such public use, however, the city council must, by
resolution, describe the property to be subject to public use, and specifically authorize the
utilization of such property for such public use. (2003 Code § 6-05-03)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 39/528
ARTICLE D. FIRE DEPARTMENT
1-8D-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a department, herein designated as the fire department. (2003 Code § 3-
03-01)
1-8D-2: PERSONNEL; DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF:
A. Specified: The fire department shall consist of a chief of the fire department, to be appointed by the
mayor, with the approval of the city council, and such other personnel as the mayor and city
council may from time to time determine necessary. The duties of the chief of the fire department
shall be as follows:
1. Direct the fighting of fires.
2. Have charge of, be responsible for, and keep in good order and repair all equipment and
apparatus connected with or belonging to the fire department.
3. Call and direct such fire drills and meetings as he deems necessary for the training of persons in
efficient firefighting.
4. Have authority over the personnel of the fire department during their activities while firefighting
and during drills and meetings.
5. Have police authority while on duty as fire chief.
B. Volunteer Members: It shall be the duty of the volunteer members of the fire department to respond
to all fire calls, unless prevented from so doing by unavoidable circumstances. They shall attend
fire department drills and meetings and obey such rules and regulations as are established for the
fire department. (2003 Code § 3-03-01)
1-8D-3: VIOLATIONS:
A. False Alarms: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to turn in or give a false alarm
of a fire emergency, or aid or abet in the commission of such an act or acts.
B. Code Violations: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any provision of
this code or the international fire code as amended from time to time. Such international fire code
hereby is adopted and incorporated herein by reference thereto.
C. False Representation:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, display or have in his possession the official badge
and/or uniform insignia of the department, unless that person at the time of the possession or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 40/528
display is a regular member of the department of fire duly appointed and employed to perform
the duty of extinguishing or preventing fires.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, display or have in his possession any representation,
facsimile or counterfeit of the official badge and/or uniform insignia of the department of fire.
D. Interference With Hydrant: To interfere with any fire hydrant, either by turning the water on or off or
by attaching any hose, pipe or other connection thereto.
E. Obstructing Hydrant: To obstruct in any manner the use of any fire hydrant or place any material in
front thereof or within ten feet (10') of either side of said hydrant. (2003 Code § 3-03-01)
1-8D-4: MITIGATION COST SCHEDULE AND RECOVERY SYSTEM:
A. Purpose, And Authority To Establish A Mitigation Cost Schedule And Recovery System:
1. In order to protect the city from extraordinary expenses resulting from the utilization of city
resources in response to certain public safety or fire emergency incidents, this section
authorizes the imposition of charges to recover costs incurred by the city in responding to such
incidents.
2. The mitigation cost shall be charged or billed to the responsible party, representing an add-on
cost of the claim for damages of the vehicles, property and/or injuries. The claim for mitigation
costs may be charged or billed to the insurance coverage of the owner of a vehicle, owner of
property, or other responsible parties where an authorized agent of the city, county, or state, or a
court of competent jurisdiction determines the owner, owners, and/or responsible party or parties
is/are at fault, allocating all or some of such costs jointly and severally. In some circumstances, a
responsible party may be charged or billed directly.
3. The city of Blackfoot shall initiate recovery of mitigation costs for the delivery of emergency
services by the fire department for personnel, supplies, and equipment taken to the scene of
emergency incidents involving power lines or underground pipelines. Only incidents involving
negligent, intentional and/or illegal conduct shall be assessed mitigation costs. Fees shall be set
by city council by resolution.
4. The city may recover all mitigation costs in connection with a public safety or fire emergency
incident, as allowed herein, from any or all responsible parties jointly or severally. The fire chief
or his or her designee shall, pursuant to the resolution setting forth applicable fees, determine
the total mitigation costs and shall determine whether to assess any, all, or part of such costs
against any of the responsible parties. The fire chief or his or her designee may allocate
mitigation costs among and between any responsible parties, including allocating all or some of
such costs jointly and severally against more than one responsible party regardless of whether a
responsible party has any other legal liability. If the fire chief determines not to assess all or a
portion of mitigation costs against a responsible party, such determination shall not in any way
limit, reduce, or extinguish the liability of the responsible party to any other parties.
5. After determining to assess mitigation costs against a responsible party, the fire chief or his or
her designee shall mail an itemized invoice to the responsible party at its last known address.
Such invoice shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days of the date of the mailing. Any
amounts not paid in full within the thirty (30) days shall accrue interest as allowed by Idaho
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 41/528
Code. If a responsible party shall appeal the claim of mitigation costs, such costs, if upheld, shall
be due and payable thirty (30) days after the date of determination of the appeal.
6. Any responsible party who receives an invoice for mitigation costs shall have an opportunity to
meet with the fire chief or his or her designee to request a modification of mitigation costs. The
responsible party shall request in writing within ten (10) days from the date of the invoice
assessing the mitigation costs. If after meeting with the fire chief or his or her designee the
responsible party is still not satisfied, he or she may request an appeal to city council as set forth
herein.
7. Any responsible party aggrieved by the determination of being a responsible party and/or the
assessment of mitigation costs who desires an appeal to city council shall submit the request in
writing to the city clerk within thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice assessing the
mitigation costs. The city clerk shall place the matter on the next city council agenda. All
determinations of city council shall be deemed final. (Ord. 2152, 1-3-2017)
Chapter 9
CODE OF ETHICS
1-9-1: POLICY:
It hereby is declared to be the policy of the city, and the city council hereby finds and declares such
policy to be necessary, in order to promote and provide efficient and good government, where
government is based on the consent of the governed, that the proper operation of democratic
government requires the public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to
the people, that government decision and policy be made in the best interest of the people, the
community and the government, that public office not be used for personal gain, and that the public
have confidence in the integrity of its government. (2003 Code § 1-21-01)
1-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, each of the terms herein defined shall have the meaning given in this section
unless a different meaning is clearly required by the context. All words used in the present tense shall
include the future; words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural
number the singular, unless the natural construction of the sentence indicates otherwise, and the word
"shall" is mandatory, not directory:
BUSINESS: Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association,
organization, self-employed individual, and any legal entity.
BUSINESS WITH WHICH HE IS ASSOCIATED: Any business of which the person or a member of his
household is a director, officer, owner, employer, or holder of more than five percent (5%) of the
outstanding stock, and any business which is a client of the person.
CITY OFFICIAL: For the purposes of this chapter, a city official is defined as any elected official,
employee, any member of a board or commission appointed by the mayor or city council, or any agent
of the city. (2003 Code § 1-21-02)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 42/528
1-9-3: STANDARD OF CONDUCT:
No city official shall knowingly:
A. Use his official position or office to obtain financial gain for himself, any member of his household,
or any business with which he or a member of his household is associated.
B. Use or disclose confidential information gained in the course of or by reason of his official position
or activities in any way that could result in financial gain for himself or for any other person.
C. Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise from any person or
business which is interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings
with the city; provided, however, any city official who is a candidate for public office may accept
campaign contributions and services in connection with such campaign. (2003 Code § 1-21-03)
1-9-4: DISCLOSURE:
Any city official, who in the discharge of his official duties would be required to take an action or make
a decision that would affect directly or indirectly his financial interests, or those of a member of his
household, or a business with which he is associated, or who shall have any interest, directly or
indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department, commission, board or
council of the city, shall:
A. If an official, other than an appointed or elected member of a commission, board or council, verbally
disclose such interest to the mayor (or if such official is the mayor, then to the city council), who
may require the assignment of the matter creating the conflict to another official of the same
department of the city who does not have a conflict of interest, or determine such conflict de
minimus.
B. If an appointed or elected member of a commission, board or council, disclose such interest on the
records of said commission, board or council and shall disqualify himself from participating in any
decision or vote relating thereto, unless following such disclosure a majority of the remaining
members of such commission, board or council determined by official action at a public meeting of
such commission, board or council that such conflict of interest is de minimus. (2003 Code § 1-21-
04)
1-9-5: PROHIBITED INFLUENCE AND CONDUCT:
A. No person shall offer or give to a city official, or a member of any official's household, and no city
official shall solicit or receive, anything of value, including a gift, favor, service or promise of future
employment, based on any understanding that such official's vote, official action, or judgment
would be influenced thereby, or where it could reasonably be inferred that the thing of value would
influence the official in the discharge of his duties, or as a reward, of which would cause the total
value of such things received from the same person not a member of such official's household to
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) during any single calendar year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 43/528
B. No person shall offer or pay to a city official, and no such official shall solicit or receive, any money
in addition to that received by the official in his official capacity, for advice or assistance given in
the course of the official's employment or relating to this employment. (2003 Code § 1-21-05)
1-9-6: EXCEPTION:
A city official shall not be deemed to have a financial interest in a matter if his interest is solely that of
a general taxpayer or solely that of a recipient of public services generally provided by the city on the
same terms and conditions as if he were not an official. (2003 Code § 1-21-06)
1-9-7: APPOINTMENTS:
Appointments to boards and commissions of the city shall be made with a view to minimizing potential
conflicts of interest described in this chapter, and no person shall be appointed to any such board or
commission if his potential conflicts of interest are of such a degree that they are likely to substantially
interfere with the performance of his duties as an official. Appointments to such boards and
commissions have memberships, which approximate the diverse interests of the residents of the city.
(2003 Code § 1-21-07)
1-9-8: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The terms of office for each board and/or commission shall be provided by ordinance. Reappointment
for a successive term or terms shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and city council. Prior to
the expiration of a term of office, the board of commission upon which a member serves may submit a
majority recommendation to the mayor and city council for the reappointment of such member or the
appointment of a new member for city council consideration. (2003 Code § 1-21-08)
1-9-9: PENALTY:
Any person or business violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4
of this code. (2003 Code § 1-21-09; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 10
ELECTION PRECINCTS
1-10-1: CITY CLERK CHIEF ELECTION OFFICER:
It is hereby declared that the city clerk shall be the chief election officer of the city and shall perform all
duties in accordance with the provisions of Idaho Code section 50-400. (2003 Code § 1-10-01)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 44/528
1-10-2: ELECTION PRECINCTS BOUNDARIES AND NUMBER ESTABLISHED:
A. The city council, in conjunction with the board of county commissioners, shall establish a
convenient number of election precincts, or create new or consolidate established precincts, only
within the boundaries of the legislative districts provided by Idaho Code section 67-202. All
municipal election precincts shall, insofar as possible, have the same boundaries as established by
the board of county commissioners of Bingham County.
B. Pursuant to the laws of the state, there hereby is established a convenient number of election
precincts within the city. The six (6) precincts herein established conform as nearly as possible and
practicable to the Bingham County, Idaho, election precincts within the city. (2003 Code § 1-10-02;
amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 11
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
1-11-1: CREATION OF RIGHT:
The people of this city shall have the right to enact ordinances through the initiative process, and to
repeal ordinances through the referendum process, according to the procedures set forth herein.
(2003 Code § 1-22-01)
1-11-2: NUMBER OF PETITIONERS REQUIRED:
To enact an ordinance by initiative or to repeal an ordinance by referendum, there shall be attached or
appended to the petition the signatures of the legal voters of the city equal to at least twenty percent
(20%) of the total number of electors who cast votes at the last general election in the city. (2003 Code
§ 1-22-02; amd. 2012 Code)
1-11-3: FORM OF PETITION:
The initiative petition shall be in substantially the following form:
Initiative Petition to the Mayor and Council of the City of Blackfoot City, Idaho: "We, the undersigned
citizens and legal voters of the City of Blackfoot, respectfully demand that the following proposed
ordinance, to wit: (setting out full test of measure proposed) shall be submitted to the legal voters of
the City of Blackfoot, for their approval or rejection at an election to be called in accordance with Idaho
Code Section 50-501(3), and each for himself says I have personally signed this petition; I am a legal
voter of the City of Blackfoot; my residence and post office are correctly written after my name.
Name street and number post office
(2003 Code § 1-22-03)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 45/528
1-11-4: TIME FOR FILING PETITIONS:
Referendum petitions with the requisite number of signatures shall be filed with the city clerk not less
than sixty (60) days following the final adoption of the ordinance to be subject to referendum. (2003
Code § 1-22-04)
1-11-5: PRINTING PETITION AND SHEETS; TIME LIMITS FOR PERFECTING
PETITION:
A. Examination Of Petition; Determination Of Form: Before or at the time of beginning to circulate any
petition for initiative or referendum, the person or persons, organization or organizations, under
whose authority the petition is to be circulated, shall send or deliver to the city clerk a copy of such
petition duly signed by at least twenty (20) electors eligible to sign such petition. The city clerk shall
immediately examine the petition and specify the form and kind and size of paper on which the
petition shall be printed and circulated for further signatures. All petitions and sheets for signatures
shall be printed on a good quality bond or ledger paper, on pages eight and one-half inches (81/2")
in width by thirteen inches (13") in length, with a margin of one and three-fourths inches (13/4") at
the top for binding, and the sheets for signatures shall have numbered lines thereon from one to
twenty (20) for signatures. The petition shall be prepared in sections with each section numbered
consecutively. Each section of a petition shall have attached to it not more than ten (10) sheets for
signatures.
B. Approval Of Petition; Time Limit Specified: The city clerk shall indicate in writing on the petition that
he has approved it as to form. The city clerk shall inform the person or persons, organization or
organizations under whose authority the petition is to be circulated, in writing, that the petition must
be perfected with the required number of certified signatures within sixty (60) days following the
date of approval as to form. Any petition that has not been perfected with the required number of
certified signatures within the sixty (60) days allowed shall be declared null and void ab initio in its
entirety. (2003 Code § 1-22-05)
1-11-6: VERIFICATION ON SHEETS FOR SIGNATURES:
Each and every signature sheet of each petition containing signatures shall be verified on the face
thereof in substantially the following form by the person who circulated said sheet of the petition, by
his or her affidavit thereon, as a part thereof:
STATE OF IDAHO )
) ss.
County of Bingham)
I, , swear, under penalty of perjury, that every person who signed this sheet of the foregoing petition
signed his or her name thereto in my presence. I believe that each has stated his or her name and the
accompanying required information on the signature sheet correctly, and that the person was eligible
to sign this petition.
Signature
Post Office Address
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 46/528
Subscribed and sworn to before me this day of , 200 .
(Notary Seal)Notary Public
Residing at
(2003 Code § 1-22-06)
1-11-7: EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATION OF SIGNATURES:
A. Requirements:
1. All petitions with attached signature sheets shall be presented on the same day to the city clerk,
who shall make a cursory examination of them to determine whether the petitions apparently
contain the necessary number of signatures.
2. If the total number of signatures on the petitions is not sufficient to satisfy the number required
by section 1-11-2 of this chapter, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be retained by
the city clerk who shall notify in writing the person filing the petition of the number of signatures
needed, and further signatures may be gathered, if within the time limit of section 1-11-5 of this
chapter.
3. If the cursory examination of the signature sheets reveals:
a. Erasures on any signature;
b. Illegible or undecipherable signatures:
c. Signatures not properly identified by all of the information required on the sheet;
d. Duplicate signatures;
e. Signatures of persons who have requested in writing to have their names removed from the
petition;
the city clerk shall summarily reject such signatures and they shall not be counted. Each
rejected signature shall be drawn through with ink and initialed by the city clerk. If the total
number of signatures not rejected is not sufficient to satisfy the number required by section 1-
11-2 of this chapter, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be retained by the city
clerk, who shall notify in writing the person filing the petition of the number of signatures
needed, and further signatures may be gathered, if within the time limit of section 1-11-5 of
this chapter.
B. Certification: All petitions presented to the city clerk found to apparently contain the necessary
number of signatures, after the cursory examination provided for above, shall be filed with the city
clerk and become public records of the city not to be returned. The city clerk shall examine each
such signature purported to be that of a registered elector of the city, and compare each such
signature with the registration documents available to the city clerk. The city clerk shall summarily
reject all signatures which are not the signatures of a registered elector of the city; and such
rejected signatures shall not be counted. Each rejected signature shall be drawn through with ink
and initialed by the city clerk. The city clerk may take not to exceed ten (10) days after filing of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 47/528
petition to complete his examination. The city clerk shall certify each signature found to comply
with all of the requirements of this chapter by an appropriate mark following each signature.
C. Required Number Of Signatures: The city clerk shall total the number of certified signatures, and if
found to total the number of signatures required by section 1-11-2 of this chapter, shall proceed as
provided in section 1-11-8 of this chapter. (2003 Code § 1-22-07)
1-11-8: SUFFICIENCY OF PETITION; NOTIFICATION; COUNCIL ACTION;
ELECTION:
A. Notice Of Insufficient Petition; Time For Correction: In the event that a petition filed with a city clerk
does not contain the required number of certified signatures, the city shall inform the person or
organization under whose authority the petition was circulated that the petition is defective for lack
of certified signatures, and specify the number of additional signatures required to make the
petition valid. If the city clerk's determination that the filed petition is defective occurs after the time
limitation of section 1-11-5 of this chapter has expired, then an additional period of thirty (30) days
after notice of correction will be granted to perfect the defective petition. If the petition is not
perfected within the additional thirty (30) day period after notice of correction, the city clerk shall
declare the petition null and void ab initio in its entirety.
B. Notice Of Sufficient Petition: In the event that a petition filed with a city clerk is found by the city
clerk to contain the required number of certified signatures, the city clerk shall promptly, by certified
mail, inform the petitioners, and shall also notify the city council at its next meeting, that the
initiative or referendum petition is in proper form.
1. If the petition is for a referendum, the city council shall have thirty (30) days from the date of
certification of a petition to repeal the ordinance being referred to the voters. In the event the city
council repeals the ordinance, the referendum petition shall be declared null and void.
2. If the petition is an initiative petition, the city council shall have thirty (30) days to pass an
ordinance substantially as proposed by the petition. In the event the city council passes such an
ordinance, the initiative petition shall be null and void.
3. In the event the city council neither repeals the ordinance, which is the subject of a referendum
petition, nor enacts an ordinance that is the subject of an initiative petition, an election shall be
ordered by the city clerk to be conducted citywide. A special election for initiative or referendum
shall be provided not more than ninety (90) days following the certification of the petition;
provided, that in the event a municipal election will occur within the ninety (90) days, the initiative
or referendum shall be submitted at the time of the municipal election. (2003 Code § 1-22-08)
1-11-9: FORM OF BALLOT:
The city council shall prepare a ballot for an initiative or referendum election in one of the following
ways:
A. If the full text of the ordinance or proposed ordinance to be voted upon does not exceed two
hundred (200) words in length, it may be set out in full on the election ballot; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 48/528
B. If the full text of the ordinance or proposed ordinance to be voted upon exceeds two hundred (200)
words in length, and the city council votes not to have it printed at length on the election ballot, it
shall, with the assistance of the city attorney, prepare a short title and description of the ordinance
or proposed ordinance, which shall clearly and impartially state its purpose and effect, which short
title and description shall be printed on the election ballot. (2003 Code § 1-22-09)
1-11-10: CONDUCT OF ELECTION:
Initiative or referendum elections, whether special or general, shall be conducted and the results
thereof canvassed and certified in all respects as near as practicable, in like manner as general
elections, except as otherwise provided. (2003 Code § 1-22-10)
1-11-11: COSTS OF ELECTION:
The costs of any election held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be the sole responsibility
of the city. (2003 Code § 1-22-11)
1-11-12: CANVASS OF RETURNS:
The mayor and city council shall meet within five (5) days after said election to canvass the votes cast
at such election, and the city clerk shall immediately announce the results. Any initiative measure
approved by a majority of the votes cast shall be in full force and effect from the date of such
announcement. Any ordinance which is the subject of a referendum receiving less than a majority of
the votes cast shall be repealed, effective on the date of such announcement. (2003 Code § 1-22-12)
1-11-13: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
A person is guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in chapter 4 of this title, who:
(2003 Code § 1-22-13; amd. 2012 Code)
A. Signs any name other than his own to any initiative or referendum petition;
B. Knowingly signs his name more than once on the same initiative or referendum petition;
C. Knowingly signs his name to any initiative or referendum petition if he is not a registered city
elector;
D. Wilfully or knowingly circulates, publishes or exhibits any false statement or representation
concerning the contents, purpose or effect of any initiative or referendum petition for the purpose of
obtaining any signature to any such petition, or for the purpose of persuading any person to sign
any such petition;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 49/528
E. Presents to any officer for filing any initiative or referendum petition to which is attached, appended
or subscribed any signature which the person so filing such petition knows to be false or
fraudulent, or not the genuine signature of the person purporting to sign such petition, or whose
name is attached, appended or subscribed thereto;
F. Circulates or causes to circulate any initiative or referendum petition, knowing the same to contain
false, forged or fictitious names;
G. Makes any false affidavit concerning any initiative or referendum petition or the signatures
appended thereto;
H. Offers, proposes or threatens for any pecuniary reward or consideration:
1. To offer, propose, threaten or attempt to sell, hinder or delay any initiative or referendum petition
of any part thereof or any signatures thereon;
2. To offer, propose or threaten to desist from beginning, promoting or circulating any initiative or
referendum petition;
3. To offer, propose, attempt or threaten in any manner or form to use any recall petition or any
power of promotion or opposition in any manner or form for extortion, blackmail or secret or
private intimidation of any person or business interest. (2003 Code § 1-22-13)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
GENERALLY
2-1-1: POLICY:
It is hereby determined by the city council that a single, cohesive and consistent policy is required to
order the relationship of all city boards and commissions pursuant to this code and state law. (2003
Code § 2-01-01)
2-1-2: DUTIES OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS:
Unless specific activities or duties are enumerated elsewhere in this code, all city boards and
commissions shall operate in an advisory capacity only to the mayor and the city council. Any
activities, duties or responsibilities delegated by permanent boards and commissions shall be by
ordinance and not otherwise. (2003 Code § 2-01-02)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 50/528
2-1-3: COMPENSATION:
Unless otherwise provided in this code, all members of any city boards and commissions shall serve
without compensation. However, actual and necessary expenses may be allowed with the prior
approval of the mayor and city council. (2003 Code § 2-01-03)
2-1-4: ORGANIZATION; REPORTS TO CITY COUNCIL:
Unless otherwise provided in this code, each city board or commission shall provide its own rules for
conducting business, including, but not limited to, the regularity of its meetings. Each city board or
commission shall provide minutes of its meetings to the city council after each regular or special
meeting of such board or commission. Each city board or commission shall maintain such records as
are required by law, provided for in the internal organization of the board or commission, or as the
mayor or city council may from time to time require or request. (2003 Code § 2-01-04; amd. 2012
Code)
2-1-5: APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVAL:
Unless otherwise provided, all appointments to boards or commissions, which shall be permanent
boards or commissions, shall be made by the mayor, with the consent of the city council. All members
of boards or commissions may be removed from service on such boards and committees in a like
manner as is provided for their appointment. (2003 Code § 2-01-05)
2-1-6: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT:
Unless otherwise provided by this code, members of every city board or commission must be, at the
time of their appointment and throughout the tenure of their membership, residents of city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the airport board and the planning and zoning board may have out of
city board members as provided in applicable ordinances. (2003 Code § 2-01-06)
2-1-7: RESIGNATIONS OR VACATIONS:
Should any member of any city board or commission resign or should a vacancy on any city board or
commission become available, a replacement board or commission member shall be appointed in a
manner consistent with this chapter to fill out the term of office for that originally provided for the
member resigning or vacating office on such board or commission. (2003 Code § 2-01-07)
Chapter 2
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
2-2-1: NAME:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 51/528
The name of this chapter shall be the TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION. (2003 Code § 2-04-01)
2-2-2: MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION:
The transportation commission shall consist of seven (7) members, to be appointed by the mayor, with
the consent and approval of the city council. Members of said commission shall hold office for a period
of six (6) years each and said terms shall be staggered in such a manner so that the terms of not
more than three (3) members shall expire in any one year. Two (2) of such members shall hold office
for a term of two (2) years, two (2) for four (4) years, and three (3) for six (6) years, the respective
terms of office to be determined by lot at the first meeting of the commission. Thereafter, the term of
office for each appointed member shall be six (6) years. Members of the commission shall serve
without compensation. (2003 Code § 2-04-02)
2-2-3: VACANCIES:
Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the mayor, with the consent of the city council. (2003 Code
§ 2-04-03)
2-2-4: ORGANIZATION:
The commission shall elect its own chairperson and secretary, and create and fill such other offices as
it may determine necessary, and adopt such rules as it shall deem necessary to carry out its purpose.
(2003 Code § 2-04-04)
2-2-5: MEETINGS:
The commission shall hold one regular meeting each month for not less than nine (9) months in each
year. The majority of the appointed members of the commission shall be necessary to constitute a
quorum at any meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. A written record of its meetings,
resolutions, findings and determinations shall be kept, which shall be a public record. (2003 Code § 2-
04-05)
2-2-6: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the commission to recommend and make suggestions to the city council
regarding transportation issues in the city. Such transportation issues shall include, but not necessarily
be limited to, the adoption of plans for traffic safety, coordination of city traffic safety plans with the
state plans, making suggestions for projects designed to increase safety in pedestrian and school
traffic in the city, reviewing and making recommendations regarding transportation projects within the
city, and to generally recommend to the city council plans to improve transportation and traffic safety
in the entire city. (2003 Code § 2-04-06)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 52/528
Title 3
FINANCES
Chapter 1
GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
3-1-1: CLAIMS AND WARRANTS:
A. Filing Claims: Any party having claims or accounts against the city, except refund payments or
accounts from funds or monies held in trust for performance guarantee purposes only, shall file the
same with the city clerk at least three (3) business days before the regular meeting of the city
council. The claims or accounts shall be in the form of a bill of particulars, stating the item in detail
and for what, and when the same accrued. When on account or claim or any item thereof, has
once been disallowed, in whole or part, by the city council, the same shall not be again presented
to the city council, and in no case shall such account be presented to any council other than the
one that has passed on the same; and every claim or account when presented shall contain all
items of accounts and demands which the party claims against the city, up to the time of filing the
same. (2003 Code § 1-14-01)
B. Paid By Warrants: All claims and accounts allowed against the city shall be paid by a warrant upon
the city treasurer, to be drawn by the mayor and countersigned by the city clerk, or on a check
signed by the mayor and city treasurer. (2003 Code § 1-14-02)
3-1-2: CITY FUNDS:
A. Daily Deposits: Every officer of the city receiving money in his official capacity for or on behalf of
the city shall deposit the same timely and accurately and in accordance internal accounting
procedures promulgated by the city treasurer. Every officer so depositing money shall be
responsible for assuring that monies are allocated to the correct revenue account and that the
documentation accompanying the deposit is accurate. (2003 Code § 1-16-01)
B. Purchasing Supplies: No officer or employee of the city shall purchase any supplies for any
purpose except upon authorization, nor contract any indebtedness of any nature whatsoever,
employ any labor, nor appoint any officers without first obtaining consent or permission from the
mayor or the city council, unless otherwise specifically provided, and all contracts made otherwise
shall be null and void as against the city, and shall not be allowed or paid by the city council. (2003
Code § 1-16-02)
3-1-3: SURETY BONDS:
A. Guarantee In Lieu Of Surety Bonds: Whenever any chapter, section or provision of this code, and
as hereafter amended, or any rule, regulation or ordinance printed and contained in a book in code
form now ratified, adopted and in force, and as hereafter amended, requires a surety bond as a
condition: 1) of acceptance of a plat; 2) for the approval of a grant for a permit or license; or 3) for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 53/528
the permission to do any thing, act or work, the city council may, in lieu of a surety bond, require
another type of guarantee sufficient to secure the actual and faithful observance and performance
of: 1) all conditions and requirements therein imposed by said plat, permit, license or contract, or
thing, act or work approved; 2) all ordinances of the city; and 3) the duties required by ordinances,
rules or regulations now in force or as hereinafter enacted, ratified or adopted and otherwise do,
perform and observe all provisions and conditions of any approval, permit, license or contract.
(2003 Code § 1-19-01)
B. Security Of Thing, Act Or Work Approved: The guarantee in lieu of a surety bond acceptable to
secure the actual performance and observance of the plat, permit, license or contract or thing, act
or work approved by the city council may be the following:
1. A general undertaking in a form similar to that required by Idaho Code section 12-613, and
acknowledged by and before an officer authorized by law to take acknowledgments in order for
such undertaking to be recorded.
2. The assignment or pledge of savings passbooks, time certificates or certificates of deposit of a
bank or savings and loan association authorized to do business in the state.
3. The pledge, assignment or other act of rendering custody to the city in and to securities, bills or
notes of the United States Of America, or the bonds of the state of Idaho, municipal
corporations, or local improvement districts. (2003 Code § 1-19-02)
Chapter 2
BUDGET
3-2-1: BUDGET OFFICER DESIGNATED:
The mayor shall be the budget officer for the city. (2003 Code § 1-15-01)
3-2-2: FORMS APPROVED:
All forms for reports, proposed and final budgets, as hereinafter provided, shall be uniform in size, and
type and such form as the budget officer, with the approval and advice of the city council, shall
prescribe. (2003 Code § 1-15-02)
3-2-3: PERSONNEL TO FURNISH BUDGET INFORMATION:
All officers and employees of the city shall furnish to the budget officer or his designee such
information and perform such duties and services, in preparation of the budget, as may be requested
or required. (2003 Code § 1-15-03)
3-2-4: ITEMIZATION OF BUDGET:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 54/528
A. Classifications: The budget shall itemize and show for each department, office, service, agency or
activity of the city, information under the following classifications:
1. All revenue from all sources.
2. An itemized and detailed statement of salaries and wages; provided, that intermittent and
nonsalaried employees, and laborers, shall be shown by the total for each department, office,
service, agency or activity.
3. All expenses and expenditures, other than salaries and wages.
B. Information Required: Said estimates and reports for each of the foregoing classifications shall
cover the following:
1. Audited numbers for the preceding fiscal year;
2. The current year operating budget; and
3. A forecast for the upcoming fiscal year budget. (2003 Code § 1-15-04)
3-2-5: BOND AND INTEREST PAYMENTS:
The budget, in addition to the information required by section 3-2-4 of this chapter, shall itemize and
show, on appropriate forms, the amount required during the next fiscal year for payment of bonds,
interest and for sinking fund requirements. (2003 Code § 1-15-05)
3-2-6: FINAL BUDGET:
Before August 31 of each year, the city council, after such revision as it desires, shall adopt and
approve a final budget for the following fiscal year. In addition, on the same date, the city council shall
pass a resolution approving a conceptual budget plan for the year that follows the next fiscal year.
Such conceptual budget plan shall be the blueprint for the following year's budgeting process. (2003
Code § 1-15-06)
3-2-7: FEE AND TAX INCREASES:
All proposed fee increases and tax increases that are relied upon in a proposed budget must be voted
upon and approved by the city council prior to or at the same time that the final budget is voted upon
and approved by the city council. (2003 Code § 1-15-07)
Chapter 3
PURCHASING AND BIDDING PROCEDURES
3-3-1: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 55/528
All public works construction and the purchases of goods and services shall be governed by Idaho
Code section 67-2801 et seq. (2012 Code)
3-3-2: SALE OF PROPERTY:
A. Surplus Property: The mayor shall dispose of all surplus property, including land, building,
equipment, and other city assets no longer required for city use, in the manner which is in the best
interest of the city and in such form as is described in the property management policy.
Departments shall submit to the mayor, at such times and in such form as is described in the city
procurement policy, reports describing all property recommended for surplus property designation.
1. Declaration Of Surplus: Department heads or designees may recommend designation of
property as surplus. The mayor may declare property items with an estimated current value of
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or less surplus property. The mayor, with the approval
of city council, may declare property items with an estimated current value over twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) surplus property. (2003 Code § 1-13-11)
2. Transfer: The mayor shall have the authority to transfer surplus property to other departments
with appropriate reimbursement or to make a recommendation to the city council to donate
surplus property to other government agencies as provided for in Idaho Code. (2003 Code § 1-
13-11; amd. 2012 Code)
3. Disposition: The mayor may sell all surplus property. The mayor may also dispose of surplus
property through exchange for, or in trade, or as trade in credit on property to be acquired.
a. All sales of surplus personal property items except as provided for later in this section, shall
be made through auction or sealed bid to the highest responsible bidder and be preceded by
public notice whenever possible. Choice of the procedures to be followed for auction or sealed
bid is the responsibility of the mayor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the mayor determines
that the property to be disposed is not worth more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), he may
dispose of such property in any appropriate manner to maximize financial return to the city
without the requirement of the process of a sealed bid or auction.
b. If disposition of surplus property pursuant to the bids received are determined to not be in the
best interest of the city, or no bids are received, the mayor shall proceed to dispose of the
property at his discretion in any appropriate manner to maximize financial return to the city.
c. In the event items of surplus personal property are determined to have no salable value
because of condition, obsolescence or are inappropriate for use by the public, the mayor shall
dispose of the property in any manner he deems appropriate.
d. Personal property received by the city as a result of lawful confiscation or abandonment shall
either be used by the city for public purpose or sold by sealed bid or auction unless it is the
determination of the mayor that the city's interest would be better served by another method of
disposal; in which event, the mayor shall dispose of the property in an appropriate manner.
B. Sale At Retail: Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the city may sell personal property
to employees and members of the public at retail, in accordance with pricing schedules approved
by the mayor and city council, at city facilities and events. For purposes of this section, "facilities
and events" shall include, but shall not be limited to, vending machines, snack bars, gift shops, pro
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 56/528
shops or other marketing methods catering to city employees or members of the public utilizing city
facilities or participation in city sponsored events. (2003 Code § 1-13-11)
3-3-3: LEGAL AND CONTRACTUAL REMEDIES:
A. Authority To Resolve Protested Solicitations And Awards:
1. Right To Protest: Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror or contractor who is aggrieved by an
action of the mayor or of a department related to the solicitation or award of a contract may
protest to the mayor. The protest shall be submitted in writing within four (4) working days after
such aggrieved person knows or should have known of the facts giving rise thereto. The
deadline may be waived by the city council. Actions by the mayor and the city council are not
subject to protest under this section.
2. Authority To Resolve Protests: The mayor, with concurrence of the department head, or a
designee, the city attorney and the supervising council member shall have the authority, prior to
the commencement of an action in court concerning the controversy, to settle and resolve a
protest of an aggrieved bidder, offeror or contractor, actual or prospective, concerning the
solicitation or award of a contract, unless the settlement entails the payment of city funds in
excess of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), in which case it must be approved by the
mayor and city council.
3. Decision: Unless a protest is withdrawn, the mayor, or a designee, shall issue a decision in
writing. The decision shall:
a. State the reasons for the action taken; and
b. Inform the protestor of its right to administrative review as provided in this chapter.
4. Notice Of Decision: A copy of the decision under subsection A3 of this section shall be mailed
by certified letter or otherwise furnished immediately to the protestant and any other party
intervening.
5. Finality Of Decision: A decision under subsection A3 of this section shall be final and conclusive.
The party adversely affected by the decision may appeal administratively to a hearing officer or
to the city council within three (3) working days of notification of the decision by filing the notice
of appeal with the city clerk.
6. Stay Of Procurement During Protests: In the event of a timely protest under subsection A1 of
this section, the city shall not proceed further with the solicitation or with the award of the
contract until the mayor, after consultation with the department head of the using agency, the city
attorney, and the supervising council member, makes a written determination that the award of
the contract without delay is necessary to protect substantial interests of the city.
B. Authority To Debar Or Suspend:
1. Authority: After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable opportunity for that
person to be heard, the mayor, after consultation with the department head of the using agency,
the city attorney, and the supervising council member, shall have the authority to debar a person
or firm for cause from consideration for award of contracts. The debarment shall not be for a
period of more than three (3) years. The same officer, after consultation with the department
head of the using agency, shall have the authority to suspend a person from consideration for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 57/528
award of contracts if there is probable cause for debarment. The suspension shall be for a
period not exceeding three (3) months.
2. Causes For Debarment Or Suspension: The causes for debarment or suspension include the
following:
a. Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to
obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or
subcontract.
b. Conviction under city, state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery,
falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating
a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously, and directly affects
responsibility as a city contractor.
c. Conviction under city, state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or
proposals.
d. Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character which is regarded by the
mayor to be so serious as to justify debarment action:
(1) Failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the specifications or within the
time limit provided in the contract; or
(2) A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with
the terms of one or more contracts; provided, that failure to perform or unsatisfactory
performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to
be a basis for debarment.
e. Any other cause the mayor determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect
responsibility as a city contractor, including debarment by another governmental entity.
3. Decision: The mayor shall issue a written decision to debar or suspend. The decision shall:
a. State the reasons for the action taken; and
b. Inform the debarred or suspended person involved of its rights to administrative review of the
city council.
4. Finality Of Decision: A copy of the decision under subsection B3 of this section shall be final and
conclusive. The debarred or suspended person may appeal to the city council within fourteen
(14) days of notification of the decision by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk.
C. Authority To Resolve Contract And Breach Of Contract Controversies:
1. Applicability: This section applies to controversies between the city and a contractor and which
arise under, or by virtue of, a contract between them. This includes, without limitation,
controversies based upon breach of contract, mistake, misrepresentation, or other cause for
contract modification or recision.
2. Authority: The mayor, with the concurrence of the department head or designee, the city
attorney, and the supervising council member, prior to commencement of an action in a court
concerning the controversy, is authorized to settle and resolve a controversy described in
subsection C1 of this section, unless the settlement entails the payment of city funds in excess
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 58/528
of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), in which case it must be approved by the mayor and city
council.
3. Decision: If such a controversy is not resolved by mutual agreement, the mayor shall promptly
issue a decision in writing. The decision shall:
a. State the reasons for the action taken; and
b. Inform the contractor of its right to administrative review by the city council.
4. Notice Of Decision: A copy of the decision under subsection C3 of this section shall be mailed or
otherwise furnished immediately to the contractor.
5. Finality Of Decision: The decision under subsection C3 of this section shall be final and
conclusive. The contractor may submit a written appeal to the city council within seven (7)
working days of notification of the decision by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk.
6. Failure To Render Timely Decision: If the mayor does not issue the written decision required
under subsection C3 of this section within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days after written
request for a final decision, or within such longer period as may be agreed upon by the parties,
then the contractor may proceed as if an adverse decision had been received.
D. Remedies Prior To An Award: If prior to award it is determined that a solicitation or proposed award
of a contract is in violation of law, then the solicitation or proposed award shall be:
1. Canceled; or
2. Revised to comply with the law.
E. Remedies After An Award: If after an award it is determined that a solicitation or award of a contract
is in violation of law, then:
1. If the person awarded the contract has not acted fraudulently nor in bad faith nor been party to
the illegality:
a. The contract may be ratified and affirmed, provided it is determined by city attorney and the
mayor that doing so is in the best interest of the city; or
b. The contract may be terminated and the person awarded the contract shall be compensated
for the actual expenses reasonably incurred under the contract prior to termination.
2. If the person awarded the contract has acted fraudulently or in bad faith:
a. The contract may be declared null and void; or
b. The contract may be ratified and affirmed if it is determined by the mayor such action is in the
best interests of the city, without prejudice to the city's rights to such damages as may be
appropriate. (2003 Code § 1-13-12)
Chapter 4
OFFICIAL CITY FEES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 59/528
3-4-1: SET BY RESOLUTION:
Unless otherwise stated in any other provision of this code, city fees shall be as set by one or more
resolutions. Such resolutions may be amended at any time by the city council. Applicable state sales
tax shall be added to fees that require such. (2003 Code § 1-23-01)
Title 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUSINESS LICENSING PROVISIONS
4-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, prosecute or carry on any trade, business, profession or activity within the
limits of the city, for which a license may be required by this chapter, or by any ordinance of the city,
until he shall have obtained the license required for that trade, business, profession or activity, all
hereafter referred to as "activity". (2003 Code § 5-01-01)
4-1-2: PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEE:
A. Payment Of Fee; License Issuance: Every person required by this chapter, or any ordinances of the
city, to obtain a license to engage in any trade, business, profession or activity, for which a license
is required, shall pay to the city treasurer the sum, or sums, required to be paid for a license. With
the receipt of the city treasurer, which receipt shall set forth the kind of activity for which a license
is desired, the applicant shall apply to the city clerk for the license desired. The city clerk may issue
a license to the party applying upon compliance by the applicant with the provisions relating to
obtaining a license for the business, trade, profession or activity, for which such license is desired.
B. Payment In Advance: All licenses required by this chapter shall be paid in advance and prior to
issuance. (2003 Code § 5-01-02)
4-1-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Every license to be taken out under and by virtue of this chapter, or other city ordinance, shall contain
and set forth the purpose, trade, business, profession or activity for which such license is granted, and
the name and address of the person or entity requesting the same. Said license shall authorize the
continuance of the activity named therein for the term of such license, but shall not authorize the
carrying on of said activity in any other location. If the entity to which, or to whom, a license has been
issued changes its name or address, the entity shall inform the city clerk of such and request that a
new license be issued. Until the new license is issued, the existing license shall be void. (2003 Code
§ 5-01-03)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 60/528
4-1-4: SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH ACTIVITY:
In every case where more than one activity for which a license is required is carried on in the same
place by the same person or entity, the person or entity performing the activity must obtain a license
for each activity and pay the license fee for each activity. (2003 Code § 5-01-04)
4-1-5: TERM OF LICENSE:
All licenses are issued as annual licenses, unless otherwise stated. (2003 Code § 5-01-05)
4-1-6: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; REQUIREMENTS:
A. Determine Suitability Of Applicant: In order to determine an applicant's suitability for a license
relating to the following activities:
1. City alcohol licenses and permits,
2. Vendors, peddlers and solicitors,
3. Itinerant merchants,
4. Secondhand stores,
5. Pawnbrokers,
6. Escort business operators and employees,
7. Private security service operators and employees,
8. Obscenity activists who are subject to licensing,
9. Taxicabs,
the city shall require the applicant to, and the applicant shall, furnish to the police department a
full set of fingerprints. The police department shall perform, or have the state department of law
enforcement (or state police) or the federal bureau of investigation, a criminal background
investigation.
B. Background Investigation; Consent Required: The police department shall obtain the written
consent of the applicant for the criminal background investigation and if the applicant does not
execute the consent, the application shall be denied. The police department shall submit the
completed fingerprint card to the state department of law enforcement (or state police). Such
department is authorized to submit the fingerprints to the FBI for a national criminal history record
check.
C. Payment Of Costs: The applicant shall pay for the costs of the city for all federal bureau of
investigation, state department of law enforcement, or any other investigations requested, or
performed, by the city. (2003 Code § 5-01-06; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 61/528
4-1-7: COMPLIANCE WITH LAW:
All applicants for licenses and all holders of city licenses must be in compliance with all city, state and
federal regulations, codes and ordinances, and may not be delinquent in payment on any
indebtedness, fines or fees owed to the city. Failure to comply with this section shall be grounds for
denying a license and/or grounds for revoking an existing license. Once an applicant has come into
compliance with this section after denial or revocation, such applicant may reapply for the license.
(2003 Code § 5-01-07)
Chapter 2
BEER, WINE AND LIQUOR
4-2-1: ADOPTION OF BEER, WINE AND LIQUOR LAWS:
A. Adoption Of State Law: With the exception of the hours of sale for beer, wine and liquor, there
hereby is adopted for the purpose of governing the licensing, sale and use of alcoholic beverages
within the City, the laws of the State, being particularly Idaho Code title 23, as presently in effect or
as may be amended hereafter by the legislature of the State, and/or by City Council, as may be
contained in that certain volume "Idaho Liquor and Beer Laws", revised through acts of the
legislature, published by authority of the Department of Law Enforcement, Liquor Law Division, as
the same may be revised by the legislature, or by the City Council. The same hereby are adopted
and incorporated herein as an ordinance of the City as fully as though set forth in full herein. (Ord.
2162, 12-5-2017)
B. Copies On File: Three (3) copies of the "Idaho Liquor and Beer Laws", together with all
amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk for use and examination of
and by the public. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
4-2-2: LIQUOR BY THE DRINK:
A. License Required: It shall be lawful to sell liquor by the drink within the City, as provided in Idaho
Code title 23, chapter 9, provided a license shall first be obtained from the City for the sale of liquor
by the drink.
B. Application For License; Fee: An applicant for a liquor by the drink license shall make application to
the City Clerk and pay the license fee. If the license fee is paid prior to July 1, the fee shall be
prorated, but if the license fee is paid after July 1, the fee shall not be prorated and shall be onehalf
(1/2) of the annual license fee.
C. Investigation Of Applicant: The application shall be submitted to the Chief of Police for investigation
and report to the Mayor and City Council; the application must be approved by the Mayor and City
Council before a license can be issued. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 62/528
D. License Transfer; Fee: Licenses may be transferred under the provisions of Idaho Code title 23,
chapter 9, provided that the transferee meets the requirements of a licensee, has paid a transfer
fee as established by resolution of the City Council and the Mayor and City Council have approved
of the transfer of the license. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
4-2-3: WINE:
"Wine" shall be defined as any alcoholic beverage containing not more than sixteen percent (16%)
alcohol by volume obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar content of fruits or other
agricultural products containing sugar, whether or not other ingredients are added. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-
2010, eff. 3-16-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
A. License Required: It shall be lawful to sell wine within the City, as provided in Idaho Code title 23,
chapter 13, provided a license shall first be obtained from the City for the sale of wine.
B. Application For License; Fee: An applicant for a wine license shall make application to the City
Clerk and pay the license fee. If the license fee is paid prior to July 1, the fee shall be prorated, but
if the license fee is paid after July 1, the fee shall not be prorated and shall be one-half (1/2) of the
annual license fee.
C. Investigation Of Applicant: The application shall be submitted to the chief of police for investigation
and report to the mayor and city council; the application must be approved by the mayor and city
council before a license can be granted. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
D. License Transfer; Fee: Licenses may be transferred under the provisions of Idaho Code title 23,
chapter 13, provided the transferee meets the requirements of a licensee, has paid a transfer fee
as established by resolution of the city council and the mayor and city council have approved of the
transfer of the license. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
E. Exception To License Requirement: Any establishment, lounge or bar that has a liquor by the drink
license, need not also have a wine license to sell wine by the drink or by the bottle, for
consumption on the licensed premises. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
4-2-4: BEER:
A. License Required: It shall be lawful to sell beer within the city, as provided in Idaho Code title 23,
chapter 10, provided a license shall first be obtained from the city for the sale of beer.
B. Application For License; Fee: An applicant for a beer license shall make application to the city clerk
and pay the license fee. If the license fee is paid prior to July 1, the fee shall be prorated, but if the
license fee is paid after July 1, the fee shall not be prorated and shall be one-half (1/2) of the
annual license fee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 63/528
C. Investigation Of Applicant: The application shall be submitted to the chief of police for investigation
and report to the mayor and city council; the application must be approved by the mayor and city
council before a license may be issued. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
D. Transfer Of License; Fee: Licenses may be transferred under the provisions of Idaho Code title 23,
chapter 10, provided the transferee meets the requirements of a licensee, has paid a transfer fee
as set by resolution of the city council and the mayor and city council have approved of the transfer
of the license. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
4-2-5: ELECTION DAY SALES:
The city shall follow the state laws for the sale of liquor by the drink, wine and beer on election days.
(Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
4-2-6: LIQUOR RELATED OFFENSES:
A. Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited In City Parks:
1. Consumption Or Possession Prohibited: Except as provided below, it shall be unlawful and
illegal for any person to consume or have in their possession any type of alcoholic beverage in
any shape or form, in or on the city parks or parks maintained by the city.
2. Park Alcoholic Beverage Permit; Fee: It shall not be a violation of this section to consume or to
have in their possession an alcoholic beverage of beer or wine in Jensen Grove Park and
Memorial Park if the person has obtained from the city clerk a park alcoholic beverage permit.
The city clerk may issue park alcoholic beverage permits upon application and upon proof of
age, and payment of the required fee as set forth by resolution of the city council. The person
obtaining the permit shall have the permit available at the park for inspection, upon demand, by
any police officer or other city official, and the failure to have the permit for inspection shall
subject the person who actually obtained the permit, and all other persons in his corporation,
partnership, association or organization, to the criminal penalties cited in subsection A1 of this
section.
B. Open Container Law:
1. Removal Of Liquor From Premises; Definition: It shall be unlawful for any person to remove an
open container containing any alcoholic beverage from the premises of any business
establishment which holds a beer, wine or liquor license. "Premises" shall mean the building and
contiguous property owned or leased, or used under government permit, by the holder of a
liquor, wine or beer license as part of the business establishment in the business of the sale, at
retail, of liquor, wine or beer, which property is improved to include decks, docks, boardwalks,
lawns, gardens, golf courses, courtyards, patios, abutting sidewalks, poolside areas, or similar
improved appurtenances in which, or on which, the sale of liquor, wine or beer is authorized by
the city.
2. Open Container In Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for any person, while operating or riding in or
upon a motor vehicle upon a public highway of the City, County or State, to consume beer, wine
or liquor, or have in his possession any beer, wine or liquor in an open or unsealed container of
any kind. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 64/528
4-2-7: HOURS OF SALE:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
MEAL: A heated food served at a restaurant that was cooked or prepared at the "restaurant" as
defined in this subsection.
RESTAURANT: The term restaurant, as defined by Idaho Code section 23-942(c), is further
defined as an establishment maintained, advertised and held out to the public as primarily a food
eating establishment, where individually priced meals are prepared and regularly served to the
public, for on premises consumption. The establishment must also have a dining room or rooms,
kitchen and cooking facilities for the preparation of food, and the number, and type of employees
normally used in the preparing, cooking and serving of meals. Primarily as defined for the
purposes of IDAPA 11.05.01.010, also includes that the licensee must show to law enforcement
personnel, when requested, the following:
1. An established menu identifying the individually priced meals for consumption;
2. That food service and preparation occurs on the premises by establishment employees;
3. That stoves, ovens, refrigeration equipment or such other equipment usually and normally found
in restaurants are located on the premises of the establishment;
4. The licensee must demonstrate to the satisfaction of law enforcement personnel, through
appropriate business records, that the establishment is advertised and held out to the public as
primarily a food eating establishment, or that at least forty percent (40%) of the establishment's
consumable purchases are derived from purchases of food and nonalcoholic beverages. (Ord.
2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
B. Restricted Hours Of Sale: It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person in any place
licensed to sell beer, wine or liquor, whether conducted for pleasure or profit, to sell, dispense or
give away beer, wine or liquor for consumption on the premises, or off the premises, or to permit
the consumption of such on the premises during the following hours:
1. All days of the week from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (Ord. 2161, 12-5-
2017)
C. Time Limit After Service: Any patron present on the licensed premises after the sale of beer, wine
or liquor has stopped as provided in subsection B of this section, shall have a reasonable time, not
to exceed thirty (30) minutes, to consume any beverage already served. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010,
eff. 3-16-2010)
4-2-8: PENALTY:
Any person found to be violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code, or such provision or penalty contained
in Idaho Code title 23, as applicable, whichever may be more of a penalty. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff.
3-16-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 65/528
ARTICLE A. ALCOHOL BEVERAGE CATERING
PERMITS
4-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
CONVENTION: A formal meeting of members, representatives or delegates, as of a political party,
fraternal society, profession or industry.
PARTY: A social gathering, especially for pleasure or amusement, and includes, but is not limited to,
such social events as weddings, birthdays and special holiday celebrations to include, but not be
limited to, New Year's celebrations, Super Bowl Sunday, St. Patrick's Day, the Fourth Of July and
Labor Day. (Ord. 2102, 3-6-2012, eff. 3-6-2012)
4-2A-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
An alcohol beverage catering permit is a permit issued pursuant to this article that authorizes the
permittee to serve and sell liquor by the drink, beer and wine, or beer or wine, at a party or convention,
and not to exceed three (3) consecutive days. An alcohol beverage catering permit shall be limited to
authorization to sell liquor or beer or wine, or any combination thereof, based upon the type of license
which the applicant possesses. (Ord. 2102, 3-6-2012, eff. 3-6-2012)
4-2A-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; TERM LIMITATION:
A. Term Limitation: Any person authorized to sell liquor or beer or wine, or any combination thereof,
may apply for a catering permit to serve and sell liquor by the drink, beer and wine, or beer or
wine, at a party or convention, for a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days.
B. Application; Procedure: All applications for a catering permit must be filed with the city clerk's office
on a form provided by the city clerk's office, verified by the applicant and accompanied by the filing
fee, no less than three (3) working days prior to the proposed party or convention. The application
must state:
1. The name and address of the applicant and the number of his state liquor, beer or wine license;
2. The dates and hours during which the permit is to be effective, not to exceed three (3)
consecutive days;
3. The names of the organizations, groups or persons sponsoring the event;
4. The address at which the liquor, beer or wine is to be served; and
5. The purpose for the party or convention. (Ord. 2102, 3-6-2012, eff. 3-6-2012)
4-2A-4: FILING FEE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 66/528
The filing fee shall be the fee designated by the city council. (Ord. 2102, 3-6-2012, eff. 3-6-2012)
4-2A-5: APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF APPLICATION:
A. The city clerk, as the city council's designee, upon the advice and recommendation of the chief of
police or his designee, shall approve or disapprove the application and indicate the determination
on the face of the application by endorsement signed by the city clerk, and a copy shall be mailed
or delivered immediately to the chief of police and the applicant. A signed copy shall be retained by
the city clerk.
B. An application approved in this manner shall constitute an alcohol beverage catering permit. (Ord.
2102, 3-6-2012, eff. 3-6-2012)
4-2A-6: CONDITIONS OF DENIAL:
An alcohol beverage catering permit is subject to the following limitations:
A. An application for a permit may be denied because of the applicant's previous violation within three
(3) years of any state or city code provisions regulating noise, alcohol or food service.
B. An application for a permit may be denied if, based on the totality of the circumstances, the
applicant is attempting to use the alcohol beverage catering permit to avoid having to properly
license another establishment to serve beer, wine or alcohol. (Ord. 2102, 3-6-2012, eff. 3-6-2012)
4-2A-7: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code. (Ord. 2102, 3-6-2012, eff. 3-6-2012; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 3
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
4-3-1: APPLICABILITY OF STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS:
All eating and drinking establishments within the city shall comply with all applicable federal and state
regulations. All restaurants, eating or drinking establishments must apply and obtain from the city a
permit to operate. The permit may be suspended for failure to comply with city, state or federal
ordinances and regulations. (2003 Code § 5-11-01)
4-3-2: FEE FOR PERMIT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 67/528
A fee for each permit issued under the authority contained in this chapter shall be paid to the city
clerk; such fee to be the sum as established by resolution of the city council for each eating and
drinking establishment. (2003 Code § 5-11-02; amd. 2012 Code)
4-3-3: ITINERANT RESTAURANT FEE:
A fee for each itinerant restaurant permit issued shall be paid to the city clerk; such fee to be in the
sum as established by resolution of the city council. The permit to be valid for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days. Any extension over thirty (30) days requires another permit. (2003 Code § 5-11-03;
amd. 2012 Code)
4-3-4: SANITARY FACILITIES:
In each eating and drinking establishment in the city, provision shall be made for public toilet and
lavatory facilities. (2003 Code § 5-11-04)
Chapter 4
PEDDLERS, VENDORS AND SOLICITORS
4-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect the health, safety and/or welfare of residents of the city
and to protect its citizens from crime by means of regulation of vendors, peddlers and/or solicitors.
(2003 Code § 5-04-01)
4-4-2: JURISDICTION:
The following provisions shall apply to peddlers, vendors and/or solicitors operating or doing business
within the incorporated areas of the city. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prohibit or
hamper speech that is protected by the first amendment of the U.S. constitution, but merely to
regulate specific activities of a commercial nature. (2003 Code § 5-04-02)
4-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
PEDDLER OR VENDOR: Any person traveling by foot, motor vehicle, bicycle or any other type of
conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares, merchandise, food or farm products or provisions, offering and/or exposing
the same for sale, making sales, or delivering articles to purchasers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 68/528
SOLICITOR: Any person traveling either by foot, motor vehicle, bicycle or any other type of
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, from street to street, taking or attempting to
take orders for sale of goods, wares, merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for
future delivery, or for services to be furnished immediately or performed in the future, whether he or
she is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. (2003 Code § 5-04-03)
4-4-4: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful to act as a vendor, peddler or solicitor, or to employ another
in such business within the meaning and application of this chapter, without first securing a license
to do so from the city clerk.
B. Exceptions:
1. A person invited to the premises or place by the occupant or owner of the premises or place.
2. Any sales under a court order.
3. The sale of a newspaper subscription in which the seller is a person engaged in both the
delivery and sale of the newspaper.
4. The occasional sale of admission by local school students to a function of their school or in
support of a school program or fund raising sales by local service clubs or groups such as
Soroptimists, Elks, Kiwanis, Rotary, Lions, Boy or Girl Scouts.
5. Garage, yard or similar sales by individuals at their residence or place of business, not
exceeding three (3) separate sales in one calendar year, and not to exceed three (3) days each,
which sales shall not include business inventory or items that have been purchased for the
purpose of resale from another garage sale.
6. Any political group or candidate seeking funds, membership or support.
7. A bona fide auction sale. (2003 Code § 5-04-04)
4-4-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person desiring a license to engage as a vendor, peddler or solicitor within the city shall make
application therefor to the city clerk on a form to be provided, which shall state the following
information, but which shall not necessarily be limited to the following information:
A. Name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is an association, company or corporation, then
it shall state its name along with the names and descriptions of those who will be soliciting in the
city.
B. Address, both headquarters and local.
C. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold and in the case of farm or
garden products, whether produced or grown by the applicant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 69/528
D. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the
exact relationship between the employer and the applicant.
E. The proposed method of operation, length of time for which the right to do business is desired and
if a motor vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license number and other
means of identification.
F. Whether a permit or license issued to the applicant has been revoked during the last five (5) years,
and if so, where and when.
G. A statement as to whether the applicant, or any partner or any officer or director has:
1. Forfeited bail;
2. Been arrested;
3. Been convicted;
4. Been fined;
5. Been jailed; or
6. Been placed on probation for any violation of the law.
H. The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof,
are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time said
application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery.
I. When the applicant proposes to sell any prepared food product for human consumption, a
certification from the Central district health department and/or any other applicable license required
shall be required prior to the issuance of this license.
J. An agent upon whom service of process may be made in the state of Idaho. (2003 Code § 5-04-05)
4-4-6: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
A. Upon receipt of application, or application for renewal, the city clerk shall refer the application to the
chief of police, who shall cause an investigation to determine the validity and completeness of the
information presented on the application. The chief of police shall endorse upon the application the
findings of the investigation and return it to the city clerk.
B. If the applicant or his employer has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude within the
past five (5) years, or if the applicant has made a false statement on the application, it shall be
denied.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 70/528
C. Two (2) photographs of the applicant that are two inch by two inch (2" x 2"), showing the head and
shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishable manner.
D. Any applicant, or employee of an applicant, shall be required to have their fingerprints taken as a
part of the investigation. (2003 Code § 5-04-06)
4-4-7: BOND REQUIREMENT:
Before any license as provided herein shall be issued for engaging in the business of "peddler",
"vendor" or "solicitor" as defined in this chapter, the following must occur:
A. Individuals: Every applicant plying his trade as an individual, shall file with the city clerk a surety
bond, a cashier's check, or a letter of credit from a bank in the amount of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), running to the city.
B. Business: Every business, firm, company, individual or corporation, which has two (2) or more
employees or agents acting in the capacity of vendor, solicitor or peddler, shall file with the city
clerk a surety bond, cashier's check or letter of credit from a bank in the amount of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), running to the city for each employee or agent. The surety bond must be made
by an agent upon which service of process may be made in the state.
C. Claim Against: Action on the surety bond or cashier's check may be brought directly by any person
damaged by a licensee's violation of any provisions of this chapter.
D. Return Of Surety: After expiration of a license, the city clerk shall, upon application of the licensee,
return the bond, cashier's check or letter of credit ninety (90) days after receipt of application for
return, unless the city clerk has been notified of the prudence of any claim or cause of action by
any person upon the bond, cashier's check or letter of credit. (2003 Code § 5-04-07)
4-4-8: FEES FOR LICENSE:
License fees charged for administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be as established by
resolution of the city council. (2003 Code § 5-04-08; amd. 2012 Code)
4-4-9: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL AND EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
A. Approved: The city clerk shall notify the applicant when his license request is approved, and shall
issue a license.
B. Denied: The city clerk shall notify the applicant if his license is denied, the reasons therefor, and
advise him of his rights to appeal to the city council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 71/528
C. Exhibited: The license shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place on the motor vehicle or other mode
of transportation if the licensee is using a motor vehicle or other mode of transportation. Otherwise,
the license must be kept on the person and exhibited at any time upon request. (2003 Code § 5-
04-09)
4-4-10: RESTRICTIONS:
A. No Fixed Location; Congested Area: No licensee shall have any right to any fixed, regular or
established location in a public street, sidewalk or right of way, nor shall the licensee be permitted
to conduct his business in any congested area where his operations might impede or
inconvenience the public. The judgment of a police officer is deemed conclusive as to whether the
area is congested or the public is impeded or inconvenienced. (2003 Code § 5-04-10)
B. Certain Areas Prohibited:
1. No business activity shall be carried on in any area of the city by any licensee where such
business is prohibited by the city zoning ordinance. Without prior approval by city council, no
licensee shall be permitted to conduct his business or trade in or on any city park, city building,
or adjacent grounds. (Ord. 2134, 8-4-2015, eff. 8-4-2015)
2. Vendor carts and motor vehicles are prohibited within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant, fire
escape, bus stop or loading zone.
C. Private Property: Business activity as regulated by this chapter shall only be conducted on private
property with written approval of the property owner.
D. Hours Of Operation: Vendors, peddlers or solicitors shall be allowed to engage in their licensed
business only between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and one-half (1/2) hour after sunset. All vending
stands, carts or vehicles must be removed from public property during nonvending hours. The city
council may make an exception to the usual hours of operation if a special event permit is sought.
E. Removal Of Trash: All trash or debris accumulating within twenty feet (20') of any vending stand
shall be collected by the vendor, peddler or solicitor and deposited in trash containers. All vendors
or peddlers selling food or beverages must provide trash receptacles adjacent to or as a part of
their stands. (2003 Code § 5-04-10)
4-4-11: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT:
No licensee hereunder shall:
A. Mislead Customer: Misrepresent the purpose of, or affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation,
peddling or vending.
B. Harass: Continue efforts to solicit or peddle to an individual once that individual informs the solicitor
or peddler that they do not wish to give or purchase anything from that solicitor, peddler, or vendor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 72/528
C. Claim Endorsement: Represent the issuance of any license under this chapter as an endorsement
or recommendation of solicitation.
D. Trespass: Enter upon any premises when the same is posted with a sign stating "No Peddlers
Allowed", or "No Solicitation Allowed", or "No Vendors Allowed", or other words to such effect.
E. False Statements: Knowingly make any false statement on an application for a license. (2003 Code
§ 5-04-11)
4-4-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council has the power to revoke any license granted in accordance with this chapter for any of
the following causes:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license.
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of conducting the business or
trade. (2003 Code § 5-04-12)
4-4-13: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject
to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Additionally, any applicant for a license having
signed under oath upon penalty of perjury may be prosecuted under the laws of the state pertaining to
perjury if any portion of the application is found to be untrue or if the applicant has been found to have
violated the Idaho consumer protection act. (2003 Code § 5-04-13; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 5
PAWNBROKERS
4-5-1: PAWNBROKER DEFINED:
Every person, firm, partnership, association or corporation who makes it a business or conducts or
operates a business, to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, exchange or hypothecation, any
goods, wares or merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the
repayment of money lent thereon, including the payment of interest on the money lent; or who makes
it a business of receiving or purchasing personal property or other valuables for the purpose of selling
the same back again at a stipulated price; or makes it a business of lending money secured by a
chattel mortgage, uniform commerce code financing statement or personal property while keeping
possession of the item of property placed as security; for all intents and purposes under this chapter is
hereby defined as a "pawnbroker" and shall be governed by the terms of this chapter. (2003 Code § 5-
05-01)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 73/528
4-5-2: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
This chapter shall be applicable to the principals of any entity performing any activity regulated by this
chapter and to their agents and employees. Every pawnbroker regulated hereunder shall be liable for
all the penalties provided herein for violation of any provision of this chapter, whether such violation be
committed by himself or his agent, clerk or employee. (2003 Code § 5-05-02)
4-5-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a pawnbroker
unless a valid license therefor has been issued as herein provided and said license is in full force
and effect.
B. Application For License: An application for such license shall be made to the city clerk in such form
and manner as the city clerk may prescribe. Such application shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to, the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names and addresses of each
partner, and if a corporation or association, the names and addresses of the principal
stockholders, and the name and residence of the operating manager of the business.
2. Whether the applicant has had a similar license revoked by the city or any other city in this state
or of the United States, or any state of the United States, within the past five (5) years.
3. Whether the applicant or any principal or partner has been convicted of any felony or
misdemeanor, other than minor traffic violations, the nature of the offense, and the date, and the
punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
4. The name and address of each employee of the business and whether that employee has been
convicted of any felony or misdemeanors, other than minor traffic violations, the nature of the
offense, and the date, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. Upon change of
employees, the above information shall be forwarded to the city clerk ten (10) days after the
hiring of a new employee.
C. Investigation Of Applicant Or Employee: Upon receipt of any application for a license, the city clerk
shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant. Also, upon receipt of the name of a new
employee, the City Clerk shall cause an investigation to be made of the employee. Such
investigation shall be completed within thirty (30) days.
D. License Issuance Restricted: No person or entity shall be issued a license to engage in the
business of a pawnbroker when such pawnbroker:
1. Is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
2. Is not a bona fide owner of such business;
3. Has had a similar license revoked by this City or any other city of this State, or of the United
States, within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 74/528
4. Has been convicted of any felony, or has been convicted of any other crime, whether felony or
misdemeanor, involving moral turpitude within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date
of the filing of the application;
5. Has misrepresented or made a false or fraudulent statement of material or relevant facts
contained in the application; or
6. Has engaged in a fraudulent transaction or enterprise.
E. Qualifications: An affirmative showing with respect to the qualifications herein specified shall be
required to be made with respect to each applicant, and to each partner of a partnership applicant
and to each officer, director or member of the governing board of a corporation or association and
with regard to each employee.
F. License Issuance; Term: Upon completion of the investigation, the City Clerk shall issue, subject to
City Council approval, and approval of the Chief of Police, and upon payment of the prescribed
license fee, a license which shall expire at the end of the calendar year, unless sooner revoked or
surrendered.
G. Notification Of License Denial; Hearing: The City Clerk shall notify the applicant if his license is
disapproved, the reasons therefor and advise him of the appeal procedure.
H. License Nontransferable: Licenses shall not be transferable, either as to person or place.
I. Posting Of License: The license issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously in each place of
business named therein. (2003 Code § 5-05-03)
4-5-4: FEE FOR LICENSE:
The City Clerk shall collect, before the issuance of any license or renewal thereof, an annual license
fee as established by resolution of the City Council. (2003 Code § 5-05-04)
4-5-5: RECORDS:
A. Declaration Of Purpose: The City of Blackfoot ("City"), located in Bingham County, Idaho, hereby
finds and declares that the pawn of metals, wire, and other precious items easily liquidated for
cash by those who are not the rightful owners of such property has become a serious problem
within the City.
The City also finds that recovery of the lost or stolen property becomes more difficult the longer the
property is missing and that local pawnbrokers and secondhand precious metal dealers currently
do not have any way to know whether property that is sold to them is the substance of a theft.
Therefore, the City hereby finds that the use of the electronic database of lost and stolen property
known as "LeadsOnline" will provide assistance to both the person who has been the victim of a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 75/528
theft and the pawnbroker/secondhand dealer who has been the victim of paying money for stolen
property by providing a place for the reporting of lost and stolen property. (Ord. 2115, 4-2-2013)
B. Records To Be Kept And Filed: All pawnbrokers and secondhand precious metal dealers shall keep
and file with the Blackfoot Police Department, a digital copy of the following described records. All
digital records shall be filed via internet at a website determined by the Blackfoot Police
Department using software as may be determined by the Blackfoot Police Department. Such digital
records shall be filed within seventy two (72) hours after the time and date of the transaction. The
digital records required for filing shall consist of the following:
1. An accurate description of all precious metals and personal property purchased, acquired or
received.
2. The name, residence, driver's license number or social security number of the person from
whom any precious metals or personal property is purchased, acquired or received.
3. The date and place of the purchase, acquisition or reception.
4. The date when such property is disposed of and the name and address of the person receiving
the same.
5. The serial number of any property received or sold, if that property contains a serial number.
6. Any other records required to be kept under Idaho law. (Ord. 2172, 10-2-2018)
C. Violation: Unless otherwise indicated herein, any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty of
violating any provision herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in a
County Jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or by both. (Ord. 2115, 4-2-2013)
4-5-6: MINORS AND INTOXICATED PERSONS:
No pawnbroker shall:
A. Minors: Buy items of value from or loan money on property to any person under eighteen (18) years
of age. This provision shall not prevent sales to any person regardless of age.
B. Intoxicated Persons: Have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with a person who is under the
influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs such that impairs his business judgment. (2003 Code
§ 5-05-06)
4-5-7: SALES:
No personal property purchased by a pawnbroker at his place of business shall be sold or removed
from such place of business for a period of at least seven (7) days after being so purchased without
written consent of the Chief of Police. Excluded from this restriction are transactions in gold and silver
bullion or coins. (2003 Code § 5-05-07)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 76/528
4-5-8: FORFEITURES:
Every pawnbroker shall allow a period of thirty (30) days for a pledger to repay the loan before the
property pledged shall become forfeitable. Upon payment by the pledger of the service charge
incurred in connection with the loan for the first thirty (30) days, the pawnbroker shall automatically
extend the loan repayment period another thirty (30) days. (2003 Code § 5-05-08)
4-5-9: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Legal hours for "pawnbrokers", as defined in section 4-5-1 of this chapter, may be between the hours
of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. each day, unless special permission is
obtained from the Chief of Police. (2003 Code § 5-05-09)
4-5-10: REPORT TO CHIEF OF POLICE:
The Chief of Police or other officers of the Police Department may, at their discretion, require a written
report of said business transactions, and during the business hours of every day may conduct a
personal examination of any articles pledged or sold, or inspect the books or records of such
pawnbroker showing the articles or things purchased or pawned. (2003 Code § 5-05-10)
4-5-11: NOTICE FROM POLICE DEPARTMENT:
Whenever the Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department shall notify any pawnbroker in
writing not to sell any property deposited or purchased by him or permit the same to be redeemed,
such property shall not be sold or permitted to be redeemed for a period of sixty (60) days from the
date of such notice, but such notice may be renewed by written request for an additional sixty (60) day
period or periods. Further, a notice may be terminated at any time in writing by the Chief of Police.
(2003 Code § 5-05-11)
4-5-12: STOLEN PROPERTY; RETURN TO TRUE OWNER:
A. Return Of Stolen Property: Any article pledged or sold to a pawnbroker which is subsequently
determined by a law enforcement agency to have been stolen shall be transferred to the custody of
such agency upon the agency's written request, or, at the direction of the agency, shall be returned
by the pawnbroker to the true owner. The true owner shall not be liable to the pawnbroker for any
amounts expended by the pawnbroker with respect to an article deemed stolen. The pawnbroker
shall not be required to return stolen property to the true owner until:
1. He receives written notice from the law enforcement agency authorizing the release of the
property to the true owner and specifying the name, address and social security number of the
true owner;
2. The true owner, in person, requests the return of the property, executes a receipt therefor, and
presents proper identification showing his name, address, social security number and signature.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 77/528
B. Disagreement Of Ownership: If a disagreement exists concerning the ownership of property, the
item shall be held by the police department for thirty (30) days in order to allow the pawnbroker to
seek judicial determination of ownership. If such action is not filed within thirty (30) days, the item
will be returned by the police department to the recorded owner.
C. Documentation By Pawnbroker: Upon the return of stolen property to the true owner, either by the
pawnbroker or law enforcement agency, the pawnbroker shall complete such documentation as
may be necessary or required to effect the transfer of the property, including such documents
pertaining to the registration of firearms as may be required by local, state or federal authorities.
Upon return of an item of property to a true owner, said owner shall agree in writing to pursue a
course of criminal prosecution which could result in restitution for any victimized party. (2003 Code
§ 5-05-12)
4-5-13: APPEAL FROM DENIAL OF LICENSE:
A. Time Limit For Appeal: Within five (5) days, excluding weekends and legal holidays, from refusal of
the city clerk to issue or renew a license under this chapter, the applicant for a license may appeal
to the city council for the purpose of having the city council review the action of the city clerk.
B. Appeal In Writing: The appeal by the licensee or the applicant whose license has been refused
must be in writing and shall set forth the reason why such license should not be refused.
C. Hearing Before Council: The city council shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) days, excluding
weekends and legal holidays, after the filing thereof, and shall render its decision within twenty (20)
days, excluding weekends and legal holidays, after said hearing. The decision of the majority of
the city council may be appealed to the seventh judicial district court pursuant to the Idaho
administrative procedures act. (2003 Code § 5-05-13)
4-5-14: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
A. Causes For Revocation: The city council shall have the power to revoke or suspend any license
granted in accordance with this chapter for any of the following causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license;
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business of a
pawnbroker;
3. Any other violation of this chapter;
4. The hiring of any person who has been convicted of a felony, or has been convicted of any other
crime, whether felony or misdemeanor, involving moral turpitude within the five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of being employed; or
5. Conviction of any felony or misdemeanor involving fraud, theft, dishonesty or receiving or
possessing stolen property, or any other crime involving moral turpitude.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 78/528
B. Hearing: Prior to any revocation or suspension, the licensee shall be granted the opportunity for a
public hearing before the city council, which hearing shall be held not later than twenty (20) days
after written notice to the licensee of intent to revoke or suspend. Such notice shall specify the
date, time and place of hearing and shall state the proposed basis for the suspension or revocation
and shall be delivered to the licensee personally or mailed to the licensee at the address set forth
in the license application. If, after such public hearing, the city council determines that one or more
of the grounds for revocation exists, it may revoke the license.
C. Appeal: The decision of the city council may be appealed to the district court pursuant to the Idaho
administrative procedures act. (2003 Code § 5-05-14)
4-5-15: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Actions Of Pawnbroker, Agent Or Employee: It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or any clerk,
agent or employee of a pawnbroker to:
1. Acquire, by purchase, trade, exchange or otherwise, goods bearing evidence of a serial number
which has been tampered with, or scratched or obliterated in any matter, unless such person
immediately contacts the police department;
2. Accept, buy or exchange any articles prior to examining the identifying credentials of the person
selling or exchanging said articles;
3. Fail to maintain the records required under section 4-5-5 of this chapter, or fail to maintain such
record as to any item of which record is required to be maintained under said section 4-5-5 of
this chapter, or fail to make an entry of any material matter in the record of any transaction;
4. Make any false entry in the record required by section 4-5-5 of this chapter;
5. Obliterate or destroy the record required by section 4-5-5 of this chapter; provided, however, that
such records may be destroyed at the expiration of the one year retention period prescribed in
section 4-5-5 of this chapter;
6. Refuse to allow any law enforcement officer to inspect the record required by section 4-5-5 of
this chapter or any articles in his possession during normal business hours;
7. Report any material matter falsely to a law enforcement officer;
8. Acquire by purchase, trade, exchange or otherwise, any articles from any person under eighteen
(18) years of age, without the express written consent of his or her parent or guardian or unless
said minor is the head of a family;
9. Fail to report forthwith to the police department the receipt of any property which the pawnbroker
has good cause to believe has been lost or stolen, together with the name of the owner, if
known, and the date when and the name of the person from whom the property was received; or
10. Hire or employ any person who has been convicted of any felony, or has been convicted of any
other crime, whether felony or misdemeanor, involving moral turpitude within the five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application.
B. False Information: It shall be unlawful for any person to use a false name, a fictitious address, or
any address other than the true address, or to furnish any false, untrue or misleading information
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 79/528
or statement relating to the information required by section 4-5-5 of this chapter.
C. Goods Under Contract: It shall be unlawful for any person to pledge or sell any goods, chattels or
effects, or any personal property leased or let to him by any instrument in writing under a contract
or purchase not yet fulfilled. (2003 Code § 5-05-15)
4-5-16: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 5-05-16; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 6
SECONDHAND STORES AND JUNK DEALERS
4-6-1: SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS DEFINED:
Every person who shall deal in secondhand furniture or secondhand household goods, or who shall
engage in the purchase of any used, old or discarded articles or things, shall be termed a
"secondhand dealer" and his place of business shall be known as a secondhand store or junk store.
(2003 Code § 5-03-01)
4-6-2: FEE FOR LICENSE; TERM:
Every person who shall engage in the business of running and operating a secondhand store or junk
store, shall pay an annual license in the sum to be set by the city council. Any permit granted shall be
effective only until December 31 next following. There shall be no prorating of fees. (2003 Code § 5-
03-02)
4-6-3: EACH LICENSE TO DESIGNATE PLACE OF BUSINESS:
Every license granted to any secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall designate the house or place,
together with the street and number, in which the person receiving the license shall be authorized to
carry on such business. In case any licensee licensed as such shall desire to move his store or place
of business from the place designated in his license to another location, he shall give notice to the city
clerk, who will endorse on the license held by the licensee. (2003 Code § 5-03-03; amd. 2012 Code)
4-6-4: PURCHASING FROM MINORS:
No secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall purchase any goods or articles whatsoever, from any minor
without first advising the chief of police and giving him an opportunity to inspect the goods offered for
sale before the purchase. (2003 Code § 5-03-04)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 80/528
4-6-5: POLICE AND PEACE OFFICERS TO INSPECT ARTICLES AND THINGS:
Every secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall, during reasonable hours, and upon request of any
police or peace officer, permit such officer to examine and inspect any merchandise, article or thing in
stock in his place of business. (2003 Code § 5-03-05)
4-6-6: RECORD OF PURCHASES REQUIRED:
Every secondhand dealer and junk dealer shall keep a book in which shall be written in the English
language, the time of the purchase of any article or thing, a description of the article, and the name
and address or the name and description of the person from whom such purchase was made, and the
said book, as well as every article or thing, shall at all reasonable hours be open for police inspection.
(2003 Code § 5-03-06)
Chapter 7
ESCORT AND ESCORT BUREAUS
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words or derivations shall have the
meaning given herein:
APPLICANT: The person making application for a license or the renewal of a license to either:
A. Maintain and operate an "escort bureau" as defined in this section; or
B. Engage as an "escort", as defined in this section.
EMPLOY: To retain the services of an escort or function as such under direction of an escort
bureau. A bureau shall be deemed to "employ" all escorts functioning and/or dispatched at their
direction regardless of the financial arrangements between the parties as to remuneration for
escort services provided.
EMPLOYEE: Any person functioning and/or dispatched as an escort at the direction of an escort
bureau, regardless of the financial arrangements between the bureau and the escort as to
remuneration for escort services provided.
ESCORT: A. Any person who, for hire or reward, accompanies others to or about social affairs,
entertainment or places of amusement.
B. Any person who, for hire or reward, consorts with others about any place of public resort or
within any private quarters.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 81/528
ESCORT BUREAU: Any business or agency which, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit,
furnishes or offers to furnish escorts.
LICENSE OFFICER: City clerk.
LICENSEE: A person having a city license in full force and effect issued hereunder to either:
A. Maintain and operate an "escort bureau", as defined in this section; or
B. Engage as an "escort", as defined in this section.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of
any kind. (2003 Code § 5-07-01)
4-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Business License Required; Fee; Investigation: Every person conducting, managing or carrying on
any escort bureau shall first procure a license and pay an annual license fee in such amount as
established by resolution of the city council. A provisional license may be issued pending
completion of the required investigation.
B. Escort License; Fee; Investigation: Every person hired for the purpose of accompanying others to
social affairs, entertainment, places of amusement or at any place of public resort, or within any
private quarters, shall first procure a license and pay an annual fee in such amount as established
by resolution of the city council. A provisional license may be issued pending completion of the
required investigation. (2003 Code § 5-07-02; amd. 2012 Code)
C. License And Identification Available For Inspection: Every escort shall have in their possession
while engaged in any act as an escort, including, but not limited to, travel to and from
appointments, their city license issued under this chapter and other identification with photograph;
both of which shall be provided for inspection upon request by any customer or by any law
enforcement officer.
D. Exceptions:
1. This chapter shall not apply to the lawful business of any employment office or employment
agency licensed under state law which does not conduct an escort bureau.
2. This chapter shall not apply to city licensees acting pursuant to the applicable city code licensing
requirements.
3. This chapter shall not apply to any persons acting under authorization of any public and
governmental agencies or political subdivisions thereof. (2003 Code § 5-07-02)
4-7-3: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 82/528
Each applicant for a license herein is required to provide the following information upon an application,
which shall contain the following:
A. An applicant who was not licensed by this chapter for the year immediately preceding the current
application shall be required to be fingerprinted by an appropriate agency to be designated by the
licensing officer.
B. All residential addresses during the past five (5) years.
C. The name and address of each business where the applicant was employed, or which the applicant
owned during the past five (5) years.
D. Whether the applicant has had any business license denied, revoked or suspended, the reason
therefor, and the date and place of such action.
E. Any conviction or forfeiture of bond, upon any assault, larceny, sexual offense, burglary, or any
criminal violation or municipal ordinance violation (except traffic violations) during the past five (5)
years.
F. Identification sufficient to prove that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
G. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be submitted, together
with the name and residence address of each officer and director, and of each stockholder owning
more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the
applicant shall set forth the name and residence address of each of the partners, including limited
partners. Said persons shall be construed as joint applicants for an escort bureau license.
H. The names and addresses of all persons employed or intended to be employed by the applicant
and any other person with a financial interest in the escort bureau.
I. Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation
into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for
the permit.
J. One photograph of the applicant taken within thirty (30) days of the date of application at least two
inches by two inches (2" x 2"). If the applicant is a corporation or a partnership, one photograph at
least two inches by two inches (2" x 2") in size of each officer and director and every shareholder
owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of said corporation, or if a partnership a two
inches by two inches (2" x 2") photograph of each partner, including a limited partner in said
partnership. (2003 Code § 5-07-03)
4-7-4: QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE; EMPLOYMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 83/528
No person shall hold a license who:
A. Has been convicted within the preceding five (5) years of:
1. Any felony or crime which under the laws of this state would be a felony.
2. Larceny in any degree.
3. An offense involving sexual misconduct, pandering or prostitution.
4. Any violation of this chapter or a similar law of another city in Idaho or any other state.
B. Is younger than eighteen (18) years of age.
C. Has made a material misrepresentation of fact on the application for license.
D. Has had a similar escort license, escort bureau license or other city license revoked within the last
five (5) years. (2003 Code § 5-07-04)
4-7-5: NOTIFICATION OF PERSONNEL CHANGES:
Every escort bureau shall, within twenty four (24) hours, notify the license authority of every change in
personnel of escorts employed by the escort bureau. (2003 Code § 5-07-05)
4-7-6: PROHIBITED ACTS OF ESCORT BUREAU LICENSEE:
In addition to maintaining all conditions and qualifications of a licensee for an escort bureau license,
said licensee shall not:
A. Hire Unlicensed Escort: Hire or employ any escort who is not licensed.
B. Minors:
1. Employment: Employ as an escort any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
2. Furnish Escort To Or Accept Employment From: Furnish any escort to, or accept employment
from, any patron, customer or person to be escorted who is under eighteen (18) years of age,
except at the special instance and request of the parent, guardian or other person in lawful
custody of the person upon whose behalf the escort service is engaged. (2003 Code § 5-07-06)
4-7-7: APPOINTMENT BOOK; NOTICE OF ESCORT AT OTHER LOCATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 84/528
A. Appointment Book Required: Every person who operates an escort bureau or practices or provides
as an escort shall at all times keep an appointment book in which the name, address and
telephone number of each and every patron shall be entered, together with the time and date and
place of service, the service to be provided and the name of the escort employed, furnished or
arranged for, prior to the service being rendered.
B. Inspection By Police: The appointment book shall be available at all times for inspection by the
police chief or his authorized representatives.
C. Escort Service Provided At Hotel Or Motel; Notice: Every person who practices or provides any
escort service to any location, including, but not limited to, any motel or hotel, must first give notice
of his or her presence on the premises at that location and fully identify himself or herself, the
escort bureau, and the patron upon whom the person intends to practice or provide an escort to
the owner, manager or person in charge of that location before rendering any services. This
provision shall be deemed complied with where the location is a motel or hotel by giving such
notice and identification to the person in charge of the registration desk of such motel or hotel. A
record of such appointment, or notice given and to whom said notice was given, shall also be kept
in the appointment book as hereinabove specified. (2003 Code § 5-07-07)
4-7-8: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; CONDITIONS:
In addition to the failure to maintain qualifications and conditions of licensing specified in section 4-7-4
of this chapter, the license to conduct an escort bureau or to be an escort may be suspended or
revoked if the city council finds:
A. The licensee has committed, or caused, permitted, encouraged or condoned the commission of any
lewd or immoral act or any act of prostitution.
B. The licensee has conducted, in whole or in part, a subterfuge to facilitate or to conceal the conduct
of any unlawful or immoral business or practice.
C. The licensee has failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
D. The licensee has been convicted of any violation of this chapter. (2003 Code § 5-07-08)
4-7-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day such violation is committed,
or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder. (2003 Code § 5-07-09; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 85/528
Chapter 8
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
4-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are applicable to this chapter:
ADULT ARCADE MACHINES: Machines which are used by an individual to view films, videos, or
segments of films, which distinguish, characterize or emphasize matters depicting, describing or
relating to activities of a sexual nature for the purposes of adult entertainment.
ADULT BUSINESS: An adult store, adult theater, adult entertainment establishment or adult business,
which also includes any business that operates adult arcade machines on its premises.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: Any place of business, or commercial establishment,
wherein the entertainment or activity therein consists of substantially nude persons dancing with or
without music, or engaged in movements of a sexual nature wherein the patron is directly or indirectly
charged a fee or required to make a purchase in order to view the entertainment or activity which
consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie, bikinis or similarly styled garments, or where the
patron, directly or indirectly, is charged a fee to engage in personal contact by employees, devices or
equipment, or by personnel provided by the establishment.
A. An establishment which has seminude dancing or strip tease performances, whether these
occur regularly or occasionally.
B. "Adult dancing" includes, but is not limited to: erotic, exotic, striptease, bikini or lingerie and shall
mean and relate to any performance, preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or other exhibition
performed before an audience depicting, describing or relating to activities of a sexual nature for
the purposes of adult entertainment.
C. "Substantially nude", as used in this definition, shall mean dressed in a manner so as not to
display any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, or displaying any portion of
any person's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. This definition of "adult
entertainment establishment" is to include, but not be limited to, bathhouses, massage parlors,
lingerie, modeling studios, or related or similar activities.
D. Establishments which have as their sole purpose the improvement of health and physical fitness
through special equipment and facilities, rather than entertainment, as herein above described,
are specifically excluded.
ADULT STORE: A. An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock or trade,
books, magazines or films which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing, or relating to adult entertainment;
B. An establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 86/528
C. An establishment which sells or displays for sale devices designed to stimulate sexual arousal
by contact with the skin or bodily orifices.
ADULT THEATER: An establishment, either enclosed or in the open air, used for presenting to an
audience through film or live performance material distinguished or characterized by emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to activities of a sexual nature for the purposes of adult
entertainment.
HOLDING COMPANY: A. Any corporation, firm, partnership, trust or other form of business
organization, not a natural person, which, directly or indirectly:
1. Owns;
2. Has the power or right to control; or
3. Holds with the power to vote, all or any part of the outstanding voting securities of a
corporation which holds or applies for a license required by this chapter.
B. For the purposes of this section, in addition to any other reasonable meaning of the words used,
a holding company "indirectly" has, holds or owns any power, right or security mentioned in
subsection A of this definition if it does so through any subsidiaries, however many such
subsidiaries may intervene between the holding company and the corporate licensee or
applicant.
INTERMEDIARY COMPANY: Any corporation, firm, partnership, trust or other form of business
organization other than a natural person which:
A. Is a holding company with respect to a corporation which holds or applies for a license required
by this chapter.
B. Is a subsidiary with respect to any holding company.
SUBSIDIARY: A. Any corporation, all or any part of whose outstanding equity securities are:
1. Owned;
2. Subject to a power or right of control; or
3. Held with power to vote, by a holding company or intermediary company; or
B. Any firm, partnership, trust or other form of business organization, not a natural person, all or
any interest in which is:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 87/528
1. Owned;
2. Subject to a power or right of control; or
3. Held with power to vote, by a holding company or intermediary company. (2003 Code § 5-10-
01)
4-8-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this chapter a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any
business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person
or corporation shall be subject to the requirement, if by himself or through an agent, employee or
partner he holds himself out as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage
therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform any part of such business or
occupation in the city. (2003 Code § 5-10-02)
4-8-3: LICENSING FOCUS:
This chapter is not designed to define, nor regulate, the sale, loan, distribution, dissemination,
presentation or exhibition of material or live conduct which is obscene. This chapter is designed to
license establishments that provide adult entertainment or themes of a distinct sexual nature. (2003
Code § 5-10-03)
4-8-4: LICENSE REQUIRED; ALCOHOL LICENSE PROHIBITED, OTHER
PROHIBITIONS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of
the citizens and visitors of the city, to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of employees
and patrons of adult businesses and adult establishments, and to protect children from being
inadvertently exposed to adult material.
B. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate within the city limits any adult store,
adult theater, adult arcade machine business, or adult entertainment establishment, without first
obtaining an appropriately classified license to do so as set forth in section 4-8-5 of this chapter.
No license shall be issued to any adult store, adult theater, adult arcade machine business, or
adult entertainment establishment where beer, wine or liquor are allowed on the premises during
any hour of operation. (2003 Code § 5-10-04; amd. 2012 Code)
C. Alcohol License Prohibited: No beer, wine or liquor license shall be issued to any adult theater,
adult store, adult arcade business or adult entertainment establishment business as described
above.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 88/528
D. Other Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful to allow beer, wine or liquor on the premises of any adult
theater, adult store, adult arcade business or adult entertainment establishment business during
any hour of operation or when any patron, customer, client, visitor, or any person other than the
business owner is present. No adult establishment of any class, as defined in section 4-8-5 of this
chapter, or as described above, shall be licensed or allowed within one thousand feet (1,000') of
any store, bar, tavern or business that sells, vends, serves, dispenses or distributes any alcoholic
beverages, including, but not limited to, beer, wine and liquor, or within one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500') of any school, preschool, daycare facility, public park, playground or other institution,
either public or private, where children under the age of eighteen (18) are taught, instructed or
trained. (2003 Code § 5-10-04)
4-8-5: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS:
A. Class A: Adult store which does not admit persons eighteen (18) years or younger.
B. Class B: Adult store which admits customers eighteen (18) years or younger to purchase
publications or items not relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, but
which has a portion of its premises devoted to the sale or display of such publications, films or
sexual devices.
C. Class C: Adult theater.
D. Class D: Adult arcade machines.
E. Class E: Any adult entertainment establishment which may also include the elements of class A, C
and D, but not class B. (2003 Code § 5-10-05)
4-8-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license to operate one of the establishments described in section 4-8-5 of this
chapter shall be made to the city clerk in such form and manner as prescribed by the city council,
accompanied by the annual fee hereinafter prescribed, but the application shall contain at least the
following:
A. The name and residence address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of each employee.
C. If applicant is a corporation, the names and resident addresses of each of the officers, directors
and managers of said corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of
the stock of the corporation and the address of the corporation itself, if different from the address of
the proposed establishment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 89/528
D. If applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of each of the partners, including any limited
partners and the address of the partnership itself, if different from the address proposed for the
establishment.
E. Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen (18) years.
F. The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately
preceding the date of the application, including the names, dates of, location and nature of same.
G. The number of adult arcade machines to be installed, if any, and the name, address and employer
of the owner of said machines. If the owner is a corporation, the names and resident addresses of
each of the officers, directors and managers of said corporation and of each stockholder owning
more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation and the address of the corporation
itself, if different from the address of the proposed establishment.
H. The class of license applied for and a statement why the proposed establishment falls within the
requested classification.
I. If the applicant is seeking a class B adult store license, a description of the manner in which minors
will be prevented from viewing publications and films of specified sexual activities or sexual
anatomical areas.
J. If a class A adult store license is being requested, a statement whether the applicant will display for
sale or sell any device designed to be used to stimulate sexual arousal or arousal by contact with
the human skin or bodily orifices.
K. A diagram of the floor plan and number of square feet and on premises parking spaces.
L. If the applicant is seeking a class C adult theater license, a statement whether the entertainment
will be live or on film. If live, a statement as to the nature of the live entertainment, e.g., burlesque,
dance, musical, drama, etc.
M. If a class E adult entertainment license is sought, a statement of the type and nature of
entertainment, whether class A items are to be sold or offered for sale, and if adult arcade
machines, including the number of, will be available for patronage.
N. The date on which the applicant intends to open for business.
O. The type and nature of activity desired to be licensed and whether the type of activity shall at any
time require the total exclusion of minors from the premises.
P. A legal description of the real property on which the premises is to be located, the name and
address of the record owner; the name and address of each lienholder; the name and address of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 90/528
each party to a valid and subsisting contract of sale, deed of trust or other agreement, the subject
of which is the aforesaid real property. If any of the persons sought to be identified by this section
is a corporation, the names and resident addresses of the officers, directors and managers of said
corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the
corporation and the address of the corporation itself, if different from the address of the proposed
establishment.
Q. If any of the information supplied pursuant to this section becomes outdated by virtue of changes in
the operation of the business or otherwise needs to be supplemented, the licensee shall provide
the city clerk with the modified or supplemental data within ten (10) days of the change or addition
being effective.
R. As to subsections C, G and P of this section, if the owner or applicant corporation is an
"intermediary company", as defined in section 4-8-1 of this chapter, the identity of each related
"holding company" or "subsidiary", as those terms are defined in section 4-8-1 of this chapter. In
providing the identity of each such corporation, the applicant shall furnish the names and
addresses of each of the officers, directors and managers and of each stockholder owning more
than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation, and the address of the corporation. (2003
Code § 5-10-06)
4-8-7: CONTROL BY CITY CLERK:
The city clerk shall, within three (3) working days of a receipt of an application for license required by
this chapter, submit a complete copy of the application to the planning and zoning commission,
building inspector, Central district health department of the state, fire inspector for the city, city
attorney, city engineer, and the chief of police. (2003 Code § 5-10-07)
4-8-8: INVESTIGATION BY CITY OFFICIALS AND OTHER AGENCIES:
On receipt of an application for licensing from the city clerk as required by this chapter, respective city
officials and other governmental agencies shall commence investigations as to whether the physical
plant of the proposed establishment is in conformity with the state law and city ordinances within ten
(10) days of receiving the license application and state whether the proposed establishment is in
compliance with the applicable city ordinances, state laws and regulations. It shall further be the duty
of each respective official agency, should a license subsequently be granted to the applicant, to
examine and inspect such place licensed on a regular basis to determine continuing conformity to the
applicable laws and regulations. If, during such routine inspection, a discrepancy is noted, the official
noting such discrepancy shall so advise the licensee in writing. The licensee shall have ten (10) days
within which to correct the discrepancy. Reasonable extensions of time will be granted the licensee if
the discrepancy cannot be eliminated within a ten (10) day period. (2003 Code § 5-10-08; amd. 2012
Code)
4-8-9: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Submission Of Application And Report To Council: When the city clerk has received a report and
recommendation from each of the officials or agencies designated in section 4-8-6 of this chapter,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 91/528
and not later than twenty (20) days from the filing of the application, the city clerk shall submit the
license application and official reports to the city council for inclusion in the council agenda.
B. Council Action: The city council shall act upon the application at the next regular scheduled meeting
after submission of the application by the city clerk. If each of the designated officials or agencies
has determined that the proposed business establishment is in conformity with all applicable city
and state laws, and if it appears that there are no material misrepresentations or fraud in the
application or in connection with the investigation by the city officials or other governmental
agencies, the city council shall grant a license to the applicant. (2003 Code § 5-10-09)
4-8-10: FURTHER INVESTIGATION BY CITY COUNCIL:
The city council, prior to the issuance of any license requested by this chapter and after review of the
submitted application, may undertake further investigation if it has reasonable cause to believe that
the applicant has or is attempting to perpetrate a fraud or material misrepresentation on the city. Such
further investigation may be completed and written findings issued at or prior to the next regular
meeting following the meeting at which such application was initially considered. Upon a finding by the
city council that the material misrepresentation or fraud has been perpetrated either in the application
or in connection with the investigation by city officials or other governmental agencies, said application
may be denied by the city council. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit any
investigation into the substantive content of the publications or films to be displayed or sold by the
applicant. (2003 Code § 5-10-10)
4-8-11: FEES FOR LICENSE:
A. Fees Established: The annual license fees, in such amounts as established by resolution of the city
council, must be paid to the city at the time the license application is submitted. (2003 Code § 5-
10-11; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Renewals: The request for renewal of licenses must be made on forms supplied by the city clerk
and such requests must be submitted by December 1 for renewal for the next calendar year. Each
renewal application must be accompanied by the annual fee set forth in subsection A of this
section.
C. Proration Of Fee: Where an application for a new license is made after January 1, the applicable
fee shall be apportioned in accordance with the number of days remaining in the calendar year.
(2003 Code § 5-10-11)
4-8-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Scope And Authority: The licensee shall be responsible for the operation of the licensed premises
in conformity with the ordinances of the city and the state. Upon a conviction of the licensee, or the
agent or employee of the licensee, of violating any law or ordinance, including this chapter,
intended to protect the health, welfare or safety of individuals in this state and which violation
occurs in the course of the main business activity licensed under this chapter, and not incidental
thereto, the city council may revoke all licenses held by the licensee under this chapter for a period
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 92/528
up to and including eighteen (18) months from the date of conviction. Upon expiration of the period
of revocation, the applicant will be eligible to reapply for a license according to the procedures and
requirements of this chapter. (2003 Code § 5-10-13)
B. Hearing: Any revocation of a license pursuant to this chapter shall not occur until a hearing is held
before the city council. Twenty (20) days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing and
the nature of the grounds for such revocation sufficient to inform the licensee and enable him to
respond shall be given. The licensee shall have the right to appear at said hearing in person or by
counsel to present evidence and argument on the licensee's behalf and cross examine witnesses.
C. Council Ruling: The city council shall make a ruling based on the evidence presented to it at the
hearing. Thereafter, the licensee shall be informed in writing of the city council's decision. If the city
council, by majority vote, favors revocation, such revocation shall take effect when personal
service of the written decision is made upon the licensee or an agent or employee of said licensee.
(2003 Code § 5-10-14)
4-8-13: PRIOR LOCATION AND LICENSE LAPSE:
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way affect the rights of present adult businesses to continue their
operation so long as they adhere to the provisions of this chapter, including submission of properly
completed applications, within thirty (30) days of the effective date hereof and otherwise maintain a
current license. Once an existing operation obtains a classified license, any subsequent change in
classification shall be treated as a new use and must qualify under the provisions of this chapter. If
there is a failure to timely renew a license, any subsequent application must satisfy all the
requirements of this chapter. (2003 Code § 5-10-15)
4-8-14: PENALTY:
It shall be a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code, for an
applicant or licensee to make a material misrepresentation on his application, to perpetrate a fraud on
any investigative official or agency, or to operate a business licensed under this chapter in
contravention to the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city. (2003 Code § 5-10-12; amd. 2012
Code)
Chapter 9
PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICES
4-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the
meaning given herein. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
APPLICANT: The person making application for a license or the renewal of a license for:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 93/528
A. Private patrol agent; or
B. Private patrol or private security service or system.
LICENSING OFFICER: The city clerk.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock
association.
PRIVATE OR PATROL SERVICE OR SYSTEM: Any service or system which purports to furnish, or
does furnish, for a consideration, or otherwise, any watchman or guard, either uniformed or otherwise,
to patrol any district in the city, or to guard or watch any property, or which employs any person to
perform any type of duty to guard, protect or maintain peace and order at any public function, dance
hall, theater, tavern or lounge, or any other place of public amusement or entertainment open to or
frequented by the general public.
PRIVATE PATROL AGENT: Any person employed by the service or who performs individually the
functions of a private patrol or private security service.
PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICE: Any service or system which purports to furnish, or does furnish, for
a consideration, or otherwise, any employee or agent to protect any property by means other than
physical observation of property. (2003 Code § 5-08-01)
4-9-2: LICENSES REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
A. Private Patrol Or Private Security System: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate or
maintain, or permit to be conducted, operated or maintained, or to participate in the conduct,
operation or maintenance of, a private patrol or private security system unless a valid license
therefor has been issued as provided for in this chapter and which is in full force and effect.
B. Private Patrol Agent: It shall be unlawful for any person to act or to offer to act, as a private patrol
agent within the city, unless a valid license therefor has been issued as provided for in this chapter
and which is in full force and effect.
C. Employment Of Licensed Agent: It shall be unlawful for any private patrol or security service to
employ or hire the services of a private patrol agent until and unless said private patrol agent has
been duly licensed as required by this chapter.
D. Exception; Police Officers: This chapter shall not apply to or include regularly appointed police
officers of the city or to any regularly appointed police officer or law enforcement agent of the
United States and of this state, or any political subdivision thereof, while acting as their agent.
E. Owner/Operator Acting As Agent: Any owner/operator of a validly licensed private patrol or security
service or system may act as a private patrol agent for their private patrol or security service or
system without additional bond or fee and be issued a license accordingly. (2003 Code § 5-08-02)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 94/528
4-9-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; PAYMENT OF FEE:
A. Application Made To Licensing Officer: An application for a license, whether for private patrol or
security service or system or private patrol agent, shall be made to the licensing officer.
Applications for such licenses may be made by mail.
B. Payment Of Application Fee: At the time of filing an application, an application fee shall be paid to
the city clerk pursuant to fee schedule. (2003 Code § 5-08-03)
4-9-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be issued a license who:
A. Is not over eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Has been convicted, paid any fine, placed on probation, received a deferred sentence, received a
withheld judgment, suffered the forfeiture of a bond for failure to appear or complete any sentence
of confinement for any felony or misdemeanor within three (3) years prior to the date of making
application; provided, that offenses regulating the operation and licensing of vehicles and fish and
game laws, other than driving while under the influence of intoxicating beverages and reckless
driving, shall not be grounds for disqualification. (2003 Code § 5-08-04)
4-9-5: INVESTIGATION:
A. Investigation Of Application And Applicant: The licensing officer shall examine all applications filed
and shall make, or cause to be made, such further investigation of the application and applicant as
he shall deem necessary.
B. Fingerprinting Required: An applicant who was not licensed by this chapter for the year immediately
preceding the current application shall be required to be fingerprinted by an appropriate agency to
be designated by the licensing officer. Cost of taking and processing such fingerprints shall be
borne by the applicant. (2003 Code § 5-08-05)
4-9-6: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
The licensing officer shall approve the issuance of a license provided for in this chapter whenever he
shall find that the applicant has complied with the provisions of this chapter and is otherwise qualified.
A provisional license may be issued pending completion of the required investigation. (2003 Code § 5-
08-06)
4-9-7: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 95/528
Before any license shall be issued to any applicant:
A. Bond: The applicant shall be required to give a fiduciary bond running to the city in the sum of:
1. Private patrol or security service, ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
2. Private patrol agent, two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
B. Insurance: General and personal liability insurance for bodily injury, sickness, disease or death
sustained by persons and arising out of assault, battery, false imprisonment, false arrest, malicious
prosecution, abuse of process, libel, slander, misrepresentation, deceit, or interference with
property and contract rights. The minimum limits for such insurance shall be five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) for the result of any one occurrence or accident regardless of the number of
persons injured or the number of claimants. (2003 Code § 5-08-07)
4-9-8: FEES FOR LICENSE; EXPIRATION; FORM:
A. Fees: The city license officer shall collect annual license fees, in such amounts as established by
resolution of the city council, before the acceptance of an application. (2003 Code § 5-08-08; amd.
2012 Code)
B. License Expiration: All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire each year.
Any person holding a license under the provisions of this chapter must renew such license for the
following succeeding year by payment to the city clerk, the license fees required by this chapter on
or before December 31.
C. License Form: The license for a private agent shall be in the form of a card which shall contain the
words "Private Patrol Agent"; and shall also bear numerals designating the year in which such
license is in force and effect. (2003 Code § 5-08-08)
4-9-9: UNIFORMS AND EMBLEMS:
A. Similarity To City Police Uniforms Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any private patrol or security
service, or for any private patrol agent, to use or authorize the use of any uniform, clothing, uniform
emblems or shoulder patches having a color, design and/or shape such as makes any of them
individually, or some or all of them in the aggregate, appear indistinguishable from any uniform,
uniform emblems and/or shoulder patches of the police department.
B. Identifying Tape Required: It shall be unlawful for any private patrol service to omit the use of a tape
which has stitched thereon words such as "private patrol or security service", "private patrol
system", or "bonded police" to be affixed to the left breast of the uniform or clothing worn by a
private patrol agent.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 96/528
C. Approval Required: Every private patrol or security service and private patrol agent, prior to being
licensed under this chapter, shall obtain approval and authorization of any color, design or shape of
any uniform, clothing, uniform emblems, badges and/or shoulder patches, to be utilized by such
licensee. Application for such approval shall be made to the police department and approval and
authorization, if any, shall be given in writing by the department and shall be attached to the
application for license required by this chapter and shall describe the color, design and shape of
the uniform, patches, badges and/or emblems, as the case may be. (2003 Code § 5-08-09)
4-9-10: UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear or display any license required or provided for by this
chapter unless such person is duly licensed therefor. (2003 Code § 5-08-10)
4-9-11: AUTHORITY RESTRICTED:
The granting or issuance of any license under the provisions of this chapter shall not be construed in
any manner as granting or providing any additional or further power of arrest than that granted under
the provisions of the statutes of the state, and the provisions of this code, nor shall the provisions of
this chapter be construed in any manner as authority or power to carry weapons contrary to the
statutes of the state. (2003 Code § 5-08-11)
4-9-12: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day such violation is committed,
or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder. (2003 Code § 5-08-12; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 10
SPECIAL EVENTS
4-10-1: FINDINGS AND DECLARATION:
The city council finds and declares that special events that draw a significant number of participants
require the city to expend funds to provide additional staffing and equipment to maintain peace and
order and to protect the public health and safety. The city council has determined that the additional
costs associated with these special events should not be borne solely by the taxpayers of the city, but
rather, the sponsors of the events should participate in the covering the additional costs. (2003 Code
§ 5-12)
4-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 97/528
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
APPLICANT: The person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association or entity
applying for a special event permit.
ATTENDEE: People participating in or attending a special event.
PERMIT: Written authorization to conduct a special event, as required by this chapter.
SECURITY PLAN: A comprehensive written plan to be proposed by the organizer of a special event,
which shall include the following:
A. Anticipated times of attendee movement;
B. Numbers, types and duties of law enforcement, professional security, and volunteer personnel
which may be required;
C. Vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress routes for all event locations;
D. Available parking space estimates and locations;
E. Shuttle types, routes, and schedules;
F. Traffic control points and warning devices;
G. Emergency vehicle access routes, anticipated routes of movements on public rights of way;
H. Placement of traffic direction and parking personnel;
I. A plan for the control of the service of alcoholic beverages; and
J. Other applicable preparations for the maintenance of public health and safety due to individual
or unique considerations about the event.
SOUND AMPLIFYING SYSTEM: Any system or electrical hookup or connection, loudspeaker or
electronic system, equipment, apparatus, device, instrument, or machine designed for or intended to
be used for the purpose of amplifying or producing sound or increasing the volume of the human
voice, musical tone, vibration or sound wave.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any organized nonroutine activity on public or private property that may significantly
impact or affect neighboring property owners, residents and businesses and that may reasonably be
expected to attract more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) attendees and/or which may require
more parking spaces than the sponsor's property can accommodate.
SPONSOR: The applicant, or the person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 98/528
association, or other entity owning, leasing, or otherwise controlling real property upon which a special
event is to be located. (2003 Code § 5-12-01)
4-10-3: APPROVAL REQUIRED:
A. Permit Required: No person shall produce, direct, conduct, manage, institute, or carry on any
special event without first obtaining the appropriate permits from the city. No person shall promote,
advertise, encourage, or solicit attendance or otherwise participate in any way in a special event
for which no permit has been issued, or for which such permit has been suspended or revoked.
B. Issuing Official: Approval of a special event may be issued only by the mayor of the city.
C. Constitutional Rights: For any special event involving the exercise of rights protected by the first
and fourteenth amendments of the United States constitution, or article 1, section 4, 9 or 10 of the
constitution of the state of Idaho, the application shall be processed promptly, without charging a
fee for political or religious activities, without imposing terms or conditions that infringe
constitutional freedoms, and in a manner that respects the liberties of the applicants and the
public. Events involving commercial activity are presumed to be of a commercial nature and
subject to the provisions of this chapter, except when such commercial activity conveys a
constitutionally protected communication. (2003 Code § 5-12-02)
4-10-4: TIME TO FILE PERMIT APPLICATION; FEES:
An application for a permit for a special event shall be filed with the city clerk not less than forty five
(45) days before the date proposed for holding a special event. A fee in such amount as established
by resolution of the city council shall accompany the application. For good cause, the city clerk may
accept applications within the forty five (45) day period; provided, the applicant shall be required to
pay, in addition to the application fee, the estimated costs, if any, of city staff time incurred for special
meetings. (2003 Code § 5-12-03; amd. 2012 Code)
4-10-5: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
Application for a special event permit shall be made on forms provided by the city clerk. The
application shall be signed by the applicant and shall contain the following:
A. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, and if the same be a corporation, the
names of its principal officers, or if the same be a partnership, limited liability company,
association, or organization, the name or names of the person or persons who shall be responsible
for the event. This information may be used by the city clerk to conduct a criminal background
check.
B. A description of the special event proposed to be held, estimates of: 1) the number of persons
participating in the event; 2) the number of spectators and vehicles anticipated; 3) the number and
type of participating vendors anticipated, the purpose of the event, the date, hours, and location
where the event is proposed to be held, and the admission fee, if any, to be charged.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 99/528
C. Verification of conformance to department of health and/or adopted building codes in regard to
sanitary facilities.
D. A description of the equipment to be used, if any, including the number and types of vehicles, the
number and types of sound amplifying systems, whether mounted, portable, or stationary, the time
and area of operation of the sound amplifying systems, the number and type of special units such
as musical groups, animal petting zoos, or shows and the like.
E. An agreement that the city shall be compensated for any damage to public property, and that the
public property shall be cleaned and restored to the condition in which it was found prior to the
holding of the special event.
F. "Security plan", as defined in section 4-10-2 of this chapter.
G. Verification of conformance to fire codes.
H. A detailed drawing or schematic of the staging area and the entire event grounds, showing
emergency lanes for responding vehicles, the exits for the public, emergency lighting locations (if
required), fire extinguisher locations, and emergency medical service locations (if required). (2003
Code § 5-12-04; amd. 2012 Code)
4-10-6: APPROVAL STANDARDS:
Generally, special events permits will be approved if the applicant meets the following criteria:
A. The proposed special event will not pose an unreasonable safety or traffic impact or impede in any
substantial way public safety services or the distribution of those services in emergency response
situations.
B. The proposed special event will not have a significant adverse environmental impact or in any
substantial way constitute a disturbance of the peace of the community or unduly endanger the
health, safety and welfare of the public.
C. The proposed special event will not cause damage to any property, either public or private.
D. The proposed special event will not leave city services overextended beyond normal working
conditions; provided, if the city feels that the special event will create a hardship on city services,
the special event may be rescheduled or canceled.
E. The applicant has not violated conditions of approval for previous special events. (This item may be
enforced or waived at the city's discretion, depending upon the severity and number of infractions.)
(2003 Code § 5-12-05)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 100/528
4-10-7: CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING PERMIT:
As a condition to granting a special event permit:
A. May Be Imposed: Reasonable conditions may be imposed concerning the time, duration and place
of such event; the area and manner of conducting such an event; the maximum number of
participants or spectators; the regulation of traffic, if required, including the number and type of
vehicles and the number and placement of signs and barricades to be provided by the applicant,
together with a plan of removal of such signs and barricades to be attached to the application;
reasonable sound levels; the number of privately hired licensed security personnel or additional
police escorts or employees, agents, or volunteers needed for safe and efficient operation; whether
alcoholic beverages may be consumed, sold, or permitted at the event site as otherwise authorized
by law; and such other requirements as the city may find reasonable and necessary for the
protection of persons and property.
B. Costs Estimated; Security:
1. The applicant shall be required to compensate the city for its actual costs incurred for increased
fire or police protection, street or bike path cleaning or other extraordinary city services. Such
costs shall be estimated in advance of the special event by the city clerk based upon the
information in the application and upon consultation with the chiefs of police and fire. The
applicant shall provide financial assurance to the city that the costs will be paid within twenty
(20) days after invoice. Financial assurance shall be given by depositing with the city cash in an
amount of one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the city anticipated expenses.
2. Such cash deposit shall be delivered to the city no later than forty eight (48) hours before
commencement of the special event.
C. Agreements And Insurance Requirements: Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall file
with the city clerk the following:
1. An executed written agreement, as provided for in the application, to compensate the city for: a)
loss or damage to public property; b) cleanup and removal of debris; and c) additional costs
associated with city provided services such as personnel, equipment, supplies, utilities and
facilities.
2. A hold harmless agreement, executed by the applicant, indemnifying the city for any and all
claims for personal injury, damages or losses resulting or arising from the special event not
caused by the gross negligence of the city.
3. A liability insurance policy in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the
aggregate naming the city as an additional named insured and providing for adequate notice of
cancellation if the policy is canceled prior to the special event.
D. Cooperation And Compliance: The applicant shall cooperate with city authorities and personnel,
and do all things required by the city to ensure that the attendees and sponsor abide by all rules
and regulations of the city and all applicable local, state and federal laws. (2003 Code § 5-12-06)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 101/528
E. Monitoring By City Officials; Revocation Of Permit: The applicant agrees that the city, through the
city clerk, police department, and fire department have the authority to monitor the special event at
any time during and in preparation of the event to ensure the conditions for the permit are met by
the applicant, sponsor and attendees. Applicant agrees the city may revoke the permit or close
down the event at any time that it is determined that the public health, safety or welfare is in
jeopardy. If the event is ordered to be closed down by the city, the attendees, sponsor, and others
at the special event shall be ordered to disperse. Refusal of any person to disperse upon order of a
law enforcement officer acting under the authority of this section is a misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 5-12-06; amd. 2012 Code)
4-10-8: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The city shall not issue a permit if, upon review of the application, any of the below is found to exist.
The city clerk shall notify the applicant within five (5) days, in writing, specifically stating all reasons for
denial of the permit:
A. The application is not on the form provided or does not contain the required information;
B. The applicant has made a false or misleading statement of material fact in the application for a
permit;
C. The building, structure, equipment or location of such special event does not comply with or fails to
meet all of the health, fire, building, safety and welfare requirements of the city;
D. The special event or its location is such as to interfere with or unreasonably obstruct the free flow of
vehicular traffic or other means of travel on any public street or with pedestrian traffic on the
sidewalks, except where use of such is sought and granted as part of the application for the
special event permit;
E. Proof of insurance, executed written agreement for compensation, hold harmless agreement,
financial assurance, or prepayment of the sum described in section 4-10-7 of this chapter, has not
been delivered to the city;
F. The conduct of the special event or any portion thereof will be contrary to law;
G. The conduct of the special event or any portion thereof will unreasonably interfere with the
preservation of the public peace, health, safety, or welfare of the city;
H. An applicant has had a special event permit denied for good cause within one year prior to the
application, and can show no material change in the circumstances since such denial;
I. The applicant refuses to agree to, abide by, or comply with any of the conditions and regulations
attached to such permit; or such special event will interfere or conflict with another event for which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 102/528
a permit has already been issued; or will interfere or conflict with another scheduled event which
takes precedence by virtue of section 4-10-9 of this chapter;
J. In the city's discretion, the city has insufficient police and fire personnel available for monitoring the
special event. (2003 Code § 5-12-07)
4-10-9: RESOURCE ALLOCATION:
The city has limited resources in terms of fire and police personnel to adequately monitor and regulate
special events. Accordingly, an applicant's special event which has annually been conducted in the
city over the preceding five (5) year period shall have priority over another applicant's event with less
or no history in the city, for purposes of date, time and location preference. Otherwise, first in time to
file an application shall have priority as to choice of date, time and location of the proposed event.
(2003 Code § 5-12-08)
4-10-10: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Any special event permit may be summarily suspended or revoked at any time by the mayor or chiefs
of police or fire in consultation with the mayor when because of disaster, emergency or other change
of circumstances it is determined that the special event will unreasonably interfere with the public
peace, health, safety and welfare, or if it is determined that the applicant has not fully complied with
the terms and conditions of the city as described in the permit or conditions of approval. (2003 Code
§ 5-12-09)
4-10-11: APPEAL OF DENIAL, CONDITIONS, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF
PERMIT:
Notice of an appeal from the denial, imposition of conditions, suspension or revocation of a permit
shall be filed within five (5) days after service of notification of denial, imposition of conditions,
suspension or revocation of permit. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing, setting forth fully the
grounds upon which the appeal is based, and shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall forward
copies to the mayor and city council. The city clerk shall submit to the mayor and city council a report
indicating the findings and reasons for denying, restricting, suspending or revoking the special event
permit. (2003 Code § 5-12-10)
4-10-12: COUNCIL ACTION ON APPEAL:
A. Time Limit; Consideration: Within fifteen (15) days after the filing of the notice of appeal with the city
clerk or at the next regular meeting of the city council, the city council shall consider the appeal.
Written notice of the time and place the city council will consider the appeal shall be mailed by the
city clerk to the appellant at least five (5) days before the date set for hearing unless the appellant
shall waive this notice in writing. Appearance at the hearing by the appellant shall be waiver of
notice in any event.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 103/528
B. Decision Of City Council: In any appeal, the city council shall consider the application, the report
submitted by the city clerk, and other pertinent information presented, and may grant or deny the
permit subject to the conditions, terms, and regulations set forth in this chapter. The decision of the
city council shall be final.
C. Notification Of Decision: The city clerk shall notify the appellant in writing of the decision of city
council by placing the written notification in the United States mail, at the address provided in the
application. (2003 Code § 5-12-11)
4-10-13: EXEMPTIONS:
The following events are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Events sponsored or cosponsored by the city.
B. The Eastern Idaho State Fair.
C. The annual parade.
D. Other governmental sponsored or cosponsored events as determined by the city council. (2003
Code § 5-12-12)
4-10-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or condition of any permit issued hereunder shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction or plea of guilty thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is committed, continued or permitted. (2003 Code § 5-12-13; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 11
TAXICABS
4-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CORPORATION, PERSON, INDIVIDUAL OR ASSOCIATION: Include a corporation, individuals,
association, joint stock company and copartnership.
OPERATION: The conducting of a general taxicab business.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 104/528
TAXICAB: Any motor vehicle used for purpose of transporting persons for hire; providing, that
"taxicab", as herein stated and herein defined, shall not include school buses or other motor vehicles
used exclusively for the transportation of children to and from school, nor a motor bus with a seating
capacity of over seven (7) passengers operated on a regular schedule over regularly designated
streets, nor companies operating for the purpose of carrying U.S. mail or other U.S. property.
TAXICAB OWNER, OPERATOR OR LICENSEE: That person, firm, copartner, corporation, individual
or association securing a license to operate upon and through the streets, avenues and alleys. (2003
Code § 5-09-01)
4-11-2: DRIVER REQUIRED TO CONVEY:
No owner or driver of any "taxicab", as defined in section 4-11-1 of this chapter, shall, when not
otherwise engaged or occupied in the performance of his duties as a licensee under the provisions of
this chapter, refuse to convey any person when applied to for that purpose, the proper fee therefor
being tendered; or having undertaken to convey such person shall omit or neglect to do so; provided,
that such passenger is in such condition of health and cleanliness that his carriage in such vehicle
would not be a violation of any provisions of this chapter. (2003 Code § 5-09-02)
4-11-3: CITY COUNCIL AUTHORIZED TO LICENSE AND CONTROL:
The governing body is hereby vested with complete authority to issue licenses for the operation of
taxicabs and to alter, revoke or amend, or suspend the said license in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, and to regulate and limit the method of operation of taxicabs in accordance with this
chapter, and is further vested with full and complete authority and responsibility to carry into effect all
of the provisions of this chapter relative to the operation of taxicabs. (2003 Code § 5-09-03)
4-11-4: LIMITATIONS ON LICENSES; TRANSFERABILITY:
A. Any license now issued and which may hereafter be issued to engage in the business of operating
taxicabs on or over the streets and public ways shall mean and be construed to be only a license
or privilege to use the street and public ways for the business of operating taxicabs thereon.
B. There shall not be issued to the owner of taxicabs by the city clerk or other authority authorized to
issue licenses under the direction of the governing body a greater number of licenses than one
taxicab license for one taxicab for each one thousand five hundred (1,500) persons of the
population of the city, based on the most recent Unites States official census.
C. Such licenses shall be apportioned to the various applicants therefor as the governing body may
determine the public interest requires. (2003 Code § 5-09-04)
D. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable, subject to the consent
and approval of the governing body; provided, however, that no license may be issued to another
or to any other persons until such licensee or person has applied for a license and has been found
to be qualified to obtain such license under all of the provisions of this chapter; provided further,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 105/528
that upon the approval of the transfer of any license as herein provided, the city clerk shall charge
and collect a fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council for transferring
said license and issuing the new license card and plate as provided for in this chapter. (2003 Code
§ 5-09-04; amd. 2012 Code)
4-11-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a license shall be addressed to the governing body, shall be in writing, verified by the
affidavit of the applicant or his or its duly authorized agent or office, and shall state the following facts:
the full name and address of the applicant; if a partnership, the name and address of each partner; if a
corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors thereof; previous experience he or
it has had in such business; the number of taxicabs desired; the seating capacity of each taxicab,
according to manufacturer's rating; name of manufacturer; the state license number; and the length of
time the said taxicab has been in use; a full and complete statement of an applicant's financial
standing, showing assets and liabilities; a statement of method of operation; a schedule of fares to be
charged by the applicant and the method of computing the same; and the color scheme of applicant's
cabs. (2003 Code § 5-09-05)
4-11-6: NAME AND NUMBER REQUIRED:
A. Every taxicab shall have painted upon each of the rear doors of said taxicab the name of the owner,
or the trade name under which the owner operates, together with the cab number of each of the
vehicles. All the lettering mentioned in this paragraph shall not be less than two inches (2") in
height.
B. No applicant shall adopt or imitate the name or insignia used by another city licensed taxicab
operator in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public. (2003
Code § 5-09-06)
4-11-7: INSPECTION:
The chief of police shall make or have made by police officers designated by him such examination
and inspection of the vehicles before and after issuing a license as the chief of police or the city
council considers necessary. The governing body shall refuse a license to, or, if already issued,
revoke or suspend the license of any vehicle found to be unfit or unsuited for public patronage. The
governing body is hereby authorized and empowered to establish reasonable rules and regulations for
the inspection and operation of public vehicles and their appurtenances, construction and condition or
fitness. (2003 Code § 5-09-07)
4-11-8: LICENSE CARD:
The city clerk shall grant a license only after payment of license fees herein set forth and filing of the
bond or security for insurance hereinafter provided for, by delivering to the owner a card of such size
and form as may be prescribed. That card shall contain the official license number of the vehicle, the
date of issuance, and a statement to the effect that in case of any complaint, the city clerk shall be
notified, giving the license number of the vehicle. Such card shall be signed by the city clerk and shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 106/528
be good for one year, or the remaining fraction of the year through December 31, following its
issuance, unless sooner revoked by the governing body, and shall contain blank spaces upon which
an entry shall be made of the date of every inspection of the vehicle. (2003 Code § 5-09-08; amd.
2012 Code)
4-11-9: FEES:
A. Specified: A license fee of an amount as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid
for each and every taxicab, licensed hereunder.
B. Term: All licenses granted hereunder shall be from January 1 and ending December 31 of the same
year; provided, however, if application for license is made after July 1 of any year, the fee for the
remainder of the year, to December 31, shall be in such amount as established by resolution of the
city council. (2003 Code § 5-09-09; amd. 2012 Code)
4-11-10: DRIVER'S LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a licensed taxicab without first complying with
the following requirements:
A. Be of the age of eighteen (18) years or over and possess and present a duly issued, valid Idaho
chauffeur's license.
B. Be of sound physique, with good eyesight, and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, ear or any other
infirmity of body or mind which might render him unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab.
C. Be able to read and write in the English language.
D. Be clean in dress and person and not be addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or drugs.
E. Produce in letter form, affidavits of his good character from two (2) reputable citizens who have
known him personally during one year next preceding the date of his application, and a further
testimonial in letter form for that purpose from his last employer unless sufficient reason is given
for its omission.
F. Fill out in letter form, a statement giving his full name, residence, place of residence for one year
previous to moving to his present address, age, color, height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth,
length of time he has resided in the city, whether a citizen of the United States, places of previous
employment, whether he has previously been licensed as a driver or chauffeur, and, if so, whether
his license has been revoked and for what cause, which statement shall be signed and sworn to by
the applicant and filed by the police department as a permanent record.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 107/528
G. Upon the examination by the chief of police of the applicant and upon all facts disclosed by the
requirements hereinabove, the chief of police may recommend to the governing body that such
applicant be granted a taxicab driver's license or if said chief of police is not satisfied that the
applicant is a suitable and proper person to operate a taxicab upon the streets of the city, he may
reject the applicant his license to so operate. If the applicant is rejected by the chief of police, the
applicant may request a personal appearance before the governing body to offer evidence why his
application should be considered. A majority vote of the governing body is sufficient to issue or
reject said applicant a license after said hearing. (2003 Code § 5-09-10)
4-11-11: PHOTOGRAPH OF DRIVER:
Each applicant for a driver's license must file with his application two (2) recent photographs and
fingerprints of himself, of a size which may be easily attached to his license, one of which shall be
attached to the license when issued, the other shall be filed with the application. The photograph shall
be so attached to the license that it cannot be removed and another photograph substituted without
detection. Each licensed driver shall, upon demand of an inspector of licenses, a police officer or
passenger, exhibit his license and photograph for inspection. Where the application for a license is
denied, the photograph shall be returned to the applicant. (2003 Code § 5-09-11)
4-11-12: FORM AND TERM OF DRIVER'S LICENSE:
Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the foregoing requirements there shall be issued to the applicant a
license, which shall be in such form as to contain the photograph and signature of the licensee and
blank spaces upon which a record may be made of any arrest or of serious complaint against him.
Any licensee who defaces, removes or obliterates any official entry made upon his license, shall be
punished by the revocation of his license. Driver's licenses shall be issued as of the date of issuance
and shall be valid to and including December 31 next succeeding, unless sooner revoked. (2003 Code
§ 5-09-12)
4-11-13: RENEWAL OF DRIVER'S LICENSE:
The police department may renew a driver's license from year to year by appropriate endorsement
thereon. A driver in applying for the renewal of his license shall make application upon a form to be
furnished, entitled "application for renewal of license", which shall be filled out with the full name and
address of the applicant together with the statement of the date upon which his original license was
granted and number thereof. (2003 Code § 5-09-13)
4-11-14: FEE FOR DRIVER'S LICENSE:
The license fee, in such amount as established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid for a taxi
driver's license. Each license issued shall be effective only until December 31 following its issuance.
There shall be no proration of fees. (2003 Code § 5-09-14; amd. 2012 Code)
4-11-15: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 108/528
A. Driver's licenses shall be revoked upon the conviction of a violation of any criminal statute relative
to the sale, possession or delivery of intoxicating liquor or controlled substances; drunk or reckless
driving; shall be suspended upon the first offense of speeding and revoked upon the second
offense. If revoked for any cause, no new license shall be granted to such driver except upon the
unanimous vote of the city council. In the event of conviction as above set forth, an acquittal in a
higher court shall automatically remove such grounds of revocation.
B. Driver's licenses may be suspended or revoked at any time by the governing body for good cause
shown upon a hearing thereon, also upon the entering of a judgment or verdict of guilty of any
person holding a driver's license. Any such suspension or revocation shall be noted on the license,
together with a statement of the reason therefor. A second suspension for the same reason, or in
any case, a third suspension of a driver's license, shall revoke the license. In all cases involving a
suspension, it shall be discretionary with the city council as to the tenure of the suspension. (2003
Code § 5-09-15)
4-11-16: DESIGNATION OF TAXICAB STANDS; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The governing body shall, upon issuing a license, designate taxicab stands and call boxes, at which
stands, cabs so licensed shall be required to stand while waiting for patronage and is authorized to
promulgate and adopt such reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter as may be necessary or deemed advisable to carry out and enforce its provisions. (2003
Code § 5-09-16)
4-11-17: DOUBLE PARKING; SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
Two (2) or more taxicabs shall not be permitted to stand side by side on any street and such taxicabs
and the drivers of such taxicabs or the person in charge thereof shall remain quietly at the taxicab
stands when not employed and shall not move about the streets for the purpose of soliciting
patronage, nor shall such taxicab be left standing at any point or place while unemployed other than at
the stand designated. The drivers of all taxicabs licensed under the provisions of this chapter are
expressly prohibited from indiscriminately soliciting passengers for hire or from cruising the streets for
the purpose of obtaining patronage for their cars, and solicitation within this prohibition is hereby
defined to consist of moving about the streets soliciting or inviting business or customers, or calling
attention of members of the public to taxicabs by word of mouth, signals, nods or other signs from the
taxicab while moving or by drawing up to the curb for that purpose, or in any other manner
affirmatively calling attention to service while going to or from its points of service. Cruising within this
prohibition is declared to consist of: Moving about the streets either indiscriminately or between fixed
points for the purpose of obtaining patronage; provided, however, that taxicabs shall be permitted to
receive or discharge passengers at public places or gatherings, such as theaters, public buildings, and
stands. (2003 Code § 5-09-17)
4-11-18: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Before any license is issued for any taxicab, the owner thereof shall be required to file with the city
clerk a certified copy of policy of insurance executed by a qualified insurance company, insuring the
public against any loss or damage that may result to any person or persons from the operation of said
taxicab, provided the limited amount of liability in such policy of insurance specified shall be as
follows: property damage, not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00); public liability,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 109/528
per incident, not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00). Provided, however, an
applicant for an operator's license may in lieu of furnishing such policy of insurance, deposit with the
city treasurer the sum of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) in cash or in government
bonds that may be cashed immediately, to be approved by the governing body, or a surety bond
executed by an authorized bonding company, to insure the public against any loss or damage caused
in the operation of any taxicab operated by such licensed operation to any property or to any person
or persons other than the taxicab owner or its chauffeur operator. Also, it is further expressly required
that if the amount of said cash or cash value of said bonds, as so deposited, has been reduced at any
time by payments therefrom for damages to property or persons, then in that event the taxicab owner
and licensed operator hereunder shall replenish the said amount within five (5) days after such
reduction has been made so that the amount of said cash or cashable bonds shall at all times equal
the said three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) so deposited for said purpose. (2003 Code
§ 5-09-18; amd. 2012 Code)
4-11-19: PROOF OF BONA FIDE USE:
No license for the operation of taxicabs under the provisions of this chapter shall be granted to any
person except upon the satisfactory proof being made that said vehicle is to be used in actual bona
fide taxicab business. The business of every licensed taxicab under the provisions of this chapter shall
be carried on by the person in whose name the bond or contract of insurance provided for herein is
written and every licensed operator shall display in a conspicuous place on his cab the name of the
person in whose name the license is issued, and no other name shall appear thereon. (2003 Code
§ 5-09-19)
4-11-20: METERS REQUIRED:
It shall be lawful for any person owning, operating or controlling a taxicab or taxicabs to operate the
same without installing for the purpose of determining the fare to be charged, a taximeter; but if a
taximeter is used, it shall be of size and design approved by the city council, and conform to the
following specifications:
A. A taximeter is a mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is
mechanically calculated, whether for distance traveled or for waiting time, or both, and upon which
such charge shall be indicated by means of legible figures, which are electrically lighted each time
the taximeter flag is thrown from nonearning to earning position. There shall also be a similar
indicating mechanism to show charges for extra passengers.
B. Such meters must register upon visual counters the following items:
1. Total miles.
2. Paid miles.
3. Number of trips.
4. Number of extras.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 110/528
C. Each taximeter must be furnished with a tamperproof switch and system of electrical distribution so
that when the taximeter flag is in the vacant or nonearning position, the vacant sign on the top of
the taxicab will be lighted, and when the meter flag is thrown to an earning position, the fare
indicator on the taximeter will be lighted.
D. Each taximeter must be driven direct from the taxicab transmission, or connected with
speedometer driving shaft to the taximeter head itself.
E. No person shall use or permit to be used upon any taxicab a taximeter which does not conform to
these allowable tolerances.
F. No taximeter shall be allowed to determine fare until the taximeter shall have been inspected and
found to be accurate.
G. No driver of a taxicab equipped with a taximeter while carrying passengers, or under employment,
shall display the taximeter flag affixed to such taximeter in such position as to denote that such
vehicle is not employed, or in such a position as to denote that he is employed at a rate of fare
different from that to which it is entitled under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of
the driver to call the attention of passengers to the amount registered and the taximeter flag shall
not be changed to "vacant" position until after the fare is paid. (2003 Code § 5-09-20)
4-11-21: COMPUTATION OF CHARGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or driving a taxicab with taximeter installed to
operate or drive such taxicab unless such taximeter is used in determining the fare to be charged and
no other or different fare shall be charged to a passenger than is recorded on the reading face of said
taximeter for a trip, except that the hourly rate may be used on mutual agreement of passenger and
owner of the taxicab. (2003 Code § 5-09-21)
4-11-22: FARE RATES:
The rates and charges for transporting persons for hire by the operator licensed under this chapter
and title shall be fair and reasonable. The operator shall file a schedule of its rates and charges with
the city clerk with its application and shall make no adjustments or changes in rates or charges until
sixty (60) days after the filing of a new rates and charges schedule with the city clerk, at which time
such rates and charges shall become effective, unless disapproved by the city council. A schedule of
the authorized rates and charges shall be legibly printed on a card not less than four inches by six
inches (4" x 6") and conspicuously displayed in each taxicab. (2003 Code § 5-09-22)
4-11-23: RIGHT TO REFUSE EMPLOYMENT AND MULTIPLE PASSENGERS:
Every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand payment of the legal fare in advance and may
refuse employment unless it be prepaid, but no driver of a taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect to
convey any orderly persons upon request anywhere in the city unless previously engaged or unable to
do so. No driver of a taxicab shall carry any other person than the passenger first employing the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 111/528
taxicab without the consent of the passenger. In such event, if a taximeter be used, the first departing
passenger shall pay the face amount as shown on meter. The meter shall then be cleared and the
remaining passenger shall pay for distance thereafter carried. If the taxi be unmetered, the fare to be
charged shall be as follows: The first departing passenger shall pay the regular fare to his place of
departure, and the remaining passenger shall then pay the regular fare from his point of pick up to
point of delivery. (2003 Code § 5-09-23)
4-11-24: LIMITATION ON FARE CHARGE:
No person owning, operating or controlling a taxicab shall charge or attempt to charge any passenger
a greater rate of fare than to which he is entitled under the provisions of this chapter. (2003 Code § 5-
09-24)
4-11-25: MANNER OF INSTITUTION; REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Filing Of Charges Required: Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked or suspended by the city council whenever it shall find that the licensee or any agent,
servant or employee of such licensee has violated the provisions of this chapter, or permitted the
same to be violated; provided, however, no such license shall be revoked or suspended unless
charges in writing shall first have been filed with the city clerk setting forth with reasonable
certainty the nature of such charges against such licensee.
B. Hearing; Notice:
1. Upon the filing of charges as aforesaid, the city council shall fix a time and place for the hearing
of said charges, and a copy of the charges as filed, together with the notice of the time and place
of hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least five (5) days prior to the date fixed by the
city council for the hearing.
2. Any notice provided for in this chapter shall be served either by delivering a copy personally to
the licensee, or by leaving a copy with a person of suitable age and discretion at the place of
business of the licensee, and mailing a copy of the notice to the licensee at his place of business
as set forth in his application for license. At the hearing on said charges, the licensee shall have
the right to appear and defend the charges and, if he so desires, to be represented by counsel.
(2003 Code § 5-09-25)
Title 5
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
Chapter 1
NUISANCES
5-1-1: NUISANCE DEFINED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 112/528
Anything which is injurious to health or which is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction
to the free use of property, or unlawfully obstructs free passage or use in the customary manner of any
street, alley or sidewalk or public park, or injures any street or alley, or disturbs the peace and quiet, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance. (2003 Code § 7-02-01)
5-1-2: RUBBISH ON STREETS, ALLEYS OR SIDEWALKS:
Any person who shall wilfully or negligently throw, dump, store or deposit upon any sidewalk, street,
alley or public place, or any portion thereof, any glass, nails, tacks, hoops, cans, barbed wire, boards,
or any other substance or material which would be likely to injure any horse, stock, vehicle or person
traveling thereon, or which obstructs or impedes the free passage of pedestrians or public travel upon
such sidewalk, street, alley or public place, or any portion thereof, shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter. (2003 Code § 7-02-02)
5-1-3: IRRIGATION OR OVERFLOW WATER, BURNING ON STREETS:
A. Irrigation Water Flowing Upon Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or negligently
allow irrigation water to flow upon the streets of the city in such a manner that it stands in pools or
continuously flows upon said streets.
B. Burning Leaves Or Grass Upon Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn leaves, grass or
other material upon the streets of the city.
C. Overflow Water From Air Conditioners: It shall be unlawful for any person to allow overflow water
from air conditioners to run across or stand upon the sidewalks or streets of the city. (2003 Code
§ 7-02-03)
5-1-4: OBSTRUCTIONS ON SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any display signs, merchandise or other obstructions upon
any public sidewalk of the city. (2003 Code § 7-02-04)
5-1-5: OFFENSIVE MATTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon any property, or to allow to remain upon any property
within his or its control any matter which is offensive to the senses or potentially injurious to health.
(2003 Code § 7-02-05)
5-1-6: REFUSE IN BUILDINGS; STAGNANT WATER:
A. Refuse; Stagnant Water Prohibited: No person shall permit or suffer to be in or accumulate in, or
upon any yard, lot, place or premises, or upon any street or sidewalk adjacent to or abutting upon
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 113/528
any lot, block, place or premises, or in any building or shed owned or occupied by him or for which
he may be an agent, within the city limits, any stagnant or impure water, refuse, vegetable decay or
decaying substance, garbage or filth of any kind, nor suffer any yard, lot, place, building or
premises to be or to remain in such condition as to cause or create a noisome or offensive smell,
or to pollute or render unhealthful the atmosphere or the premises or thereby to be, become, cause
or create a public nuisance. (2003 Code § 7-02-06)
B. Penalty: Any person who shall fail to clean up said premises and to abate such nuisance and cease
to violate subsection A of this section for forty eight (48) hours after having received notice from
the chief of police so to do, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-3 of this code. (2003 Code § 7-02-07; amd. 2012 Code)
5-1-7: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Notice To Abate:
1. Issuance; Contents Of Notice: If it is determined by the city clerk or his authorized representative
that a public nuisance, as herein defined, exists on any lot, place or area, or upon any street,
sidewalk, or public right of way abutting the same, the city clerk or his representative shall cause
a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. The notice shall be headed "Notice To Clean
Premises", and shall:
a. Contain a description of the property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the
location of the nuisance;
b. Describe the nuisance in terms reasonably sufficient to identify the same;
c. Direct the abatement of the nuisance;
d. Specify the penalty provisions as provided herein; and
e. Specify the appeal process as provided herein.
2. Serving Of Notice: The notice above referenced may be served in the following ways:
a. Personal Service: By personal service on the owner of said lot, place or area, if owner lives
within the city, or by personal service on the occupant or person in charge or control of the
property, if such person can be identified; or
b. Mail: If said owner does not live within the city, by registered mail to the owner, at the address
shown on the last available assessment role, or as otherwise known; or by personal service
on the occupant or person in charge or control of the property, if such person can be identified;
or
c. Posting: Should the owner not be known or have an available address, by posting at a
conspicuous place on the land or abutting public right of way and insertion of an
advertisement at least once a week for the period of two (2) weeks in the official newspaper of
the city, and by personal service on the occupant or person in charge or control of the
property, if such person can be identified. Said newspaper advertisement shall be a general
notice that property in the city has been posted in accordance with this chapter and contain a
general statement of the effect of such postings. The date of such newspaper advertisements
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 114/528
shall not be considered in computing the appeal periods provided by this chapter. (2003 Code
§ 7-02-08)
B. Appeal: Within five (5) days from the date of posting, mailing or personal service of the required
notice, the owner or person occupying or controlling such lot, place or area affected may appeal to
the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk. At the regular
meeting or regular adjourned meeting of the city council, not less than ten (10) days nor more than
twenty six (26) days after receipt of the appeal, the city council shall proceed to hear and pass
upon such appeal, and the decision of the city council thereupon shall be final and conclusive.
(2003 Code § 7-02-09)
C. Time Period For Abatement: It shall be the duty of the owner or person occupying or controlling any
lot, place or area in the city which has been declared a public nuisance, as provided herein, within
five (5) days from the date of notification, as provided herein, or in case of an appeal to the city
council, within five (5) days from the determination thereof, unless the same is sustained, to
remove the nuisance as stated. (2003 Code § 7-02-10)
D. Failure To Abate; Legal Action:
1. Notice To City Attorney: Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified
to remove the public nuisance, as herein defined, within the time specified in this chapter, the
city clerk shall notify the city attorney in writing of the last known legal owner and property
description in general terms.
2. Legal Action: The city attorney may cause legal action to be taken through the magistrate court
for action as follows: The owner or person in control of any lot, place or area within the city who
shall permit or allow the existence of a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, upon any lot
or premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, or who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, or the city attorney, in his discretion, may also
take civil action to obtain an order from said court enjoining the maintenance of said public
nuisance, which, such court order shall include reimbursement to the city of its costs and
attorney fees. (2003 Code § 7-02-11)
E. Abatement By City: Upon direction of the city council and at the city council's discretion, upon the
failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to remove the public nuisance, as
herein defined, within the time specified in this chapter, the city clerk's office shall proceed with the
work specified in the notice. The cost of the work shall be transmitted to the city council, who shall
cause the same to be paid and levy a special assessment against the property for such cost that
shall be collected with the real property taxes assessed against said property. (2003 Code § 7-02-
12)
Chapter 2
LITTERING
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 115/528
the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in
the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
DEBRIS: The remains, fragments, pieces or parts of something broken down, damaged or destroyed.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish", as defined in this section, and junk and all other waste or
discarded materials and substances, including, but not excluding by enumeration, paper, bottles,
glass, nails, tacks, hoops, cans, wire (barbed or otherwise), building materials (lumber, boards,
plasterboard, mortar, insulation, sheet metal, plumbing materials and fixtures, electrical materials and
fixtures, water and gas materials and fixtures, sand and gravel, and roofing and siding materials),
automobile bodies, including the parts and components thereof, and tires.
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other public area in the city owned or
used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any
kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES: Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used wholly or in
part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or mailbox belonging or
pertinent to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways, and any and
all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, easements and buildings.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body waste), including garbage,
rubbish, trash, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, junk, and solid market
and industrial waste.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste,
such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery, and other similar materials.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a street, except devices moved solely by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks. (2003 Code § 6-04-01)
5-2-2: LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his agent, employee or servant, to cast, throw,
sweep, sift, deposit, place, leave or dump in any manner any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and
refuse, or cause, permit or allow such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse to be carried, blown,
scattered or deposited by the elements, in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, river,
canal, public water, drain, sewer or receiving basin within the corporate limits of the city. (2003 Code
§ 6-04-02)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 116/528
5-2-3: PLACEMENT IN RECEPTACLE TO PREVENT SCATTERING:
Persons placing debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being blown, carried, scattered or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
(2003 Code § 6-04-03)
5-2-4: SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his agent, employee or servant, to sweep into or
deposit or place in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of debris,
garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free
from such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse. (2003 Code § 6-04-04)
5-2-5: MERCHANTS DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS CLEAN:
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into, or deposit or place in, any
gutter, street or other public place within the city, the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of such debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish and refuse. (2003 Code § 6-04-05)
5-2-6: LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, to throw, cast, deposit or
place, or permit or cause such to be cast, thrown, deposited or placed, any debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish or refuse upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. Each
owner of a vehicle shall be liable and responsible for the actions and conduct of the driver or
passengers in a vehicle from which vehicle debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse is thrown, cast,
deposited, or placed. The operation of a vehicle by any person other than the owner and the actions
and conduct of such driver or operator of, and the passengers in, such vehicle shall be imputed to the
owner for all purposes of this section. (2003 Code § 6-04-06)
5-2-7: TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his or its agent, employee or servant, to operate,
drive, move or use any truck or other vehicle within the city to haul or transport any kind of debris,
litter, garbage, rubbish or refuse, unless such truck or vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent
any of the load or contents thereof or any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse thereon from spilling
or dropping, or from being carried, scattered or blown by the elements, or in any other way deposited,
placed or dumped, upon any street, alley or other public place. (2003 Code § 6-04-07)
5-2-8: LITTER IN PARKS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 117/528
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, leave, deposit, dump or place debris,
garbage, litter, rubbish or trash in any park within the city, except in public receptacles and in such
a manner that such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse will be prevented from being scattered,
carried, blown or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other
public place.
B. Removal By Responsible Person: Where public receptacles are not provided, all such debris,
garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible
for its presence and properly disposed of in the manner provided elsewhere by this code. (2003
Code § 6-04-08)
5-2-9: LITTER IN LAKES AND FOUNTAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or place litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
canal, river or any other body of water in any park or elsewhere within the city. (2003 Code § 6-04-09)
5-2-10: UNAUTHORIZED DEPOSIT OR DUMPING OF TRASH, WASTE OR DEBRIS
INTO BINS OR OTHER CONTAINERS:
This section is intended to address the problem of persons dumping their household and
nonhousehold garbage, refuse and other debris into bins or other containers owned, leased or paid for
by the city or other individuals and businesses.
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, natural or artificial, in person or by his agent,
employee or servant, to cast, throw, sift, deposit, place, leave or dump in any manner any debris,
garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse into any bin or other container for which such person does not pay
for its collection and removal, or which is not owned or leased by such person, unless such person
is the customer or patron authorized to use the particular bin or container or has been granted the
specific right of use by the proper owner, lessee, or city. (2003 Code § 6-04-10)
B. Penalty: Any person violating subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-3 of this code. (2003 Code § 6-04-10; amd. 2012
Code)
5-2-11: LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, place, leave or dump debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish or refuse on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or
not, or cause, permit or allow such debris, garbage, litter or refuse to be carried, blown, scattered or
deposited by the elements upon any private property, except that the owner or person in control of
private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for the collection and storage in such a
manner that such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse will be prevented from being carried, blown,
scattered or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any
private property. (2003 Code § 6-04-11)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 118/528
5-2-12: OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER:
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of
debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the
storage of such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse as provided elsewhere in this code. (2003
Code § 6-04-12)
5-2-13: LITTER ON VACANT LOTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, place, leave or dump any debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish or refuse on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such
person or not. (2003 Code § 6-04-13)
Chapter 3
REFUSE REMOVAL AND WEED CONTROL
5-3-1: REMOVAL OF REFUSE AND RUBBISH:
The owner of the premises abutting or adjoining any sidewalk, alley, street, or right of way in the city
hereby is required to remove all refuse and rubbish from any such sidewalk, alley, street, or right of
way, and the owner of private property within the city shall cut and remove the weeds and grass and
remove the rubbish and eradicate any diseases or pests, eggs, larvae of any pests injurious to trees,
plants, shrubs, or vines, upon and from private property to the center of any street, right of way or
alley along or in front of such property, including the parking within the curbing abutting such property,
within twenty four (24) hours after such rubbish or refuse accumulates, or within twenty four (24) hours
of the time it is determined that injurious pests as herein described exist on such property, or within
twenty four (24) hours of receipt of notice from the city to cut and remove such weeds and grass.
Notice shall be deemed to have been given by sending notice by regular mail to the owner of said
property at the address of such person as shown by the tax assessment rolls of the county. (2003
Code § 8-11-01)
5-3-2: FAILURE TO REMOVE; ASSESSMENT; PENALTY:
In the event of failure of such owner to remove such rubbish from said sidewalk, alley, street, right of
way or premises, or to cut and remove the weeds and grass and remove the rubbish and eradicate
any diseases or pests, eggs, larvae of any pests injurious to trees, plants, shrubs or vines as
heretofore provided within the time herein provided, then the city may remove such rubbish or cut and
remove such weeds, rubbish and grass, and eradicate such pests and assess the cost thereof against
the premises abutting the sidewalk or alley so cleared or treated for eradication and against the
private property as cleaned or cleared, or treated for eradication, such assessment to be certified by
the city clerk to the county assessor, such assessment to be placed on the assessment roll and
collected in the same manner as other municipal taxes are collected. In addition, any person violating
any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction or plea of guilty
thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each such person
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 119/528
any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted. (2003 Code
§ 8-11-02; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 4
OPEN BURNING
5-4-1: REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
A. Burn barrels are prohibited within the city limits.
B. Any person desiring to engage in open burning within the city limits must first obtain a permit from
the fire department.
C. There shall be no burning of tires, petroleum products, pesticide containers, demolition debris, tar,
household trash, carpet, wire, insulation or treated wood.
D. There shall be no burning of standing buildings.
E. All fires must be attended at all times and the attendant must possess fire extinguishing equipment
that is in good working condition.
F. A burn permit will not be issued if winds are fifteen (15) miles per hour or greater, or when a "no
burn order" has been issued by the state.
G. There shall be no burning after sunset. (2003 Code § 3-03-05)
5-4-2: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 3-03-05; amd. 2012 Code)
Title 6
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapter 1
GENERAL MISDEMEANOR OFFENSES
6-1-1: BURGLARY ALARM SYSTEMS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 120/528
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to reduce the number of the false burglary and robbery
alarms, thereby enhancing response time on other critical calls for service.
B. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases and words, and derivations
thereof, shall have the meaning given herein. When consistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and not
merely directory.
ALARM AGENT: Any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include the installation,
maintenance, repair, service, response to, or summoning others to respond to an alarm system.
When the alarm system is the sole responsibility of the user and no contractual agreements with
another company exist for the maintenance of alarm equipment, the user shall be considered the
alarm agent for purposes of this section.
ALARM COMPANY DIRECTOR: Any person who receives an activation of an alarm or alarm
system as provided by this section and then transmits the information to the Blackfoot city police
department.
ALARM OFFICER: The chief of police of the city or his designee.
ALARM SUBSCRIBER: Any person who purchases, leases, contracts for, or otherwise obtains an
alarm system or contracts for the servicing or maintenance of an alarm system.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanical, electrical or other device which is designated or used for the
detection of a trespass, burglary, or robbery within a building, structure or facility, or for alerting
others to a hazard or to the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or
which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated and which is designated to
elicit a response from the police department. Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, direct
dial telephone devices, audible alarms and proprietor alarms. Devices which are not designed or
used to register alarms but are audible, visible or perceptible outside the protected building,
structure or facility are not included within this definition. An alarm system includes all the
necessary equipment designed and installed for the detection of a trespass, burglary, robbery or
other hazard in a single building, structure or facility, or for alerting others to the commission of an
unlawful act within a building, structure or facility.
AUDIBLE ALARM: A device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry or presence on
certain premises which generates an audible sound or signal on such premises when it is
activated.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: An alarm system that automatically sends over regular telephone
lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating
the existence of an emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
EMERGENCY: Any condition for which the alarm was designed and installed, and which results in
a response of police personnel.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal, message, transmittal or communication which is activated from
an alarm system and which is responded to by personnel of the police department for which no
emergency situation exists or existed as determined by the responding personnel. False alarm
shall not include alarms caused by natural occurrences such as hurricanes, tornadoes,
earthquakes, or other extraordinary circumstances determined by the alarm officer to be clearly
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 121/528
beyond the control of the alarm subscriber.
PENALTY STATUS: That status achieved by more than two (2) false alarms within the calendar
year beginning January 1 and ending December 31.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, organization of any kind, or any
governmental entity or political subdivision thereof.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The Blackfoot city police department.
C. Alarm Systems Maintenance:
1. Each alarm subscriber shall maintain each alarm system in good working order, and provide the
necessary service to prevent malfunctions.
2. It shall be unlawful for an alarm subscriber to allow, permit, or use an alarm system that is not in
good working order, or has fallen into disrepair, or has malfunctioned.
D. Maintaining A Public Nuisance Alarm; Penalty Fees:
1. More Than Two False Alarms: No person, whether or not an alarm subscriber, shall maintain,
operate, use or attempt to use an alarm system which generates more than two (2) false alarms
in a calendar year. (2003 Code § 6-01-07)
2. Penalty Fees: Any alarm system maintained, operated, used, or attempted to be used in
violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-
334. In addition to reimbursement or any other remedy available to the city, the city may impose
a penalty fee for each and every false alarm after the two (2) within the calendar year, as
determined by resolution of the city council. (2003 Code § 6-01-07; amd. 2012 Code)
3. Finding Of Public Nuisance: Where the alarm system is deemed a public nuisance as provided
in this section, the alarm officer shall provide the alarm subscriber written notice informing the
alarm subscriber of the penalty status and the finding of public nuisance.
4. Abatement Of Nuisance:
a. The city hereby reserves all remedies provided for in Idaho Code sections 50-334, 52-202,
and 52-205.
b. The city shall further reserve all rights and remedies of collection pursuant to Idaho Code
section 50-1008.
5. Review:
a. The alarm subscriber may request that the alarm officer review and reconsider the
determination of public nuisance by submitting a written request to the alarm officer within ten
(10) days upon receipt of the notice of penalty status and nuisance. Failure to submit a written
request in compliance with this section is deemed a waiver of any and all rights to appeal.
b. The alarm officer shall review the determination and send the alarm subscriber his findings as
to whether the alarm system is a public nuisance in writing by certified mailing within fifteen
(15) days of receipt of written request of the alarm subscriber. (2003 Code § 6-01-07)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 122/528
6. Appeal: The alarm subscriber may request a hearing before the city council after filing a notice
for hearing in writing to the city clerk no later than ten (10) days upon mailing of the alarm
officer's finding of public nuisance. Any finding by the city council is appealable to the district
court of the seventh judicial district provided filing and fees are submitted in accordance with
state law.
E. Compliance:
1. An alarm subscriber who has notice of his/her alarm system being deemed a public nuisance
shall be assessed a penalty fee in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution of
the city council. (2003 Code § 6-01-07; amd. 2012 Code)
2. An alarm subscriber who has notice of the assessed penalty or for any amount due in
reimbursement, shall remit within fifteen (15) days the amounts due to the city.
F. Prohibited Alarm Systems: No person shall use or operate an automatic dialing device or any
device programmed to initiate and deliver a message or signal to any telephone number belonging
to the city.
G. Violations:
1. It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain any "alarm system", as defined in subsection B of this
section, for any purpose other than reporting such trespasses, burglaries, robberies, or other
crimes involving potential serious bodily injury or death.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a public safety alarm system for any
purpose other than that for which it is installed, or for any purpose other than detecting and
reporting a trespass, burglary, robbery or other permitted purpose.
3. It shall be unlawful for any alarm agent, alarm subscriber or other person to install, operate or
use any "alarm system", as defined in subsection B of this section, which malfunctions due to
improper installation or operation and that results in the generation of false alarms. (2003 Code
§ 6-01-07)
H. Uniform Fire Code Not Affected: Nothing in this provision shall be construed as modifying or
nullifying adopted fire code. (2003 Code § 6-01-07; amd. 2012 Code)
I. Enforcement: The conviction or punishment of any person for violation of the provisions of this
section shall not release such person from paying any business taxes, charges, fees, license fees
or reimbursement for false alarms due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall payment
of any fee or reimbursement for false alarm prevent the criminal prosecution for violation of any of
the provisions of this section. All remedies shall be cumulative and the use of one or more
remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by law. (2003 Code § 6-01-
07)
J. Penalties:
1. Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a general misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 123/528
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
2. Each and every false alarm over two (2) within the calendar year shall be deemed a separate
offense. (2003 Code § 6-01-07; amd. 2012 Code)
6-1-2: FIREARMS:
A. Definitions: Wherever the term "firearms" is used in this section, the term "firearms" shall mean any
instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell or bullets by the action of gunpowder exploded
within it, or by the action of compressed air within it, or by the power of springs, and including what
are commonly known as air rifles or BB guns.
B. Discharge Of Firearms Prohibited: Except at a shooting range authorized in accordance with the
applicable zoning ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firearms of any kind or
description within the limits of the city; provided, however, that this shall not apply to police officers
in the discharge of their duties, nor to persons acting in self-defense against unlawful deadly
physical force.
C. Exception To Prohibition Of Discharge Of Firearms: A person may discharge a firearm if such
discharge is for the purpose of slaughtering animals raised on the property for the purpose of
human consumption, or the property is zoned to allow the slaughter and packaging of meat for
human consumption, and the person discharging the firearm complies with the following
conditions:
1. The discharge of the firearm is aimed away from persons, vehicles, roadways, buildings
constructed for human occupancy and other animals;
2. The slaughter of the animal is not visible from a public roadway; and
3. The person discharging the firearm provides prior notice to the law enforcement agency for the
city at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the anticipated discharge. (Ord. 2097, 12-7-2010, eff.
12-7-2010)
6-1-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A. Qualifying Behavior: Any person who shall conduct themselves in a violent, noisy or riotous
manner, and/or who shall use profane, abusive or obscene language within the presence or
hearing of children, or in any way commits a breach of the peace of another person, and/or who
shall conduct themselves in a manner that endangers the health and safety of another person,
and/or who conducts themselves in any other manner as is specified in this section, is guilty of a
misdemeanor; and a violation of this section shall also include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Accosting other persons in any public place or in any place open to the public for the purpose of
begging or soliciting alms; or
2. Occupying, lodging or sleeping in any building, structure or place, whether public or private, or
any automobile, truck, railroad car or other similar vehicles or equipment without the permission
of the owner or person entitled to the possession or in control thereof;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 124/528
3. Using any motor vehicle, motor home, travel trailer, as a residence upon any public street
(highway) and/or alleyway or upon any other premises under the ownership and/or control of a
government subdivision of the state;
4. Loitering or remaining in or about school grounds or buildings, without having any reason or
relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a pupil or student, school authorized
functions, activities or use;
5. Wilfully fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer after being lawfully ordered to stop by an
identified peace officer.
B. Misdemeanor: Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty
as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 6-01-10; amd. 2012 Code)
6-1-4: DISORDERLY HOUSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a disorderly house or place of business, or to allow, permit,
or suffer in any house or place or building kept, used, or occupied by him within the limits of the city
any drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, unlawful games, or riotous or disorderly conduct. (2003 Code
§ 6-01-11)
6-1-5: FALSE REPORTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
A. To make or file, or cause to be made or filed, an accident report knowing the same to be false or
misleading, in whole or in part; or
B. To make or file, or cause to be made or filed, a theft report of a motor vehicle or other personal
property, knowing the same to be false or misleading, in whole or in part; or
C. To intentionally make, turn in or give a false alarm of need for police or ambulance assistance, or
aid or abet in the commission of such act;
D. To make or file any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission
or alleged commission of any crime occurring within the city; and
E. To furnish in any report required by the ordinances of this city any false or fictitious address, or any
address other than a true address or intended address, or to furnish in making such report any
false, untrue or misleading information or statement relating to any information required by the
ordinances of this city to be made or furnished. (2003 Code § 6-01-13)
6-1-6: FRAUDULENTLY AVOIDING PAYMENT OF ADMISSION FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 125/528
It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently enter without payment of the proper admission fees
to any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other place where admission fees are charged; provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of law
enforcement officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public amusement or
entertainment. (2003 Code § 6-01-14)
6-1-7: IRRIGATION HEADGATES AND BOXES TO BE COVERED:
A. Enclosed headgates and boxes for the diversion of irrigation waters, with openings at the top, are
hereby recognized and declared to be attractive and dangerous to small children who are likely to
play about the same and on occasion to fall into the water therein contained. (2003 Code § 6-01-
16)
B. All persons using or maintaining such enclosed headgates and diversion boxes of sufficient size to
admit the body of any child, within the city, are therefore required to keep the same securely
covered and locked to regulate the irrigation waters thereby controlled. Violation of this provision
shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(2003 Code § 6-01-16; amd. 2012 Code)
6-1-8: LOITERING:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, remain or repeatedly enter upon the premises or real
property of any business, unless such person is acting as a customer or patron of the business, is
engaging in or attempting to engage in an enterprise, venture or other lawful activity involving the
business or its employees, or unless the person is upon the property or premises of the business
with the permission of the owner or the owner's agent.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, remain or repeatedly enter upon the real property of
another, unless express or implied permission has been given by the property owner or the
property owner's agent. (2003 Code § 6-01-17)
6-1-9: NOISES CREATING PUBLIC DISTURBANCE:
A. Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful for any person to cause, or for any person in possession of property
to allow to originate from the property, sound that is a public disturbance noise. The following
sounds are determined to be public disturbance noises:
1. Horns Or Sirens: The frequent, repetitive or continuous sounding of any horn or siren attached
to a motor vehicle, except as a warning of danger or as specifically permitted or required by law;
2. Repetitive Motor Vehicle Sounds: The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds in
connection with the starting, operation, repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle,
motorcycle, off highway vehicle or internal combustion engine within a residential district, so as
to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or possessors
of real property;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 126/528
3. Yelling Or Shouting: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on or near the public streets
which unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or
possessors of real property;
4. Noise From Buildings: The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds which emanate
from any building, structure, apartment or condominium, which unreasonably interfere with the
peace, comfort, and repose of owners or possessors of real property, such as sounds from audio
equipment, musical instruments, band sessions or social gatherings;
5. Motor Vehicle Sound Systems: Sound from motor vehicle sound systems, such as tape players,
radios and compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than fifty feet
(50') from the vehicle itself;
6. Audio Equipment: Sound from audio equipment, such as tape players, radios, or compact disc
players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than fifty feet (50') from the source,
and if not operated upon the property of the operator.
B. Exceptions: The foregoing provisions shall not apply to regularly scheduled events at parks, such
as public address systems for baseball games or park concerts.
C. Public Disturbance Noise Time Period: Public disturbance noises shall not be permitted within the
city between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., or at any time
so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or enjoyment of others. (2003
Code § 6-01-19)
D. Violation, Penalties: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 6-01-
19; amd. 2012 Code)
6-1-10: ALCOHOL AND INTOXICATION OFFENSES:
A. Open Container: Except as otherwise permitted by statute or ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any
person to have in his or her possession any open container of any alcoholic beverage on any
street, in any public or private parking lot, in or upon any public or private motor vehicle or upon
any public or private property open to the public.
B. Consumption: Except as otherwise permitted by statute or ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any
person to consume any alcoholic beverage on or upon any street, in any public or private parking
lot, in or upon any public or private motor vehicle or upon any public or private property open to the
public.
C. Public Intoxication Prohibited: A person is guilty of intoxication if such person is under the influence
of intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance, or any substance having the property of releasing
toxic vapors, to a degree that the person may endanger herself or himself or another, in a public
place or in a private place where such person unreasonably disturbs other persons. (2003 Code
§ 6-01-21; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 127/528
6-1-11: JUMPING FROM BRIDGES PROHIBITED:
A. Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to jump from any bridge or like structure over a
watercourse within the city.
B. Penalties: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 6-01-26; amd. 2012
Code)
6-1-12: ILLEGAL CAMPING:
A. Definitions:
CAMPING: The use of land to conduct one or more specified activities when, based upon such
use, it reasonably appears in light of all the circumstances that the participants, in conducting the
specified activities, are using the area as a living accommodation regardless of the intent of the
participants or the nature of any other activities in which they may be engaging. Camping shall
not include residing in a permanent structure that may be lawfully occupied as a permanent or
temporary residence.
SPECIFIED ACTIVITIES: Shall include one or more of the following:
1. Sleeping or making preparations to sleep, such as laying down bedding;
2. Storing personal belongings, including, but not limited to, clothing, sleeping bags, bedrolls,
blankets, sheets, luggage, backpacks, kitchen utensils, cookware and similar materials;
3. Making any fire for the purposes of warmth, or of cooking;
4. Erecting a tent, lean to or other similar temporary structure.
B. Private Property: It shall be illegal to engage in camping on private property without the consent of
the property's owner.
C. Public Property: It shall be illegal to engage in camping on any public right of way or public property
located within the limits of the city unless such area has been designated specifically as authorized
for camping or lodging. (Ord. 2072, 7-17-2007)
D. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject
to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2072, 7-17-2007; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 128/528
Chapter 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as in this section provided:
ABANDONMENT: It shall be unlawful for any owner of an animal or his agent to abandon said animal
within the city limits. Abandonment means the desertion of said animal for more than thirty six (36)
hours.
ANIMAL: Every domesticated and tame living creature, except members of the human race.
AT LARGE: Off the property of the owner and off the leash, cord, chain or effective control of a
responsible person.
CONFINED: The dog is restricted to the property of the owner by leash, cord, chain or fence barrier.
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS: See section 6-2-13 of this chapter.
DOG: Includes both male and female member of the canine family over the age of six (6) months.
OWNER: Any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or otherwise responsible for such animal.
VETERINARIAN: A graduate doctor of veterinary medicine licensed to practice in the state of Idaho.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: A. Any animal which, when unprovoked by teasing, taunting, or a threatening
manner by any person, approaches said person in an apparent or perceived attitude of attack upon
the streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places, common areas within subdivisions or mobile home or
recreational vehicle parks, common grounds of apartment buildings, condominiums or townhouse
developments, or private property not solely owned or possessed by the owner or custodian of the
animal; or
B. Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause
injury, or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals or livestock; or
C. Any animal that bites, inflicts injury, assaults, or otherwise attacks a human being or domestic
animal or livestock without justifiable provocation; or
D. Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting or any animal
trained for fighting; or
E. Any dog that has been trained as an attack dog, except dogs used by law enforcement
agencies.
6-2-2: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 129/528
A. Appointment: The chief of police shall appoint an animal control officer who shall, under the
direction of the chief of police, have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Prohibited Behavior: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Hinder, or interfere with in any manner, the animal control officer while enforcing any of the
provisions of this chapter, or
2. Recover or attempt to recover possession of any impounded animal, in any manner contrary to
the provisions of this chapter. (2003 Code § 6-02-02)
6-2-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; TAG; FEES:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep or possess a dog which
is more than twelve (12) weeks of age within the city without first procuring a license therefor as
provided by this chapter; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
any person visiting in the city for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and owning or possessing
a dog currently licensed, and bearing the license issued by another municipality or other licensing
authority.
B. Collar; Tag: Every dog shall at all times wear a substantial, durable collar, to which shall be securely
attached the required license tag.
C. License Fees; Expiration:
1. License Term: All dog licenses within the city shall be valid only in the calendar year issued and
shall expire December 31 of that year. (2003 Code § 6-02-03)
2. License Fee: The owner or person having charge of any dog, except as provided in this chapter,
shall make application to the city for a dog license and pay an animal license fee in such amount
as established by resolution of the city council.
3. Microchip Fee: The city will place an identifying microchip into a dog upon the request of the
owner for a fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council.
4. License Fee For Microchipped Dog: The licensing fee for a spayed or neutered dog that has
been implanted with an identifying microchip by the city shall be waived. The licensing fee for a
nonspayed or nonneutered dog that has been implanted with an identifying microchip shall be in
such amount as established by resolution of the city council.
5. Lost Tags; Fee: A charge in such amount as established by resolution of the city council shall be
made for each lost license tag reissued by the city. (2003 Code § 6-02-03; amd. 2012 Code)
6. Certificate Of Neuter Required: A certificate of neuter or spay issued by a veterinarian or the
Idaho Humane Society shall be required to be present at the time the license is applied for in
order to secure the license rate for a neutered or spayed dog.
7. Exception To License Fee: Any dog owned and used by a blind, visually or hearing impaired
person and used as a seeing eye or hearing ear dog or guide dogs in training, shall be licensed
annually at no cost to the owner and user of the dog. To qualify under this exception, the owner
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 130/528
and user of the dog must be medically certified as having a visual or hearing impairment by a
licensed medical doctor. (2003 Code § 6-02-03)
6-2-4: RABIES VACCINATION:
A. Certificate Required: The owners of all dogs that are required to be licensed under this chapter
shall present to the city licensing department, prior to being issued a dog license, a valid rabies
vaccination certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian.
B. Guidelines: A rabies certificate shall be considered valid within the following guidelines:
1. Within one year from the date of issue when the dog vaccinated was less than one year old.
2. Within three (3) years from the date of issue when the dog vaccinated was one or more years of
age. (2003 Code § 6-02-04)
6-2-5: IMITATION LICENSE TAGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any dog owned, kept or harbored by him to wear a license
tag issued for another dog or to wear any imitation of the license tag issued by the city for that year, or
any tag marked on plate or collar similar to that required by the city at the time and calculated to
deceive. (2003 Code § 6-02-05)
6-2-6: OWNERSHIP RESTRICTION:
No person or establishment may at any one time own, possess, maintain, harbor, care for, or license
more than two (2) dogs and five (5) cats at any single location within the jurisdiction of this chapter
unless such person or establishment obtains a kennel license pursuant to title 11 of this code. This
provision shall not apply to a litter of puppies or a litter of kittens under six (6) months of age and kept
and housed with the mother. (Ord. 2109, 10-2-2012, eff. 10-2-2012)
6-2-7: RESTRAINT AND CONFINEMENT BY OWNER/CUSTODIAN:
A. Dog At Large Prohibited: It is unlawful for any owner/custodian to fail to keep any dog under
restraint or to permit such animal to be at large upon the streets and public ways of the city or on
public or private property without the consent of the owner of the property, unless the dog is under
the control of a person holding a leash no longer than ten feet (10'), securely attached to the
animal and of sufficient tensile strength to restrain it, or unless the dog is confined in a motor
vehicle in such a manner that neither its claws nor its teeth can extend beyond the exterior of the
vehicle. Any dog found at large may be impounded as provided in this chapter.
B. Livestock: No horse, mule, cow, calf, steer, bull, swine or other domestic or wild animal shall be
allowed to run at large, or to be herded in any of the streets, alleys or public places within the
corporate limits of the city, or upon any private premises therein, except those of the owners of
such animals, unless when being driven through for shipment or other purposes, the owner or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 131/528
owners of such animals first obtain permission of the owner or owners of such private premises, or
his or their agent or the occupant thereof. Any animal found in violation of this subsection is subject
to impoundment with impound fees equivalent to the cost incurred by the city, but no less than the
impound fee schedule in section 6-2-8 of this chapter.
C. Location Of Dog Runs Or Kennels: No person shall maintain or construct any dog run within thirty
feet (30') of the residence of any neighboring property.
D. Animals In Public Buildings Or Common Carriers: It is unlawful for a person to permit, allow, keep
or carry any animal in, upon or within a common carrier, public transportation facility or any other
public building or facility, particularly a building or facility in which food or drink is prepared or
stored, except that persons with disabilities shall not be denied the use of any common carrier or
public transportation facility or admittance to any cafe or any other public building or place by
reason of his being accompanied by a seeing eye or guide dog or other "assistive animal" specially
trained for such purpose. (2003 Code § 6-02-07)
E. Penalty: Any person who violates this section for the first time in a one year period shall be guilty of
a city code violation and shall pay a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the city clerk. Such penalty
shall be paid in accordance with section 1-4-6 et seq. of this code. Any person who violates this
section a second or subsequent time within the one year period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 6-02-07; amd. 2012
Code)
F. Multiple Running At Large Violations: After the conviction of an owner or custodian for allowing his
animal to become a nuisance for more than two (2) running at large violations, as part of the
sentencing, the prosecuting attorney shall request an order from the court requiring the owner or
custodian to have the animal neutered or spayed by a licensed veterinarian and provide proof to
the court and the animal control department of such alteration within thirty (30) days of sentencing.
(2003 Code § 6-02-07)
6-2-8: IMPOUNDMENT; FEES:
A. Impoundment By Property Owner: Any person finding an animal at large upon his property may
impound the animal and may take it immediately to the animal shelter or shall immediately notify
personnel at the animal shelter that he is holding the animal in his own possession and provide a
description of the animal and the name of the animal's owner, if known. The animal control officer
will impound the animal at the first reasonable opportunity to do so. If the name of the
owner/custodian is known or can be easily obtained, the officer may return the animal to the
residential address of the owner. If there is no one present, the officer may impound the animal
and shall leave written notice at the residence of the person or place to contact to reclaim the
animal. The animal control officer shall then take the animal to the animal shelter for confinement.
B. Impoundment By Officers: In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, animal control
officers and police officers are authorized to impound and confine at the animal shelter any of the
following animals:
1. Any dog without a valid license tag.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 132/528
2. Any animal at large.
3. Any animal that is in violation of any quarantine or confinement order.
4. Any unattended animal that is ill, injured or otherwise in need of care. Upon determination by
any animal shelter staff, police officer or veterinarian that the injury or illness is untreatable, the
animal may be euthanized by the officer or veterinarian without regard to the waiting period set
out subsection C2 of this section. Costs of medical care or euthanasia shall be borne by the
owner/custodian.
5. Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or neglected.
6. Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies.
7. Any animal that is reasonably believed to be dangerous or a threat to public health and safety.
8. Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered impounded or destroyed.
9. Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, e.g., due to the owner's death, arrest
or eviction from his or her residence, and there is no sign of care for the animal.
10. Any dog found running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter may be apprehended
by any designated city official and shall be impounded or delivered to its owner if such owner is
known; provided, however, that if any dangerous or vicious dog so found at large cannot be
safely taken up and impounded, such dog may be disposed of in a humane manner.
C. Terms Of Impoundment And Redemption Or Other Disposition:
1. The animal shelter shall provide suitable and adequate food and water for all animals
impounded.
2. Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within five (5) working days shall become the property of
the city and shall be placed for adoption or euthanized in a humane manner. The chief of police
or animal control officer may refuse to allow adoption to any person who has pled guilty or been
convicted of a violation of this chapter. Appeal of denial may be made in writing within three (3)
calendar days to the city council. Specific animals shall not be held at the center pending the city
council's decision, but may be adopted by other persons or euthanized as provided above. The
city council shall hear the appeal at the next available regularly scheduled meeting and may
either affirm or reverse the denial. If the denial is reversed, the person may adopt any animal
that is available after the city council's decision. The city may, in its discretion, contract the
services of the Humane Society or other organization to manage and consummate adoptions.
3. If the name of the owner is readily available through license records, the animal shelter staff
shall attempt to notify the owner by telephone or mail or by hand delivery or a notice, or by
notice attached to the door of the residence of the animal's impoundment, providing the deadline
for reclaiming the animal, the conditions under which the animal may be redeemed, including a
detailing of the costs of confinement, and the consequences of failure to redeem by the
deadline.
4. The animal shelter shall keep a record of all animals impounded which shall include a
description of the animal, date of impoundment, date of notification of impoundment, method of
notification, date of redemption, and record of fees paid or date of other disposition. In the case
of adoption, the record shall include the name, address and phone number of the person buying
or adopting the animal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 133/528
5. Redemption shall be made by providing satisfactory proof of ownership and paying the required
fees and charges, including, but not limited to, impoundment fees, daily care fees, any required
license fees, and medical costs. All such fees, with the exception of medical costs, shall be set
from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Copies of such resolutions shall be kept on
file and made available in the Office of the City Clerk. (2003 Code § 6-02-08)
D. Impoundment Of Vicious Dogs Pending Court Proceedings:
1. If the Police Chief, animal control officer, or their designee, determines that a vicious animal
needs to be impounded for the protection of the public health and safety pending the outcome of
any court proceeding, then the owner or custodian of the animal shall prepay the impound fee
and the anticipated daily cost of care and feeding of the animal. If there is no room at the animal
shelter to care for a vicious animal pending outcome of the court proceeding, the City may
impound the animal at a private boarding facility with the cost of such boarding facility being paid
by the owner/custodian of the animal. (Ord. 2171, 10-2-2018)
2. In the event that the owner or custodian fails or refuses to pay the fees and costs charged or
incurred by the City to keep the animal pending outcome of court proceedings, the animal
control officer shall give written notice to the owner or custodian of the animal of the City's intent
to destroy the animal within five (5) days. In such event, the animal shall not be destroyed if its
owner, or other person seeking to claim it, files with the City Clerk, during the five (5) day period,
a written request that such destruction be postponed pending review by the City Council. Such
written request shall be accompanied by payment in the amount which would be required by the
time of the meeting in order to claim the animal as provided herein.
3. When such request and payment have been made, the animal shall not be destroyed pending a
hearing by the City Council. When the hearing is conducted, the person making the request
must appear and show good cause why he should be allowed to claim the animal and how he
will care for it in order to avoid further violations of the provisions of this chapter pending
outcome of the court proceeding. Following the hearing, the City Council shall determine
whether the animal shall be returned to the owner/custodian pending outcome of the court
proceeding and what conditions shall apply, whether the animal should be kept at the animal
shelter pending outcome of the court proceeding and how much fees and costs shall be paid by
the owner/custodian, or whether the animal shall be destroyed for failure of the owner/custodian
to pay the fees and costs.
4. If the City Council approves the destruction, the animal shall be destroyed in a humane fashion
and the payment made by the party requesting the hearing shall be retained by the City to defray
its costs of impounding the animal pending the hearing. If the City Council decides that the
animal should not be destroyed, the animal shall be released from impoundment upon such
terms as the City Council may reasonably impose, and the payment made by the person
requesting the hearing shall be retained as the fee for claiming the animal.
5. In lieu of the City impounding a vicious animal pending outcome of the case, the
owner/custodian of the animal may have the animal boarded at a secure private boarding facility
pending outcome of the court proceeding. In such event, the owner/custodian may not remove
the animal from the boarding facility without the animal control officer's consent. (2003 Code § 6-
02-08)
E. Fees:
1. Impound Fees: Any person recovering possession of any dog impounded under the provisions
of this chapter shall, in addition to obtaining a license for such dog, if the dog is not then
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 134/528
licensed, pay an impound fee in such amount as established by resolution of the City Council.
2. Board Fee: In addition to the impound fee, a board fee in such amount as established by
resolution of the City Council shall be charged. (2003 Code § 6-02-08; amd. 2012 Code)
6-2-9: VOLUNTARY DISPOSAL OF DOGS; FEE:
The animal control officer, at the request of any resident, shall pick up and dispose of any dog owned
or under the control of that person. The charge for this service shall be the sum equivalent to that
incurred by the city for the disposition of that animal, and established by resolution of the city council.
This fee shall be paid at the time such animal is picked up or dropped off. (2003 Code § 6-02-09; amd.
2012 Code)
6-2-10: DOGS RUSHING AT PERSONS:
Any owner or keeper of a dog that rushes at any person, on a public right of way; lawfully on any
property, public or private; any postal, utility or city employee during the course of their employment; or
any cyclist or motor vehicle, shall keep such dog confined or tethered in such a manner as to prevent
such action by said dog. (2003 Code § 6-02-10)
6-2-11: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal on any property located within the city when
the keeping of such animal, or the method of keeping or harboring such animal, constitutes a
public nuisance or menace to public health or safety.
B. No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any animal shall cause unsanitary,
dangerous or offensive conditions by virtue of the size or number of animals maintained at a single
location or due to the inadequacy of the facilities. It shall be a violation of this section if the number
of animals maintained at a single residence or the condition of the facilities is offensive, injurious or
dangerous to the public health or the neighbors in close proximity to the premises.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any animal in his/her care to become a public nuisance
animal. Conduct that renders an animal a public nuisance shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Repeated running at large (more than 2 violations).
2. Being at large in any section of a park or public recreation area without being controlled by a
leash no longer than ten feet (10') or similar physical restraint.
3. Damaging, soiling, defiling, urinating on, or defecating on any property other than that of its
owner.
4. Making disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking,
whining, crowing, braying, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or
discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or
harbored.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 135/528
5. Fouling of the air by noxious or offensive odors and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or
discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or
harbored.
6. Molesting, attacking, or otherwise interfering with the freedom of movement of persons in a
public right of way.
7. Chasing motor vehicles in a public right of way. (2003 Code § 6-02-11)
6-2-12: FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT:
Each female dog, when in heat, shall be penned or enclosed in such a manner as to preclude other
dogs from attacking or being attracted to such female dog in such a manner so as to create a public
nuisance. (2003 Code § 6-02-12)
6-2-13: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any conduct defined in this section as "cruelty to
animals". Such prohibition shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Overloading; Exposure To Danger: It shall be unlawful for any person to overload or override an
animal or to expose any animal, excluding animals used in law enforcement, to any other
unreasonable danger to its health or life.
B. Abuse: It shall be unlawful to wilfully or maliciously strike, beat, abuse or intentionally run down with
a vehicle any animal or otherwise engage in any act to cause or inflict unnecessary pain, injury,
suffering or death to such animal; except that reasonable force may be used to drive away any
vicious or trespassing animal.
C. Poison: It shall be unlawful for any person, except a licensed veterinarian for humanitarian
purposes, to administer poison to any animal, or knowingly expose any animal to any poisonous
substance, or ground glass, or leave any such substance in any place with the intent to injure any
animal. The provisions of this section are not applicable to exterminators or property owners using
poisons or traps as part of a pest control program, or to the use of commercial insecticides and
rodent baits used to control insects and wild rodents, or to employees of the animal control shelter
in the discharge of their duties related to euthanasia.
D. Traps: It shall be unlawful to set any trap that is likely to be injurious to domestic animals. Traps
obtained from the animal shelter are deemed not to be in violation of this section. Nothing herein
shall be construed to prevent property owners from setting humane traps to capture and dispose of
lawn and garden pests, rats, mice, gophers, moles, voles, or other animals which constitute a
nuisance or are deleterious to their enjoyment of life or property.
E. Food And Shelter: No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient food, proper shelter and
adequate veterinary care when required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 136/528
F. Abandonment: No person shall abandon any animal.
G. Disposition Of Dead Animals: No person shall place or cause to be placed, any dead animal on
public or private property without the consent of the owner or person in charge of the property.
(2003 Code § 6-02-13)
6-2-14: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. No owner/custodian of any animal shall cause or allow such animal to soil, defile, urinate, or
defecate on any public property or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, play area or common
grounds owned jointly by the members of a homeowners' or condominium association, or upon
private property other than that of the owner, unless such owner or custodian immediately removes
and disposes of all feces deposited by such animal by collection of the feces and removal of such
to the property of the animal owner/custodian for disposition thereafter in a manner permitted by
law.
B. No person owning, harboring or keeping an animal within the city shall permit any waste matter
from the animal to collect and remain on any property so as to cause or create an unhealthy,
unsanitary, dangerous or offensive living condition on the owner's or custodian's property, or to
property of others. Offensive living condition shall include, but not be limited to, exposure to the
odor of accumulated feces. (2003 Code § 6-02-14)
6-2-15: INJURED OR DISEASED DOGS; DESTRUCTION:
Any dog impounded hereunder and suffering from serious injury or disease may be humanely
destroyed at the discretion of the chief of police or the animal control officer. (2003 Code § 6-02-15)
6-2-16: RABIES CONTROL:
A. Proclamation Of Mayor: The mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a proclamation
upon order of the city council whenever the prevalence of rabies in the city and vicinity deems it
necessary calling attention of the public to the necessity of complying with the provisions of this
chapter relative hereto.
B. Running At Large During Prevalence Of Rabies: It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any
dog to permit such dog to run at large within the limits of the city, during the prevalence of rabies in
the city, or after the issuance of a mayor's proclamation as provided in subsection A of this section.
C. Quarantine:
1. Keeping Dog Afflicted With Rabies: It shall be unlawful for a person to own, keep or harbor any
dog afflicted with rabies.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 137/528
2. Confinement; Fee; Disposition: It is hereby made the duty of any owner of a dog showing
symptoms of rabies, or of an unvaccinated dog which has bitten any person causing an abrasion
of the skin, to surrender the dog for confinement at the animal shelter, or to a licensed
veterinarian, for a minimum of ten (10) days. If such dog shall be determined free of rabies, the
same shall be returned to the owner upon payment of the regular fee for keeping dogs
impounded. If such fee is not paid, the dog shall be subject to disposal as provided by law. At the
discretion of either the animal control officer, the district health department, or the chief of police,
the quarantine of a dog may be upon the premises of the owner, or the person in charge of such
dog, if the dog is securely confined, kept from contact with other animals and is submitted to a
veterinarian for examination at the owner's expense to determine whether or not the dog is
rabid. (2003 Code § 6-02-16)
6-2-17: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
The owner, harborer or keeper of any animal that does damage to property of another shall be liable
to the owner of the property damaged for the damages and costs of suit. In the prosecution of actions
of such damage, it is not necessary for the plaintiff to show that the owner, harborer or keeper of such
animal had knowledge of the fact that such animal was doing damage to the property. (2003 Code
§ 6-02-17)
6-2-18: REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to remove or cause to be removed, the carcass of any
dead animal found in any public place within the City limits and properly dispose of same. (2003 Code
§ 6-02-18)
6-2-19: LIVESTOCK HARBORED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. Stable Refuse Care: It shall be unlawful to allow stable refuse to accumulate in such a manner that
it becomes unsightly and/or offensive to the smell. It is hereby required that such refuse be
removed from the legal sanitary limits of the City at least once each week.
B. Undue Noises: It shall be unlawful to harbor or allow to remain within the corporate limits of the City
any livestock which emits noises disturbing to residents of the City.
C. Stocktight Fences: It shall be unlawful to allow or maintain fences that are inadequate to keep
livestock within the confines of the plot, lot or pasture where such livestock is normally harbored.
(2003 Code § 6-02-19)
6-2-20: VICIOUS CONDUCT BY ANIMALS PROHIBITED; PENALTIES:
A. Vicious Conduct By Animal Prohibited: The owner or custodian of any animal that commits any of
the acts defined in this chapter as "vicious" may be cited for a misdemeanor and the Police Chief,
animal control officer, or their designee, may seize and impound the animal until the matter has
been adjudicated. The conduct shall not be deemed vicious if the victim (person, domestic animal
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 138/528
or livestock) was committing a tort against the animal's owner/custodian, or committing a trespass
or other tort on the premises of the animal's owner/custodian. Specifically prohibited are the
following acts:
1. If unprovoked by teasing, taunting, or a threatening manner by any person, approaching said
person in an apparent or perceived attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks, public grounds
or places, common areas within subdivisions or mobile home or recreational vehicle parks,
common grounds of apartment buildings, condominiums or townhouse developments, or private
property not solely owned or possessed by the owner or custodian of the animal; or
2. Biting, inflicting injury, assaulting, or otherwise attacking a human being or domestic animal or
livestock without justifiable provocation. (Ord. 2171, 10-2-2018)
B. Prohibited Animals: No person may own or harbor or have custodial care of any of the following
types of vicious animals:
1. Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause
injury, or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals or livestock,
unless restrained and/or confined as provided in subsection H of this section; or
2. Any animal which is used primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting, or any animal trained for
fighting; or
3. Any dog which has been trained as an attack dog, except dogs used by law enforcement
agencies.
C. Impoundment And/Or Destruction: Any animal whose owner has been found guilty of or entered a
plea of guilty to the offense of vicious conduct by his/her animal is subject to impoundment and
destruction. For a first offense, the court shall set the matter for sentencing and notify the Office of
the City Attorney (prosecutor) of the date, time, and place of sentencing. The prosecutor may
request that the court order the destruction of the animal. If the court determines that destruction is
warranted, it shall issue an order authorizing any animal control officer or police officer to seize the
animal and impound it for destruction if the animal has not been voluntarily surrendered by five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the date of sentencing. (2003 Code § 6-02-20)
D. Subsequent Violations: If a vicious animal whose owner or custodian has previously been found
guilty or pled guilty to a violation of the vicious conduct prohibitions in this chapter is alleged to
have committed a subsequent violation, or is found to be at large, the Police Chief, animal control
officer, or their designee, shall seize and impound the animal until the matter has been
adjudicated. Upon the second conviction or plea of guilty to either vicious animal conduct or the
offense of allowing a vicious animal to be at large, regardless of the form of the current or any prior
judgment, the court may dispense with notification to the City Attorney's Office. The court shall
order the destruction of the animal. (Ord. 2171, 10-2-2018)
E. Owner Liability: An adult owner/custodian of a vicious animal shall be liable for all injuries and
property damage sustained by any person or domestic animal caused by an unprovoked attack by
any vicious animal, plus all costs, civil judgments or penalties, criminal fines, final terms, and any
other penalties and orders. In the event that the owner/custodian of the vicious animal is a minor,
the minor's parent or guardian shall be so liable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 139/528
F. Failure To Surrender Animal: It shall be a separate offense to fail to surrender an animal for
impoundment and/or destruction.
G. Microchip Implantation And Alteration Required: Any person who has been found guilty of or pled
guilty to a violation of the vicious conduct prohibitions set out above shall, within five (5) days of
conviction, have a microchip implanted in the animal by a licensed veterinarian or the Animal
Control Department, pay all associated costs, and, for work performed by a veterinarian, provide
proof to the Animal Control Department that the microchip has been implanted. In addition, the
prosecuting attorney shall seek an order from the court requiring the owner or custodian to have
the animal spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian and to provide proof to the Animal
Control Department of such alteration within thirty (30) days of the conviction. Failure to comply
with this subsection shall constitute a separate offense.
H. Restraint And Care Of Vicious Or Dangerous Animals: The owner/custodian of any animal
convicted of a violation of the vicious conduct prohibitions set out in this chapter shall complete the
requirements of this subsection and subsection H1 of this section within thirty (30) days of the date
of such conviction. Every vicious animal shall be securely confined by its owner within a building or
secure enclosure as set out herein, and, whenever off the premises of its owner/custodian, shall be
either caged or securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of
three hundred (300) pounds and not more than three feet (3') in length. Every person harboring a
vicious animal is charged with an affirmative duty to confine the animal in such a way that persons
and other animals do not have access to such animal. To be considered secure, a facility must be
either: 1) a completed structure with a securely attached roof of durable material, secured to a
foundation or concrete pad, and provided with a locking mechanism which shall be kept locked at
all times the animal is within; or 2) an enclosure with solid sides of durable material or fencing
material of a type and design capable of containing the animal, at least ten feet (10') in height
anchored securely either to durable flooring material or embedded into the ground to a depth of no
less than one foot (1') and provided with a locking mechanism which is kept locked at all times the
animal is within. All such facilities must be adequately lighted and maintained so as to comply with
the general regulations of this chapter for the care of animals.
1. The owner/custodian of a vicious dog shall display in a prominent place on the premises a
clearly visible warning sign indicating that there is a vicious dog on the premises, with lettering
large enough to be read from the adjacent public right-of-way. A second warning sign must be
posted on the facility in which the animal is kept. (2003 Code § 6-02-20)
2. The Police Chief, animal control officers, or their designee, are empowered to make whatever
inquiry is necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and may seize and
impound any vicious animal whose owner fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2171, 10-2-2018)
6-2-21: KENNELS:
No person shall operate or maintain a kennel within the City unless the location of the proposed
kennel is in accordance with the provisions of the land use ordinance as embodied in title 11 of this
Code, as from time to time amended. (2003 Code § 6-02-21)
6-2-22: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 140/528
Unless otherwise stated, it shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code, to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. (2003 Code
§ 6-02-22; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 3
MINORS
6-3-1: CURFEW:
A. Age And Hour Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years
to be or to remain, and it shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having the
care and custody of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, to permit such person to be
or to remain, in or upon any street, alley, public ground, public place or any place open to the
public or exposed to public use within the corporate limits of the city between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
B. Exceptions: The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to any person who is
accompanied by his or her parents, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of
him or her, nor to any person who is in the performance of any errand or duty directed by his or her
parents, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of him or her, nor to any
person who is actually at the time engaged in legitimate employment for profit. (2003 Code § 6-03-
01)
C. Penalty For Parent Or Guardian: Any parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and
custody of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who shall violate the provisions of this
section, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 6-03-01; amd. 2012 Code)
6-3-2: RUNAWAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, living or found in the city, to
be or to remain a person who has run away from or is beyond the control of his or her parents,
guardians, or other legal custodian. Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this section
shall have committed a status offense, and shall be punished as provided in Idaho Code title 20,
chapter 5. (2003 Code § 6-03-07)
Chapter 4
FIREWORKS
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 141/528
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
AGRICULTURAL AND WILDLIFE FIREWORKS: Includes fireworks designated or used to prevent
damage to crops or unwanted occupancy of areas by animals or birds through the employment of
sound or light, or both, whenever such fireworks are so classified.
DANGEROUS FIREWORKS: Includes any of the following:
A. Firecrackers, cannon crackers, giant crackers, salutes, silver tube salutes, cherry bombs,
mines, ground bombardment, grasshoppers, ground blooms and other explosive articles of
similar nature;
B. Blank cartridges;
C. Skyrockets and rockets, including all similar devices employing any combustible or explosive
material and which rise in the air during discharge;
Exception: Ground spinners, chasers, including all devices which dart or travel about the surface
of the ground during discharge shall not exceed twelve inches (12") or vertical movement at
any time.
D. Roman candles, including all devices that discharge ball of fire into the air;
E. Chasers and whistles, including all devices which dart or travel about the surface of the ground
during discharge;
F. Snakes and hats containing bichloride of mercury;
G. Sparkles more than ten inches (10") in total length or one-fourth inch (1/4") in diameter.
H. All articles for pyrotechnic display such as aerial shells, salutes, flash shells, sky battles,
parachute shells, mines, dago bombs and similar devices;
Exception: Parachute shells including all ground to air projectiles that deploy a parachute and do
not carry a flame, ember, spark or any pyrotechnic discharge. Vertical movement of the
projectile shall be restricted to twenty feet (20').
I. All torpedoes which explode by means of friction, or which contain arsenic, and all other similar
fireworks devices including cracker balls;
J. Fire balloons or balloons of any type which have burning material of any kind attached thereto.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 142/528
FIRE NUISANCE: Any thing or any act which increases, or may cause an increase of, the hazard or
menace of fire to a greater degree than customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public
service of preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire; or which may obstruct, delay or hinder, or may
become the cause of any obstruction, delay or a hindrance to, the prevention or extinguishment of fire.
FIREWORKS: A. Shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in
which explosives are used, fire balloons, balloons of a type which have burning material of any kind
attached thereto or which require fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets,
rockets, roman candles, fountains, wheels, dago bombs, sparklers, and other fireworks of like
construction, and any fireworks containing any combustible or explosive substance for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, explosion or detonations.
B. Exempted from this definition are all toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns and similar
devices such as party poppers or party favors in which paper caps containing not more than
twenty five hundredths (0.25) grain of explosive compound per cap are used and such caps,
whether single, roll or tape type.
FIREWORKS PACKAGE: Includes any case, container or receptacle used for holding fireworks, which
shall be closed or sealed by tape, cordage, or by any other secure means.
FIREWORKS PERMIT: Shall relate to a permit to be issued by the city for the purpose of exporting,
importing, possessing for the purpose of sale, offering for sale or selling or buying any of the following
categories of fireworks: a) safe and sane fireworks; b) dangerous fireworks; c) agricultural fireworks;
or d) wildlife fireworks.
PUBLIC DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS: An entertainment feature where the public is admitted to or
permitted to view the display or discharge of "dangerous fireworks".
SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS: Includes any of the following:
A. Cone fountains with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding fifty grams (50 g) each;
B. Cylindrical fountains, whether base, spike or handle, with pyrotechnic composition not
exceeding seventy five grams (75 g) each and inside tube diameter not exceeding three-fourths
inch (3/4");
C. Sparklers and "dipped sticks", not more than ten inches (10") in length or one-fourth inch (1/4")
in diameter, made on steel or iron wire, and suzuki and morning glories with pyrotechnic
composition not exceeding four grams (4 g) each;
D. Snakes which do not contain bichloride of mercury and pyrotechnic composition not exceeding
two grams (2 g) each;
E. Wheels with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding sixty (60) grains for each driver unit or two
hundred forty (240) grains for each complete wheel. The inside tube diameter of the driver unit
shall not exceed one-half inch (1/2");
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 143/528
F. Whistles, without report and which do not dart or travel about the ground during discharge with
pyrotechnic composition not exceeding six grams (6 g) and containing no picric or gallic acid.
TEMPORARY FIREWORKS STAND: A structure constructed primarily for the purpose of selling at
retail safe and sane fireworks. (2003 Code § 3-03-02)
6-4-2: DANGEROUS, AGRICULTURAL AND WILDLIFE FIREWORKS:
A. Permit Required: No person shall have in his possession or under his control, or sell, buy,
dispense, keep or store or permit the keeping, storing or dispensing of any dangerous, agricultural
or wildlife fireworks, unless he shall have a valid fireworks permit issued by the city, giving him
such right.
B. Application For Permit; Fee: Any person desiring to sell or buy dangerous, agricultural or wildlife
fireworks, shall make application for such a permit to the city clerk. Each applicant shall pay to the
city clerk a fee in the amount specified in section 3-4-1 of this code. In the event no such
application is granted by the city, the fee shall be refunded. Each applicant for such a permit shall
provide the following information:
1. Name and address of the applicant;
2. Purpose for which the applicant is primarily existing and for which it was organized;
3. Names and addresses of the officers, if any, of the applicant;
4. Location where the applicant will sell or use such fireworks and the location of any fireworks
stored at another site;
5. Name under which applicant does business;
6. Location of the applicant's principal and permanent place or places of business;
7. Name and address of any wholesaler or distributor from whom the applicant proposes to
purchase fireworks for resale;
8. Applicant's state sales tax permit number;
9. Statement to the effect that the applicant is acquainted with the state fireworks law and the
provisions of this code controlling the sale and purchase of dangerous, agricultural and wildlife
fireworks;
10. Statement under oath that fireworks sold under such permit, if granted, will be sold only to
persons holding valid permits to purchase fireworks;
11. Such other information as the city clerk may require in order that a proper investigation may be
made relative to the issuance of such a permit.
C. Permit To Sell Required: No retailer of fireworks in the city shall import, export, possess for the
purpose of sale, offer for sale, or sell any dangerous, agricultural or wildlife fireworks to any
person, or give any such fireworks to any person, unless the person to whom such transfer of
possession is made has a permit from the city, which permit authorizes the transferee to purchase
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 144/528
and use such fireworks in a public display as authorized by the terms of said permit, or purchase
and use such fireworks for agricultural or wildlife purposes as described in said permit, and such
permit shall specify the type and quantity of fireworks which may be purchased under said permit,
and no retailer, wholesaler or distributor shall sell, offer to sell, or transfer possession to such
permittee of more fireworks than such permit holder is allowed to purchase according to the terms
of such permit. A violation of the terms of this provision shall constitute a violation of the chapter
and in addition to the penalty prescribed hereunder, the permit of the retailer and purchaser shall
both be canceled, and no permit for the sale of fireworks for any such purpose, or permit to
purchase any fireworks for any such purpose, shall thereafter be granted to either the retailer or
the purchaser until the lapse of at least five (5) years from the date of such cancellation.
D. Prohibited Acts And Activities:
1. No person without having a valid dangerous, agricultural or wildlife fireworks permit issued
pursuant to this chapter shall do any of the following:
a. Import, export, possess for the purpose of sale, offer for sale, buy or sell any dangerous,
agricultural or wildlife fireworks for any use or purpose whatsoever;
b. Make a public display of fireworks at any place;
c. Transport fireworks, except as provided for in the state fireworks law, this chapter and the
laws of the United States Of America.
2. No retailer, wholesaler or distributor of dangerous, agricultural or wildlife fireworks, whether or
not he has a permit from the city to sell the same, offer the same for sale, or otherwise dispose
of the same, shall publicly display the same for sale, but said fireworks shall be kept in a
separate enclosure not available to the general public, and such fireworks shall be exhibited only
to a permit holder, and no sale or offer to sell shall be made to any permit holder in excess of the
amount of fireworks the permittee is entitled to purchase under his permit.
E. Records Maintained: Any person securing a permit to sell dangerous, agricultural or wildlife
fireworks, shall maintain for inspection by the fire chief all invoices relating to the purchase of the
same made by such retailer permittee and, in addition, shall keep a book of entry to be signed by
the purchaser of such fireworks, which book shall contain the following information:
1. Name of the purchaser;
2. City fireworks permit number of the purchaser;
3. Date of purchase;
4. Amount of fireworks purchased, describing in full detail the quantity sold to the buyer permittee,
and type of fireworks purchased;
5. Line for signature by the purchaser of such fireworks acknowledging the purchase by him of
such fireworks under such permit number, on such date, and in such amount. (2003 Code § 3-
03-02)
6-4-3: SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 145/528
A. Permit Required: No person, without having a valid safe and sane fireworks permit issued pursuant
to the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter, shall import, export, possess for the purpose of
sale, offer for sale, or sell any safe and sane fireworks for any use or purpose.
B. Application For Permit; Fee: Any person desiring to sell safe and sane fireworks shall make
application to the city clerk for a safe and sane fireworks permit on or before June 1, of the
calendar year for which the permit is sought to be used. Each applicant shall pay to the city clerk a
fee in the amount specified in section 3-4-1 of this code. In the event no safe and sane fireworks
permit is issued by the city, the city clerk shall refund the application fee. Each applicant for a
permit shall file his application with the city clerk, such application to show the following
information:
1. Name and address of applicant;
2. The purpose for which the applicant is primarily existing and for which it was organized;
3. The names and addresses of the officers, if any, of the applicant;
4. The location where the applicant will sell fireworks;
5. When and where the applicant was organized and established, or if a natural person, the
applicant's age;
6. The location of the applicant's principal and permanent place or places of business;
7. Name and address of any wholesaler or distributor from whom the retailer proposes to purchase
fireworks for resale;
8. The applicant's state sales tax permit number;
9. The manner, method and times, when and how the applicant proposes to sell safe and sane
fireworks;
10. Such other information as the city clerk may require in order that a proper investigation may be
made.
C. Sales; Restrictions:
1. Sale Of Safe And Sane Fireworks: A safe and sane fireworks permit, issued pursuant to this
chapter, authorizes only the sale at retail of safe and sane fireworks by the applicant at the
location of the premises designated in the permit.
2. Limitations On Sale Of Safe And Sane Fireworks: A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
authorize sale of fireworks only from the hour of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on June 25 to twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight on July 4 of the year issued. A separate permit must be obtained for
each location of sale. No permit is transferable, assignable or renewable.
D. Temporary Fireworks Stands: All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall only be permitted to
be made from a temporary fireworks stand and shall be subject to the following provisions:
1. No temporary fireworks stand shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of any other building,
nor within one hundred feet (100') of the premises occupied by any gasoline station, or any
place where petroleum products are stored;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 146/528
2. All lighting circuits and other electrical equipment shall meet the requirements of the electrical
provisions of this code;
3. No stand shall have a floor area in excess of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet;
4. Stands shall have an exit door at least thirty inches (30") wide at either end of the structure and
one additional door for each twenty five feet (25') of rear wall in excess of twenty five feet (25').
All doors shall open outward from the stand and all doorways shall be kept free and clear from
all supplies and materials at all times;
5. Each stand shall be equipped with at least two (2) fire extinguishers in usable condition with
current inspection tags attached. One of the extinguishers shall be of a "dry chem" type, of at
least ten (10) pound size, with a minimum fire extinguishing rating of 2A.10BC. One of the
extinguishers shall be a "pressurized water" two and one-half (21/2) gallon size. Fire
extinguishers shall be mounted near the exit doors;
6. There shall be at least one supervisor, twenty one (21) years of age or older, on duty at all times.
No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be allowed inside the stand at any time, nor
shall any person under eighteen (18) years of age work at or about the premises where safe and
sane fireworks are sold or offered for sale;
7. No person employed as a watchman shall be permitted to remain inside of any stand when it is
not open for business;
8. "No Smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed, both inside and outside the stand. No
smoking shall be permitted within the stand, or within twenty five feet (25') of the stand;
9. No stand shall be erected before June 10 of any year. The premises on which the stand is
erected shall be cleared of all structures and debris, not later than twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight of July 6 next following issuance of the permit;
10. No person shall allow any rubbish to accumulate in or around any fireworks stand or permit a
fire nuisance to exist;
11. If any fireworks are stored, they shall only be stored at such places as are approved for storage
of fireworks by the fire chief. (2003 Code § 3-03-02)
6-4-4: PUBLIC DISPLAYS OR DISCHARGE OF DANGEROUS, AGRICULTURAL OR
WILDLIFE FIREWORKS:
A. Application For Permit; Fee: Any adult person or other group desiring to make a public display of
fireworks, or use or discharge dangerous, agricultural or wildlife fireworks, shall first make written
application to the city clerk for the issuance of such a permit allowing such person to purchase
such fireworks, and to use and discharge the same, such application to be accompanied by a filing
fee as specified in section 3-4-1 of this code. In the event no such permit is issued, the filing fee
shall be returned to the applicant. Such application shall show the following information:
1. Name and address of applicant;
2. If an organization, the purpose for which applicant is primarily existing and for which it was
organized;
3. The names and addresses of the officers, if any, of the applicant;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 147/528
4. The location where applicant will display said fireworks or use the same, together with the
quantity and description of fireworks applicant desires to purchase, use and discharge, and the
location, description and quantities of any fireworks stored off site;
5. When and where the applicant was organized and established, or if a natural person, the
applicant's age which must be at least twenty one (21) years;
6. The location of the applicant's principal and permanent place or places of business;
7. The name and address of any wholesaler or distributor from whom the applicant intends to
purchase such fireworks;
8. The manner, method and times when the applicant proposes to use such fireworks;
9. Such other information as the chief of the fire department may require in order to make his
investigation.
B. Term Of Permit: Such permit, if so issued, shall be valid for only the period of time for which issued.
(2003 Code § 3-03-02)
6-4-5: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
The city clerk shall cause an investigation to be made by the fire chief of each application for a
fireworks permit, and the fire chief shall submit a report of his findings and recommendations for or
against the issuance of a fireworks permit, together with his reasons therefor, to the city council. The
fire chief is to designate the category of permit, if any, he recommends be issued. (2003 Code § 3-03-
02)
6-4-6: APPROVAL, DENIAL:
The city council shall have the power, in its discretion, to grant or deny the application for a fireworks
permit, and if such a permit is issued, the city council shall designate the category of fireworks
covered by such permit, said permit to be issued subject to such other reasonable regulations, if any,
as the city council shall prescribe. (2003 Code § 3-03-02)
6-4-7: DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS:
No person shall discharge any fireworks within fifty feet (50') of any fireworks stand, or one hundred
feet (100') of the premises occupied by any gasoline station, or any place where petroleum products
are stored. The owner or operator of such stand shall post a sign to this effect in a prominent place at
the front of such stand. (2003 Code § 3-03-02)
6-4-8: INSURANCE; PROOF REQUIRED:
Each applicant for a safe and sane fireworks permit, and a dangerous, agricultural or wildlife fireworks
permit, shall have filed with the city clerk prior to the issuance of any permit, a policy of public liability
insurance with coverage of at least fifty thousand dollars/one hundred thousand dollars
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 148/528
($50,000.00/$100,000.00), and a policy of property damage insurance with at least ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00), or a certificate showing said amount of insurance. Each policy shall contain a
rider therein listing and carrying the city as an additional insured under said policy. (2003 Code § 3-03-
02)
6-4-9: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every person issued a fireworks permit to comply with all the provisions of the
state fireworks laws and this chapter. The violation of the state fireworks laws or any of the provisions
of this chapter by the permittee, or by any of its agents, employees or officers, shall constitute a
cause, in and of itself, to deny any subsequent application for a permit for a period of five (5) years
from the date of conviction for such violation. (2003 Code § 3-03-02)
6-4-10: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter does not prohibit:
A. Any manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer from selling, or any person from buying or using, blank
cartridges for use by persons for bona fide ceremonial purposes, athletic or sports events, or
military ceremonials or demonstrations, and theatrical or motion picture productions;
B. The use of torpedoes, flares or fuses by motor vehicles, railroads or other transportation agencies
for signal purposes of illumination, or for use in forest protection activities; or
C. The assembling, compounding, use and display of fireworks of whatever nature by any person
engaged in the production of motion pictures, theatricals or operas, when such use and display is a
necessary part of the production and such person possesses a valid permit to purchase, possess,
transport or use dangerous fireworks. (2003 Code § 3-03-02)
Chapter 5
EXPLOSIVES
6-5-1: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to all explosives, except small arms ammunition and pyrotechnic devices. (2003
Code § 3-03-03)
6-5-2: MANUFACTURE OR STORAGE PROHIBITED:
The manufacture or storage of explosives within the city limits is prohibited. (2003 Code § 3-03-03)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 149/528
6-5-3: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR TRANSPORTATION:
A permit shall be obtained from the city clerk to transport any explosive in or through the city. (2003
Code § 3-03-03)
6-5-4: TRANSPORTATION REGULATIONS:
A. Passengers For Hire Prohibited: Explosives shall not be transported or carried on or in any
conveyance carrying passengers for hire.
B. Signage: Every vehicle, while carrying explosives, shall display upon an erect pole at the front end
of such vehicle and at such height that shall be visible from all directions, a red flag with the word
"Danger" printed, stamped or sewed thereon, in white letters at least six inches (6") in height, or, in
lieu of such flag, the word "Explosives" must be painted on or attached to the rear end and each
side of such vehicle in letters at least four inches (4") in height.
C. Careless Activities: It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of a vehicle containing explosives
to smoke in, upon or near such vehicle; to drive, load or unload the vehicle while intoxicated; to
drive the vehicle in a careless or reckless manner; or to load or unload such vehicle in a careless
or reckless manner.
D. Metal Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or carry, or cause to be placed or
carried, any metal tool or other similar piece of metal, in the bed or body of a vehicle containing
explosives.
E. Explosive Materials Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or carry or cause to be
placed or carried, in the bed or body of a vehicle containing explosives, any exploders, detonators,
blasting caps or other similar explosive material or carry in or upon any such vehicle any matches.
(2003 Code § 3-03-03)
Chapter 6
GRAFFITI
6-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
GRAFFITI: The writing, defacing, marring, marking, inscribing, scratching, painting, or affixing of
markings on buildings or structures, including, but not limited to, walls, fences, signs, retaining walls,
driveways, walkways, sidewalks, curbs, traffic control devices, signs and utility boxes, except as
otherwise permitted by this code.
PROPERTY OWNER: Any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying, managing or having charge of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 150/528
any real property or structure.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT: A parent, guardian or person having legal responsibility for a minor. (Ord.
2080, 6-17-2008, eff. 6-17-2008)
6-6-2: REMOVAL REQUIRED:
A. Graffiti Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, owning, leasing, renting, occupying,
managing or having charge or possession of any property in the city, to maintain, or allow to be
maintained, graffiti on such property for an unreasonable period of time if such graffiti or any
portion of it is visible to the public, from a public street, sidewalk or from other properties, public or
private.
B. Unreasonable Defined: For purposes of this section, "unreasonable" shall mean the longer of the
following periods:
1. Seven (7) days from the placement of the graffiti on the premises; or
2. Seven (7) days from notification to the property owner from the city to remove the graffiti, or any
extensions of the removal period granted in writing by the city.
C. Enforcement Applicability: This chapter shall apply and be enforceable with regard to any property
within the city, regardless of zoning district. (Ord. 2080, 6-17-2008, eff. 6-17-2008)
6-6-3: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
A. Time Limit For Compliance: Private property owners shall remove graffiti from their property within
seven (7) calendar days after notification to the property owners by the city to remove such graffiti.
B. Removal By City: Whenever graffiti exists upon the property owned by another public agency, or by
a private party, the city may remove it at the expense and with the consent of the property owner. If
the removal is conducted by the city pursuant to consent, a signed consent form shall first be
obtained from the property owner.
C. Notice To Property Owners: Notice to private property owners by the city shall be addressed to the
name and address as it appears on the records of the county. Said notice shall be effected by
depositing a copy of the notice in the U.S. mail, certified with postage fully affixed, or personally
delivering a copy of the notice to the owner of the property. The service is complete at the time of
deposit in the mail or when personal service is effectuated. The failure of any person to receive
such notice shall not affect the validity of any legal proceedings regarding removal of the graffiti.
D. Failure Of Owner To Remove: In the event the owner fails to remove the graffiti after notice has
been sent, the city may, at its option:
1. Declare the structure or property to be a public nuisance;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 151/528
2. Abate the graffiti as a nuisance and charge the property owner by invoice and enforce same by
lien against the property; or
3. Prosecute the failure to remove as a violation of this code. (Ord. 2080, 6-17-2008, eff. 6-17-
2008)
6-6-4: PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT:
A. Amount: The cost of the abatement to be billed to the property owner shall be the actual cost for
city crews or contractors to remove said graffiti, plus a reasonable administrative fee covering
costs of notices, mailings, copies and administration time, which shall be added to the invoice as
part of any abatement. If volunteers are used, the city may, at its option, bill the cost of abatement
plus administrative fees.
B. Restitution: The city or the owner may seek restitution for the entire cost of removal, including
administrative fees, to reimburse the city or owner for any damage caused by the graffiti or the
removal. Said restitution may be pursued in a separate civil action, or as part of a criminal
proceeding against the perpetrator. Parental liability shall lie from damage or costs incurred by a
minor who defaces or otherwise damages property pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2080, 6-17-
2008, eff. 6-17-2008)
6-6-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction or plea of guilty thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this
code. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed,
continued or permitted. (Ord. 2080, 6-17-2008, eff. 6-17-2008; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 7
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS (SPICE)
6-7-1: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city hereby finds and declares that the products and synthetic substances described hereunder
are commonly used as an alternative to marijuana, that the synthetic substances are potentially
dangerous to users and that the long term effects are not yet known. We declare that the products
which contain these synthetic substances often use a disclaimer that the product is "not for human
consumption" to avoid regulations requiring the manufacturer to list the product's active ingredients
and that most of these products only list the ingredients of damiana leaf and mullein leaf extract. We
further declare that the synthetic substances described hereunder are not yet categorized as illegal
controlled substances under state or federal law, and that it is proper and necessary for the city to
exercise its authority to safeguard and protect the public health and safety. Finally, we declare that it is
within the police power of city, granted by article XII, section 2 of the Idaho constitution, to legislate the
use, possession and sale of synthetic cannabinoids and/or the substances known as "spice" in order
to preserve the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2096, 10-5-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 152/528
6-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is
intended, certain terms used herein are defined as follows:
SPICE: Any herbal or plant material, incense or other substance, regardless of the purpose it is
marketed for, or whether it is labeled as unsuitable for human consumption, which contains one or
more synthetic cannabinoids or their analogs or homologues.
A. "Spice" includes products by whatever trade name that are treated, sprayed or saturated with
one or more of the chemicals identified in the definition of "synthetic cannabinoids", as defined in
this section. Some currently marketed products containing synthetic cannabinoids identified in
said definition include, but are not limited to: K2, K3, Spice, Black Mamba, Mr. Smiley, Vanilla
Voodoo, Rage and Posh.
B. "Spice" includes any incense or alternative smoking blend product, which contains damiana leaf
and/or mullein leaf extract.
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS: A synthetic substance with a chemical structure or pharmacological
activity similar to tetrahydrocannabinol, also known as THC, which is the main psychoactive
substance found in marijuana. For the purpose of this chapter, synthetic cannabinoids are more
specifically identified as follows:
A. 1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole, a substance also known as JWH-018;
B. 1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole, a substance also known as JWH-073;
C. 2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methylo ctan-2-yl)phenol, a substance also known as CP
47,497 and its homologues;
D. (dexanabinol, (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10atetrahydrobenzo[
c]chromen-1-ol), a substance also known as HU-211;
E. Any salt, isomer, analog or homologue of the above mentioned chemicals;
F. Any other known synthetic cannabinoid; or
G. Any similar chemical substances which when inhaled, injected or otherwise ingested are
capable of causing a condition of intoxication, inebriation, excitement, stupefaction or the dulling
of the brain or nervous system. (Ord. 2096, 10-5-2010)
6-7-3: POSSESSION, USE OR SALE OF SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 153/528
Except as authorized by Idaho Code title 37, chapter 27, as amended, it is unlawful for any person to
knowingly and intentionally use, possess, purchase, sell, attempt to sell, publicly display for sale,
distribute, or dispense synthetic cannabinoids, either in their chemical form or as the product
commonly known as spice. (Ord. 2096, 10-5-2010)
6-7-4: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for possession or use of synthetic cannabinoids under
this chapter that said possession or use is under and pursuant to the direction or prescription of a
licensed physician or dentist authorized in the state to direct or prescribe such act. (Ord. 2096, 10-5-
2010)
6-7-5: SUBSEQUENT STATE ACTION:
If the state legislature adopts a statute enacting criminal penalties for prohibitions set forth in this
chapter, then upon the effective date of such state statute, provisions of this chapter that are
addressed by the state statute shall no longer be deemed effective. Any violations of this chapter
committed prior to the state legislature enacting such a statute may be prosecuted. To the extent that
the provisions within this chapter are not preempted by state statute, the provisions of this chapter
shall remain valid and in effect. (Ord. 2096, 10-5-2010)
6-7-6: PENALTY:
Any person who is found guilty, or who pleads guilty, of a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2096, 10-5-2010)
Title 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
7-1-1: POLICE ADMINISTRATION:
A. Duty Of Police Department: It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the street traffic
regulations of this city, and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to
make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the public works
director and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways
and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said
department by the traffic provisions of this code. (2003 Code § 10-02-01)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 154/528
B. Investigation Of Accidents And Reports: It shall be the duty of the police department to investigate
traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations
of law causing or contributing to such accidents. The police department shall maintain a suitable
system of filing traffic accident reports by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and
information of the public works director. (2003 Code § 10-02-02)
C. Emergency And Experimental Regulations:
1. The chief of police, by and with the approval of the public works director, hereby is empowered
to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic laws of this city, and
to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulation to cover emergencies or special
conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than
ninety (90) days without city council approval.
2. The public works director may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic. (2003
Code § 10-02-03)
7-1-2: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby
authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in
the event of fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the
police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the
traffic laws. Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police
in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. (2003 Code § 10-03-01)
7-1-3: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is specifically provided in this title, or in any chapter thereof for the violation of
any specific provision of a chapter of said title, any person violating any of the provisions of, or doing
any act forbidden by, or failing to perform any act required in this title, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4
of this code. Some city ordinances may be cited on a city citation form as a city code violation. In
those situations, the particular ordinance will indicate on its face that it may be cited as a city code
violation and set forth the applicable fine. Penalties and fines for city code violations shall be
processed pursuant to section 1-4-6 of this code. (2003 Code § 10-03-02; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 2
STATE VEHICLE LAWS; GENERAL TRAFFIC
PROVISIONS
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this title, they shall have the meaning herein
ascribed to them:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 155/528
ABANDONED, UNIDENTIFIED, DISABLED, NO CURRENT PLATE OR WRECKED VEHICLES: Any
vehicle which is left, or which is parked upon any street, alley or public property for a period of twenty
four (24) hours or longer within a district or part of the city, and the owner of which vehicle cannot be
found, located or determined, or the owner of which refuses to remove such vehicle from such street,
alley or public property upon notice, oral or written, given by the judge or by any member of the police
department.
ALLEY OR ALLEYWAY: A minor public way providing secondary access at the back or side of
property for vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles operated by any fire department, fire district,
nonprofit fire protection corporation, publicly or privately owned fire protection or fire patrol
organization, police, sheriff or other law enforcement agency, ambulances and like emergency
vehicles authorized by the chief of police to mount and use a siren and/or light of the type approved by
the chief of police.
BICYCLE: Every vehicle propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2)
tandem wheels, except scooters and similar devices.
CITY: City of Blackfoot, Idaho, or the area within the city limits of the city of Blackfoot, Idaho.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation
of property or persons for hire, compensation or profit.
COMMON AREAS: The areas of a facility, complex, apartment unit, hotel, motel or the like that are
open either to the general public or persons with the permission of the owner or agent of the owner of
the area. This definition would include, but not be limited to, the following: swimming pools,
restaurants, patios, hot tubs, saunas, laundry rooms, meeting rooms, lobbies, lounges, bars and other
areas within the facility that are either constructed or designed for use in this manner.
CROSSWALK: A. That part of a street included within the connections of the lateral lines of the
sidewalks at intersections measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the
traversable roadway; or
B. Any portion of a street distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other traffic control
devices.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma
or property damage demanding immediate attention.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: A motor vehicle belonging to a fire department, firefighting association or
fire district, an ambulance, or a motor vehicle belonging to a federal, state, county or municipal law
enforcement agency.
GROSS WEIGHT: The weight of a vehicle without load, plus the weight of any load thereon.
HIGHWAY: Any road, roadway or street within the city.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines,
or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the intersecting highways or the area within which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 156/528
vehicles traveling on different highways may come into conflict.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway, which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for
vehicular traffic.
LOADING ZONE: A space or section of a street, which has been set aside for the exclusive purpose
of loading and unloading persons, supplies and merchandise.
LOUD AMPLIFICATION DEVICE: Any equipment designed or used for sound production,
reproduction or amplification, including, but not limited to, any radio, television, phonograph, musical
instrument, stereo, tape player, compact disc player, loudspeaker, public address (PA) system, sound
amplifier, or comparable sound broadcasting device.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle, which is self-propelled but not operated upon rails, except vehicles
moved solely by human power.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on
not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor and an ATV threewheeler.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: The standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in
the city.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, markings and devices placed or erected
by authority of the city or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding
traffic.
OPERATOR: Every person who shall operate a vehicle upon any street in the city.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for
the purpose of and while actively engaged in loading or unloading goods, merchandise or persons.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person who is afoot, including infants in a carriage being pushed or pulled by a
person.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization or entity having a legally recognized existence,
whether public or private.
PLACE OF RESIDENCE: Any building or portion thereof adapted or used and intended for the
overnight accommodation of persons. In the event the building is used for multiple individual units (i.e.,
apartment, condominium, hotel, motel, duplex, triplex, etc.), each individual unit shall be considered a
separate residence for the purposes of this title.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Sound for which the information content is clearly communicated to the listener,
including, but not limited to, understandable spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is
raised or normal, comprehensible musical rhythms, melody or instrumentation, and the source of
which is identifiable to the listener.
PRIVATE ROAD DRIVEWAY: Every road, street, way or place in private ownership and used for
vehicular travel only by the owner or by those having express or implied permission from the owner.
RESTRICTED PARKING DISTRICT: The area of the city so designated for the purpose of providing
special regulations for the control of parking and traffic.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 157/528
RIGHT OF WAY: The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to
another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity
as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways,
the word "roadway" applies separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the
transportation of children to or from school, or privately owned and operated for compensation for the
transportation of children to and from school.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or lateral lines defining vehicular traffic
and the adjacent property lines, and intended for pedestrian travel.
STAND OR STANDING: The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than for the purpose
of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
STOLEN VEHICLE: Any vehicle, whether located upon private or public property, which the police
department has reasonable grounds to believe that the owner thereof has been, or is, unlawfully
deprived of possession.
STOP: The complete cessation of movement.
STOP OR STOPPING: When prohibited, shall mean any halting even momentarily if a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with or in compliance with the
direction of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: Shall be used interchangeably and shall mean the entire width between the
boundary lines of every way or place open to the public, as a matter of right for public vehicular travel,
but not to include alleys.
THROUGH STREET: Every street or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential
right of way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting roadways is required by
law to yield the right of way to vehicles on such through streets.
TRAFFIC: Either persons or vehicles while using any street or sidewalk for the purpose of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL: Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated,
by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed.
TRUCK:
General: Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of
property.
Pickup Truck: Every motor vehicle eight thousand (8,000) pounds' gross weight or less which is
designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
Truck Camper: Any structure designed, used or maintained primarily to be loaded on or affixed
to a motor vehicle to provide a mobile dwelling, sleeping place, office or commercial space.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 158/528
Truck Tractor: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a street, except devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
WRECKED VEHICLE: Any vehicle damaged by accidental or other cause, and left unattended upon
any street, alley or public property. (2003 Code § 10-01-01)
7-2-2: SPEED REGULATIONS:
A. Basic Rule: No person shall operate a vehicle within the limits of the city, at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions. (2003 Code § 10-05-01)
B. General Speed Limit: Subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section, no person shall drive
or operate any vehicle in excess of the speed set forth below:
1. Any speed established pursuant to subsection C of this section.
2. Ten (10) miles per hour in any alley.
3. Ten (10) miles per hour in any public park.
4. Twenty (20) miles per hour when passing any school building or when crossing any marked
school zone, such zone to extend one hundred fifty feet (150'), unless otherwise posted, in either
direction from any marked school crossing when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are
erected, and any of the following exist:
a. A school speed limit sign with a time period specified. In such case, the twenty (20) miles per
hour limit shall apply only during the specified time period.
5. Twenty five (25) miles per hour upon all other streets, unless otherwise specified by appropriate
signage. (2003 Code § 10-05-02; amd. 2012 Code)
C. Establishment Of Speed Limits: Whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of an
investigation, that any prima facie speed set forth in subsection B of this section is greater or less
than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any location within the city, the city
council may determine and declare by resolution a reasonable and safe prima facie speed limit,
which, when proper signs giving notice thereof have been erected, shall be the speed limit for such
street or portion thereof. (2003 Code § 10-05-03)
1. Chief Of Police Authorized To Set Temporary Speed Limits: At such times that a special event is
being held within the city, which creates high volumes of pedestrian and/or vehicle traffic, the
chief of police is authorized to temporarily reduce speed limits near the special event in his
discretion for the safety of all participants, visitors and attendees. Any such reduction shall not
exceed ten (10) days. When the chief of police determines that a temporary speed limit
reduction is necessary, he or she shall notify the city council and mayor as soon as reasonably
possible by telephone, electronic mail, in person, or other similar means of communication.
During the period of time so described, the speed limit set by the chief of police shall be the
speed limit for such streets or portions thereof so long as proper signs giving notice have been
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 159/528
erected. Any reduction in a speed limit in excess of ten (10) days shall have prior city council
approval by resolution per this subsection C. (Ord. 2151, 1-3-2017)
D. Minimum Speed Regulations: No person shall drive a vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the safe and efficient movement of vehicular traffic. (2003 Code § 10-05-04)
E. Citation; Penalty: Violations of the provisions of this chapter may be charged as an infraction on a
uniform state citation form and processed through the county court system, in which case the fine
shall be as designated under Idaho Code title 49. Alternatively, violations of the provisions of this
chapter may be charged on a city citation form as a city code violation, which shall carry a penalty
of fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall be processed pursuant to section 1-4-6 of this code. Speeding
violations of twenty (20) miles per hour over the speed limit and charged as a city code violation,
shall carry an enhanced penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (2003 Code § 10-05-05)
7-2-3: DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. State Laws Adopted; Citation:
1. Adoption: There hereby is adopted the motor vehicle laws of the state, that being particularly
Idaho Code title 49, as presently in effect or as may hereafter be amended, marked and
identified as the Idaho motor vehicle laws, and published annually by the authority of the state
department of transportation, for the regulation of motor vehicles and motor vehicle traffic within
the municipal boundaries of the city, and said state motor vehicle laws, and any subsequent
amendments enacted into law by the state legislature, contained in said document, or its
subsequent editions.
2. Form Of Citations: Law enforcement officers may issue citations on the standard uniform state
citation form for violations of state vehicle laws within the city limits. Alternatively, law
enforcement officers may issue citations on a city citation form for violations that, pursuant to
any particular city code provision, may be classified as a city code violation. Such city code
violation citations shall be processed pursuant to section 1-4-6 of this code. (2003 Code § 10-10-
01)
B. Operating Vehicles On Bike Lanes And Paths: No person shall drive a motorized vehicle upon any
officially marked bike lane, bike path, footpath or other separate right of way specifically set aside
for use by pedestrians or nonmotorized vehicles, except at an intersection or when entering or
leaving a roadway at a driveway, private road or alley. Prior to crossing a nonmotorized right of
way, the motorist shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian or nonmotorized vehicle operating
thereon. This subsection shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles meeting the conditions
specified in Idaho Code section 49-623, or authorized maintenance and construction vehicles while
actually engaged in work upon a roadway or nonmotorized right of way. Violation of this section
shall constitute an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003
Code § 10-10-05; amd. 2012 Code)
C. Cutting Through Parking Lots: No person shall drive a motorized vehicle through or over a parking
lot, driveway or entrance to a residence, business or building to avoid driving through an
intersection. Violation of this section shall constitute an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 10-10-06; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 160/528
D. Jake Brakes Usage Prohibited:
1. Purpose: The purpose of this subsection is to make it unlawful for vehicles equipped with
compression release type braking systems, commonly known as "jake brakes", to use such
braking systems or devices upon any public streets, roads or highways within the limits of the
city for the peace, health and comfort of the citizens of the city and the public.
2. Definition: For the purpose of this section, "compression release type braking systems" shall
mean any devices equipped on vehicles, including, but not limited to, tractors, semitrucks, motor
carriers and buses that utilized engine compression release or engine retarders as a means of
slowing or braking the speed of the vehicle in lieu of applying the clutch or foot brakes. (2003
Code § 10-10-07)
3. Prohibitive Acts: Every driver of a vehicle who shall cause his or her vehicle to brake or allow by
any method that increases the noise emission levels of the engine such as engine compression
release or engine retarder in lieu of applying the clutch or foot brakes upon any public streets,
roads or highways within the limits of the city, shall be guilty of an infraction, subject to penalty
as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 10-10-07; amd. 2012 Code)
7-2-4: MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC RULES:
A. Interference With Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person, not the owner thereof, to tamper,
meddle or interfere with any vehicle, or start or attempt to start the machinery thereof, or puncture
or otherwise mutilate the tires, scratch, mark or otherwise deface the body or apparatus thereof, or
take or remove from the vehicle any part or portion of the machinery, equipment or other portion
thereof, or throw any stones, rock, glass or other missile at any vehicle, or the occupants thereof.
(2003 Code § 10-13-01)
B. Traffic Hazards: Any hedge, shrubbery, fence, wall or other sight obstruction of any nature, except
buildings, over three feet (3') in height from the existing centerline road elevation, existing,
growing, placed or installed within a "vision triangle", the boundaries of the "vision triangle" being
formed by measuring from the intersection of the edges of the roadway or the intersection of the
edge of the roadway and railroad and a railroad property line to points forty feet (40') along the
edges of the roadways or the edge of the roadway and the railroad property line, and then
connecting the two (2) points with a straight line, is hereby deemed to be a traffic hazard and is
prohibited. It shall be unlawful for either the owner or the person in possession of any premises to
permit such traffic hazard to exist. (2003 Code § 10-13-02)
C. Driving Across Wet Painted Traffic Lines: It shall be unlawful to drive across any painted traffic
control markings while the paint is still set and traffic cones indicating such are in place. (2003
Code § 10-13-03)
D. Emergency Traffic Control Plan: In the event of an electrical power blackout and/or the malfunction
of an individual or number of signalized intersections, traffic through the inoperative signalized
intersections shall perform as a four-way stop. (2003 Code § 10-13-04)
E. Operation Of ATVs, UTVs, Go-Carts, Etc.:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 161/528
1. Intent: The intent of this subsection is to prohibit the operation of small motorized vehicles on the
public streets within the city for purposes of transportation. Such vehicles create traffic safety
hazards because of their size and the difficulty that drivers of automobiles and trucks have in
seeing such vehicles.
2. Prohibitions: "All-terrain vehicles", as defined by Idaho Code section 67-7101(1), "utility type
vehicles", as defined by Idaho Code section 67-7101(17), go-carts, riding lawn mowers, golf
carts, and like vehicles may not be driven on public streets lying within the city for purposes of
transportation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, golf carts may be driven on public streets lying
within the city within one-fourth (1/4) mile from the municipal golf course, and lawn mowers may
be driven upon public streets when going from one lawn to another for purposes of mowing such
lawn.
3. Penalty: Violation of this subsection shall be deemed a city code violation, punishable by a fine
of fifty dollars ($50.00) paid directly to the city clerk's office. (Ord. 2149, 11-1-2016)
F. Use Of Wireless Communication Devices:
1. No person shall operate a motor vehicle while using an electronic wireless communications
device to write, send or read a text based communication.
2. As used in this subsection, "write, send or read a text based communication" means using an
electronic wireless communications device to manually communicate with any person using a
text based communication, including, but not limited to, communications referred to as a text
message, instant message or electronic mail.
3. For purposes of this subsection, a person shall not be deemed to be writing, reading or sending
a text based communication if the person reads, selects or enters a telephone number or name
in an electronic wireless communications device for the purpose of making or receiving a
telephone call.
4. This subsection shall not apply to an emergency services professional using an electronic
wireless communications device while operating an authorized emergency vehicle in the course
and scope of his or her duties.
5. A violation of this subsection is an infraction, punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord.
2098, 6-7-2011, eff. 6-7-2011)
7-2-5: SKATEBOARD USE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Definition: For the purpose of this section, "wheeled apparatuses" shall be defined as a
nonmotorized vehicle or toy consisting of one or more wheels constructed or covered with
polyurethane and/or rubber materials, which are gravity operated or human powered and can
transport persons or property, including, but not limited to, in-line skates, skateboards and skates.
Any apparatus used to assist the physically disabled, bicycles and carts shall be specifically
excluded from the above definition. (2003 Code § 10-14-01)
B. Intent: It is the intent of the city council to place reasonable limits on the use for recreation of
wheeled apparatuses in congested areas to protect the public and public improvements from
damage or liability occasioned as a result of the exercise of that recreational activity. (2003 Code
§ 10-14-02)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 162/528
C. Prohibitions:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person in the city downtown corridor:
a. To use any wheeled apparatus when the wheels are not covered and/or constructed of
polyurethane or rubber materials; or
b. To use a wheeled apparatus carelessly and heedlessly or without due caution and
circumspection, or at a speed or in a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any
person or property.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any wheeled apparatus in any parking garage, public
building and private commercial parking lot or building, without prior written authority of the
owner or owner's agent. (2003 Code § 10-14-03)
D. Penalty: Any person found in violation of this subsection shall be subject to a fine of twenty five
dollars ($25.00), and court costs as may be imposed in accordance with state law. (2003 Code
§ 10-14-04)
Chapter 3
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
7-3-1: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL:
The public works director is hereby authorized and directed to place upon the public streets,
appropriate signs, signals, markings and devices for the purposes of regulating, warning, guiding and
directing traffic. (2003 Code § 10-04-01)
7-3-2: SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall, so far as practical, conform to the "Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Street And Highways", and shall so far as practical be uniform as
to type and location throughout the city. (2003 Code § 10-04-02)
7-3-3: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different colored lights, or colored
lighted arrow, successively one at a time, or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall
be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and said lights shall indicate
and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
A. Green Indication:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 163/528
1. Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left,
unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning
right or left, shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
2. Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another
indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indication shown at the same time. Such
vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk
and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
3. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, as provided in section 7-3-4 of this
chapter, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is turn arrow,
may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
B. Steady Yellow Indication:
1. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green or red (or
"stop") signals will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular traffic shall not enter
the intersection when the red or "stop" signal is exhibited.
2. Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control
signal, as provided in section 7-3-4 of this chapter, thereby are advised that there is insufficient
time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then start to
cross the roadway.
C. Steady Red Indication:
1. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain
standing until a green indication is shown.
2. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, as provided in section 7-3-4 of this
chapter, pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter the roadway.
3. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red indication when only one lane of traffic is facing the signal
and, if two (2) or more lanes of traffic are facing the signal in the same direction, vehicular traffic
in the right lane only, may, after stopping, cautiously proceed to make a right turn, with proper
care to avoid accident, but shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk,
and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
4. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red indication when only one lane of traffic is facing the signal
and, if two (2) or more lanes of traffic are facing the signal in the same direction, vehicular traffic
in the left lane only may, after stopping, enter upon streets designated as one-way streets,
cautiously proceed to make a left turn, with proper care to avoid accident, but shall yield the right
of way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk, and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
D. Applicability In Other Than Intersections: In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable
except as to those provisions that by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall
be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 164/528
absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. (2003 Code § 10-04-
03)
7-3-4: PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS:
Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk", "Wait" or "Don't Walk" are in
place, such signals shall indicate as follows:
A. Walk: Pedestrians facing such signals may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the
signal and shall be given the right of way by the drivers of all vehicles.
B. Don't Walk Or Wait: No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal,
but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a
sidewalk or safety island while the "Don't Walk" signal is showing. (2003 Code § 10-04-04)
7-3-5: FLASHING SIGNALS:
A. Legends: Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal, it
shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
1. Flashing Red (Stop Signal): When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers
of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line
when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
2. Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent
flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with
caution.
B. Railroad Crossing Excepted: This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by the rules as set forth
under Idaho Code. (2003 Code § 10-04-05)
7-3-6: DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
A. Prohibited: No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway an
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles
an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement
of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control
device or any railroad sign or signal.
B. Removal: Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or
cause it to be removed without notice. (2003 Code § 10-04-06)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 165/528
7-3-7: DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS AND ESTABLISHMENT OF SAFETY
ZONES:
The public works director is hereby authorized:
A. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway,
crosswalks at intersections where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing
the roadway and at such other places as he may deem necessary;
B. To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem
necessary for the protection of pedestrians. (2003 Code § 10-04-07)
7-3-8: TRAFFIC LANES:
A. The public works director is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street
or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
B. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully
passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
C. Upon a roadway where traffic is permitted to move in both directions, whenever the center lane of
said roadway is bounded by solid lines, vehicles shall travel upon said center lane only for the
purposes of turning to the left or entering a designated traffic lane after completion of a left turn.
Vehicles shall not use said center lane as a passing lane nor shall any vehicle travel upon said
center lane for a distance of more than one hundred feet (100') prior to turning to the left or
following completion of a left. (2003 Code § 10-04-08)
Chapter 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
7-4-1: STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway
where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right hand wheels of such
vehicle parallel to and within eighteen inches (18") of the right hand curb.
B. On one-way streets, a vehicle parked on the left side of the street shall be so stopped or parked
with the left hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within eighteen inches (18") of the left
hand curb. (2003 Code § 10-11-01)
7-4-2: ANGLE PARKING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 166/528
On those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a
vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such markings. (2003
Code § 10-11-02)
7-4-3: DISABLED PERSONS PARKING:
A. Regulations: Parking or standing a vehicle in a space reserved for the disabled, which space is
marked in conformance with the requirements specified in Idaho Code, is prohibited, unless a
vehicle is momentarily in the space for the purpose of allowing a disabled person to enter or leave
the vehicle, or unless a special license plate or card for the disabled as prescribed in Idaho Code,
or a special temporary card as prescribed in Idaho Code, is displayed on the vehicle. The
registered owner of a vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
parking violation and shall pay a penalty as set forth in subsection 7-4-13G of this chapter.
B. Enforcement On Private Property: Law enforcement officials are empowered to enter upon private
property open to the public to enforce the provisions of this section.
C. Unauthorized Use Of Plate Or Card: Any unauthorized use of the plate or card shall constitute a
parking violation. Law enforcement officials shall enforce the provisions of this section and are
empowered, using reasonable discretion, to check personal identification to determine if the user
of the plate or placard is the disabled person so authorized to use such disabled person's parking
privileges. A violation of this provision shall constitute a parking violation and carry a penalty as set
forth in subsection 7-4-13G of this chapter. (2003 Code § 10-11-03)
7-4-4: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of
a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall:
A. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
1. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
2. On a sidewalk or parkway;
3. Within an intersection;
4. On a crosswalk;
5. On a bike lane or bike path;
6. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or
markings;
7. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking
would obstruct traffic;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 167/528
8. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
9. On any railroad tracks;
10. Along any yellow painted curb.
B. Stand or park a vehicle, unless driver occupied, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a
passenger or passengers:
1. In front of a public or private driveway;
2. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
3. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk or a bike/pedestrian curb ramp, except at an intersection
where a traffic control signal is in operation, or in a parking meter zone;
4. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic
control signal located at the side of a roadway;
5. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street
opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when
properly signposted;
C. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers:
1. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
2. At any place where official traffic control devices prohibit such parking.
D. Park a vehicle in or upon a street during the nighttime, except that this prohibition does not apply to
a business and the owners or occupants of property adjacent to a street who may so park a
vehicle in compliance with and as authorized by any other provision of this code. The city council,
upon finding and declaring the necessity to prohibit the parking or standing of vehicles upon a
street during the nighttime or at other times during the day may, upon motion or order, direct the
street department to post or erect signs prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
any vehicle upon the streets of the city.
E. Park a vehicle on the side of the street whereby the front of such parked vehicle faces oncoming
traffic. (2003 Code § 10-11-04)
7-4-5: PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC:
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon a
street or highway in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than twelve
feet (12') of such roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. (2003 Code § 10-11-05)
7-4-6: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 168/528
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley, except while actively engaged in the expeditious
loading and unloading of passengers, supplies and merchandise. In no case shall the stop for loading
and unloading exceed thirty (30) minutes. (2003 Code § 10-11-06)
7-4-7: EXTENDED PARKING PROHIBITED:
No person shall park any vehicle upon any street, alley or public property for a period of forty eight
(48) hours or longer. (2003 Code § 10-11-07)
7-4-8: PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAILERS ON PUBLIC
STREETS:
A. Residential: Recreational vehicles and other nonmotorized personal property shall not be parked on
any street or alley in the residential districts of the city, except that such vehicles and other
nonmotorized personal property may be so parked for the purposes of loading, unloading or
otherwise preparing for use for a period not to exceed forty eight (48) hours.
B. Nonresidential: Vehicles shall not be parked in nonresidential areas for more than twenty four (24)
hours. Utility trailers not connected to a motor vehicle and other nonmotorized personal property
not connected to a motor vehicle shall not be parked on any street or alley in the nonresidential
areas of city. (2003 Code § 10-11-07.1)
7-4-9: REQUIREMENTS FOR LEAVING VEHICLE UNATTENDED:
No person having control or charge of a vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stand on any street
unattended without stopping the motor of the vehicle and effectively setting the brakes thereon. (2003
Code § 10-11-08)
7-4-10: PARKING NEAR PUBLIC SCHOOLS:
A. Declaration Of Necessity And Purpose: The city council finds and declares that within certain
residential areas of the city there exists a heavy concentration of vehicles which remain parked
throughout the day and that a substantial portion of these vehicles are not owned or operated by
residents of these areas; that the presence of these vehicles causes vehicular congestion on
residential streets, impedes the movement of traffic, and unduly restricts the entry of residents to
their homes; that such vehicular congestion creates excessive disturbance, trash and refuse and
causes the deterioration of residential area. The city council, therefore, declares the necessity and
public policy of protecting the availability of parking for residents, of alleviating congestion of
vehicles that are parked on the sides of the streets in and around the neighborhoods surrounding
the public schools located in the city, and of reducing the excessive disturbance, trash, and refuse
in the residential areas surrounding the public schools, by providing designated parking areas for
public school students during school hours. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general
health, safety and welfare of the neighborhoods surrounding the public schools.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 169/528
B. Student Parking Restricted To Certain Areas: During the hours of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. to
four o'clock (4:00) P.M., Monday through Friday, when school is in session, all students of any
public school located in the city shall park their vehicles only in areas or parking lots designated by
the school and/or the police chief, for student parking. Notice of such designation shall be given by
each respective school or the police department to the students in a manner that provides
reasonable notice to the students of the areas or parking lots wherein they may park their vehicles.
(2003 Code § 10-11-09)
7-4-11: PARKING IN VIOLATION OF DULY POSTED PARKING REGULATION:
No person shall park or stand a vehicle in violation to any duly posted parking regulation within the
city. (2003 Code § 10-11-10)
7-4-12: PARKING OF OVERWEIGHT COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park any commercial vehicle having a gross weight capacity in excess of eight
thousand (8,000) pounds, whether attended or unattended, upon the streets in any residential or
commercial district within the city, for a period in excess of two (2) hours, except:
A. For the purpose of loading and unloading passengers, materials or merchandise; or
B. For any purpose incident to any lawful construction project located within the immediate vicinity of
such parked vehicle; or
C. For any purpose incident to a lawful commercial operation located in any residential or commercial
district within the immediate vicinity of such parked vehicle, but the vehicle shall not be parked on a
city street for more than eight (8) hours. (2003 Code § 10-11-11)
7-4-13: PARKING TICKETS AND PROCEDURES:
Any owner or operator of a motor vehicle who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a parking violation
and shall be required to pay a penalty as described below. The administrative procedure for payment
of parking tickets for violations is set forth below.
A. Tickets: It shall be the duty of the police department, or other designee of the chief of police, upon
observing a vehicle parked or stopped in violation of the provisions of this chapter, to leave upon
such vehicle a separate notice or ticket for each violation, or as frequently as every two (2) hours,
that such vehicle has been parked or stopped in violation of provisions of this chapter. Among
other things, each notice shall bear the date and hour of leaving the same at or upon the vehicle,
make of the vehicle, and its license number, the specific code section violated and the amount of
the fine, instructing the owner or operator of such vehicle to report to the police department. One
copy or an automated record of each notice mentioned herein shall be filed with the police
department.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 170/528
B. Owner Or Operator Liable: If any vehicle is found stopped, standing or parked in any manner in
violation of any provision of this chapter and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the
owner or person or corporation in whose name said vehicle is registered or the named lessee in a
rental or lease agreement of said vehicle shall be held prima facie responsible for said violation.
C. Time Of Payment: In order to eliminate burdening courts with violations of ordinances and to
eliminate insofar as possible public inconvenience, each person receiving a parking ticket under
this chapter left upon his or her vehicle shall, within seventy two (72) hours of the time of such
notice, pay to the police department in full satisfaction of such violation, the fee indicated on the
ticket left upon his or her vehicle. If the ticket has not been paid within the seventy two (72) hours
above prescribed, an additional fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council
for each such violation shall be assessed and fined against such person, such fee deemed
necessary to defray administrative and clerical expense.
D. Contesting Citation: In the event that the ticket is contested, the person shall appear at the police
department within a seven (7) day period and sign a document contesting the violation charged. In
the event that a contest is made, the city attorney may amend the citation by filing an infraction
citation or complaint for parking violation or failure to pay a parking penalty with the magistrate
division of the district court. At the time of contesting such violation, the police officer may assign a
time and date to appear at an arraignment in the magistrate division of the county district court. In
addition to the fines set forth above, court costs may be imposed by the magistrate court in
accordance with Idaho court rules.
E. Failure To Contest And Pay: Failure to timely contest the citation as set forth above shall be
deemed an admission to the violation and the police department shall enter a default. Subsequent
failure to pay the applicable penalty within fourteen (14) days after the contest period has run as
set forth in subsection D of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and, in addition to the
penalty for the parking violation, subject the violator to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code. Upon entering the default, the police department shall notify the violator that the penalty
must be paid within fourteen (14) days or a misdemeanor citation for failure to pay penalty will be
filed in district court, subjecting the violator to possible penalties as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code.
F. Immobilization And Towing: In addition to any other penalties that may apply, vehicles parked in
violation of this chapter may be towed and impounded or booted at the owner's expense. Any
vehicle that has one or more delinquent unpaid tickets, after having an opportunity to contest
and/or pay the ticket pursuant to this section, and who either has been adjudged guilty of the
violation by a competent court and subsequently has failed to pay such ticket, or who simply failed
to pay or contest the ticket, may be immobilized by a tire boot and towed until such time that the
owner of the vehicle pays such delinquent tickets.
G. Fee Schedule: Within seventy two (72) hours of the time of such notice, the violator shall pay to the
police department in full satisfaction of such violation, the fee indicated in the following fee
schedule for each notice left upon his or her vehicle:
1. For violation of section 7-4-3 of this chapter: An amount as set by resolution of the city council.
2. For violation of section 7-4-10 of this chapter: As set forth below:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 171/528
a. First Offense: Any person violating section 7-4-10 of this chapter for the first time within a six
(6) month period shall be subject to a penalty as set by resolution of the city council for such
violation. Such fine shall be paid to the police department.
b. Second Offense: Any person violating section 7-4-10 of this chapter for the second time within
a six (6) month period shall be subject to a penalty as set by resolution of the city council for
such violation. Such fine shall be paid to the police department.
c. Third Offense: Any person violating section 7-4-10 of this chapter three (3) or more times
within a six (6) month period of time, shall be subject to a penalty as set by resolution of the
city council for third and subsequent violations. Such fine shall be paid to the police
department.
3. For all other violations: An amount as set by resolution of the City Council. (2003 Code § 10-11-
12; amd. 2012 Code)
7-4-14: IMPOUNDING VEHICLES:
Any peace officer may remove, cause to be removed and impound, any vehicle parked in violation of
the provisions of this chapter. (2003 Code § 10-11-13)
7-4-15: IMPOUNDING FEES:
The owner of any motor vehicle or trailer that has been impounded by the police under any provision
of this Code or any law of the State shall pay to the City an impound fee in the amount set by the City
Council. (2003 Code § 10-11-14)
7-4-16: PAYMENT OF TOWING AND STORAGE FEES:
The owner of any motor vehicle or trailer that has been duly impounded, removed from the City
streets, towed or stored at the direction of the police, shall pay the towing and storage fee before such
vehicle or trailer may be released. The towing and storage fee shall be paid to the person or company
effecting the removal and towing and providing the storage for such vehicle or trailer. If the motor
vehicle or trailer is towed or stored by City personnel, the towing and storage fees shall be paid to the
City. (2003 Code § 10-11-15)
7-4-17: ESTABLISHMENT OF STORAGE FEES:
The City Council shall annually establish by resolution the towing and storage fees provided for in this
chapter for towing and storage by the City. In addition, the City Council may contract with one or more
towing companies or individuals to tow and store vehicles at the direction of the police pursuant to a
preset maximum fee schedule. Such fees shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle. (2003 Code § 10-
11-16)
7-4-18: PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 172/528
Any person who parks or leaves unattended any motor vehicle upon any private property posted in
accordance with the terms hereof and located within the City, without the consent of the owner or
person thereof, is guilty of an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this
Code. For the purposes of this chapter, property is posted when one or more signs legibly printed in
the English language are placed upon the premises stating that public parking thereon is prohibited,
provided at least one such sign is plainly visible from each vehicular entrance to the premises. (2003
Code § 10-11-17; amd. 2012 Code)
7-4-19: PARKING ON LOT NEXT TO RAILROAD TRACKS:
The City has a right-of-way upon a bare lot that lies directly east of the railroad tracks, south of
Judicial Street and directly west of Courthouse Square Park. The City will allow the parking of semitractors
and trailers on the lot under the following conditions:
A. All owners and/or drivers must register for a complimentary permit at City Hall or on-line, and obtain
a "hang tag" from City Hall that must be displayed on the semi-tractor/trailer while it is parked on
the lot.
B. All semi-trucks and trailers are not to cause any disturbance to others, and all units must be parked
south of the entrance to the parking lot. All parking must be done in such a manner as to allow
others to also use the lot for parking. No parking shall be allowed for more than three (3)
consecutive days, excluding holidays.
C. All owners and/or drivers must keep the lot clean from all trash, garbage, refuse, or other items left
on the lot.
D. The City shall not be responsible for any theft, vandalism, or other damage to personal property
while vehicles are parked on the lot.
E. All permits are valid for one year from the date of issuance and must be renewed annually.
F. During the winter months, the lot is used by the City for snow storage. At such times as the lot is
used for snow storage, all parking of semi-trucks/trailers must cease or relocate based upon notice
and direction from the City.
G. Any peace officer may remove, or cause to be removed and impound, any vehicle parked in
violation of this section with the owner and/or driver responsible for all towing and storage fees as
set forth in sections 7-4-14, 7-4-15, and 7-4-16 of this chapter.
H. The City reserves the right to further restrict or prohibit parking at any time.
I. Any person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of an infraction in an amount to be set
from time to time by resolution of City Council or this Code. Any person who violates this section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 173/528
more than three (3) times within a two (2) year period is guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable
as set forth in this Code. (Ord. 2177, 3-5-2019)
ARTICLE A. SNOW REMOVAL PARKING REGULATIONS
7-4A-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this article are:
A. To render the removal of snow and ice from the public streets safe and more economical and
efficient;
B. Avoid collisions of snow removal equipment with motor vehicles, and reduce the possibility of
accidents involving pedestrians;
C. Provide for more efficient and economical utilization of snow removal equipment. (2003 Code § 10-
15-01)
7-4A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meaning specified:
EAST-WEST STREET: Streets running in the general direction of east and west.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every self-propelled vehicle in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public street or highway, except vehicles or devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
MOTORCYCLE: A motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to
travel on no more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground.
NORTH-SOUTH STREET: Streets running in the general direction of north and south.
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER: The official newspaper of the city of Blackfoot, as designated in section 1-5-
3 of this code.
PROCLAMATION: A proclamation issued by the mayor declaring the necessity to impose the parking
restrictions set forth in this article.
SNOW REMOVAL: The process of removing snow from the streets within the city.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed to carry persons or property and which is
drawn by a motor vehicle.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (2003 Code
§ 10-15-02)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 174/528
7-4A-3: SNOW REMOVAL; DISPOSAL:
A. Proclamation: The mayor may, at any time, issue a snow removal proclamation declaring that
snowfall has accumulated on the public streets of the city in amounts sufficient to pose a hazard to
the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. Such proclamation shall order that the
parking restrictions be placed in effect, and shall state the specific restrictions and the date and
time when the restrictions shall go into effect. Such restrictions shall become effective upon the
date and time stated therein; provided, however, in no event shall the restrictions become effective
before the expiration of twelve (12) hours following the time when the proclamation is broadcast at
least once by any radio or television station having a general audience within the city, or before
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of the day following the date on which the proclamation is published in the
official newspaper, whichever is earlier. (2003 Code § 10-15-03)
B. Disposal Of Snow: No person shall remove snow from privately owned property, or property owned
by any person or entity other than the city, and place onto the sidewalks or streets of the city, or
onto any other property owned by the city. Violation of this subsection shall be an infraction,
subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2012 Code)
C. No Overnight Parking Downtown In Winter Months: Parking of any vehicles on streets and
highways in the downtown and heavy traffic areas shall be unlawful from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. from November 15 through March 1 of each winter season.
Said areas described are those encompassed between West Main Street on the east and Oak
Street on the west; Alice Street on the north and Sexton Street on the south; Pacific Street west
from Oak Street to Bridge Street; Bridge Street and Judicial Street west from Oak Street to
Meridian Street. (Ord. 2150, 12-6-2016)
7-4A-4: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
No person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle or trailer on the designated streets during the
times set forth in the proclamation. (2003 Code § 10-15-04)
7-4A-5: OTHER PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
In the event any other ordinance, statute or regulation provides for parking restrictions that are more
restrictive than those set forth herein, then such other parking restrictions shall be controlling and may
be enforced in accordance with the terms of such other ordinance, statute or regulation. (2003 Code
§ 10-15-05)
7-4A-6: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES:
Any motor vehicle, motorcycle or trailer parked upon any public street in violation of this article may be
removed at any time at the direction of a police officer and may be towed to, and stored in, any public
or private storage lot, without prior notice to the owner or operator of the vehicle. (2003 Code § 10-15-
06)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 175/528
7-4A-7: PAYMENT OF TOWING AND STORAGE FEES:
The owner or operator of any motor vehicle, motorcycle or trailer towed or stored pursuant to section
7-4A-6 of this article, shall be responsible for all reasonable towing and storage charges of the private
towing company. Such charges shall be paid to the private towing company before the vehicle,
motorcycle or trailer is released. If the vehicle, motorcycle or trailer is towed by city personnel, the
towing charge shall be paid to the city. If the vehicle, motorcycle or trailer is stored on city property, the
storage fee shall be paid to the city. (2003 Code § 10-15-07)
7-4A-8: PENALTY:
Any person who violates this article is guilty of an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 10-15-08; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 5
PEDESTRIANS
7-5-1: SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS:
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore declared in chapter 3 of this title,
but all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights, and be subject to the restrictions, stated
in this chapter. (2003 Code § 10-06-01)
7-5-2: PROHIBITED CROSSING:
No pedestrian shall cross any street except upon the crosswalk thereof where traffic lights are
installed and working. (2003 Code § 10-06-02)
7-5-3: RIGHT OF WAY IN CROSSWALKS:
A. When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the
right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway
within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway
as to be in danger.
B. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
C. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a
vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 176/528
D. At any crosswalk designated and posted as a "Stop For Pedestrian In Crosswalk", the driver of a
vehicle shall stop to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within the crosswalk, until the crosswalk is
unoccupied.
E. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at any
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. (2003 Code § 10-06-
03)
7-5-4: PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS:
A. Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an
adjacent roadway.
B. Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when
practical, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic, which may
approach from the opposite direction. (2003 Code § 10-06-04)
7-5-5: DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE:
Notwithstanding the provisions of this title, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid
colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give precaution upon observing any child or
any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. (2003 Code § 10-06-05)
7-5-6: CITATION AND PENALTY:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter may be charged as an infraction on a uniform state citation
form and processed through the county court system, in which case the fine shall be as designated
under Idaho Code title 49. Alternatively, violations of the provisions of this chapter may be charged on
a city citation form as a city code violation, which shall carry a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall
be processed pursuant to section 1-4-6 of this code. (2003 Code § 10-06-06)
Chapter 6
BICYCLES
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings herein ascribed
to them:
BICYCLE: Every vehicle propelled exclusively by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two (2) tandem wheels, except scooters and similar devices.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 177/528
BIKE LANE: A portion of a roadway designated for preferential or exclusive use by bicycles which is
distinguished from that portion of the roadway to be used by motor vehicles by a painted strip and
other pavement markings.
BIKE PATH: A. A completely separate right of way designated primarily for use by bicycles. Conflicts
with pedestrians are kept to a minimum while cross flows by motor vehicles are discouraged.
B. Bike path shall include both the paved surface and a minimum of two feet (2') on either side.
BIKE PATH APPROACH: That area where a transition is made between a roadway, parking lot,
sidewalk or other facility and a bike path.
BIKE/PEDESTRIAN CURB RAMP: A break in a curb designated to facilitate movement by a bicyclist,
pedestrian or handicapped person from a street or parking lot to a sidewalk or bicycle facility.
BIKE ROUTE: Any roadway specifically signed for shared use by bicycles and motor vehicles. (2003
Code § 10-12-01)
7-6-2: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES:
A. Applicability: Every person, regardless of age, who operates a bicycle upon a roadway, public
parking lot, sidewalk, bike path, bike lane or other public vehicular right of way in the city shall be
granted the same rights and shall be subject to the same responsibilities applicable to a motor
vehicle operator by the laws of the state, and the provisions of this title not in conflict with and as
authorized under Idaho Code title 49; except where provisions of those laws and ordinances by
their very nature can have no application to bicycles, or where portions of this chapter direct
otherwise.
B. Peace Officers:
1. Any "peace officer" of jurisdiction, as defined in Idaho Code section 19-5101(d), operating a
bicycle during the course of his or her duties, is exempt from the requirements of subsection A of
this section if the bicycle is being operated under any of the following circumstances:
a. In response to an emergency call.
b. While engaged in rescue operations.
c. In the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law.
2. This section does not relieve a peace officer from the duty to operate a bicycle with due regard
for the safety of all persons. (2003 Code § 10-12-02)
7-6-3: REQUIRED BICYCLE EQUIPMENT:
No person shall operate a bicycle without the following equipment:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 178/528
A. Brakes capable of causing the bicycle to stop within twenty five feet (25') at ten (10) miles per hour
on dry, level, clean pavement;
B. A permanent seat designed for the bicycle being operated;
C. When in use at nighttime, a red reflector on the rear, visible from a distance of three hundred feet
(300') when directly in front of lawful upper beams of a motor vehicle, and a forward facing white
light attached either to the bicycle or the bicyclist which is visible from a distance of at least five
hundred feet (500') in front of the bicycle. A bicycle shall be equipped with a front facing white or
yellow reflector when the bicyclist uses a generator powered light which is unlit when the bicycle is
stopped. (2003 Code § 10-12-03)
7-6-4: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
A. No person riding or operating a bicycle shall ride other than upon or astride a permanent and
regular seat attached thereto.
B. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed
and equipped.
C. No person shall operate a bicycle that either is too large or too small for such person to operate
safely.
D. Every person operating a bicycle shall keep at least one hand on the handlebar at all times, and
shall carry nothing which prevents full control of the bicycle or obstructs the operator's vision.
(2003 Code § 10-12-04)
7-6-5: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
Persons riding or operating bicycles shall not attach themselves or such bicycles to a moving vehicle.
This section shall not prohibit attaching a trailer device to a bicycle that is designed to accommodate
such a device. (2003 Code § 10-12-05)
7-6-6: RIDING ON ROADWAYS:
A. No person shall operate a bicycle on a roadway against the flow of motorized traffic, except where
permitted by official signs or pavement markings.
B. Every person operating a bicycle upon a two-way roadway shall be entitled to use the right hand
lane and shall proceed in the same direction of travel as other vehicles in that lane. On one-way
roadways, a bicycle may be operated in any existing lane.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 179/528
C. The operator of a bicycle traveling at a rate of speed which delays a vehicle or vehicles following in
the same lane shall be required, when it is unlawful or unsafe for the following vehicle to pass, to
move as far to the right of the traveled roadway, or to the left where the bicycle is in the left lane of
a one-way roadway, as is safe under the conditions then existing; provided, however, that when
the bicyclist is within fifty feet (50') of an intersection, he shall not be required to move to the right
or left until he has moved through the intersection. (2003 Code § 10-12-06)
7-6-7: USING PROVIDED BIKE LANES AND BIKE PATHS:
A. Wherever a bike lane is present upon a roadway, a bicyclist shall use that lane and shall not use
the roadway; except that the bicyclist shall not be required to use or remain in a bike lane:
1. When the lane is of insufficient width to permit safe bicycle operation;
2. When the condition of the pavement, or the presence of water, dirt, glass or other foreign objects
upon the pavement prevents safe bicycle operation in the lane;
3. When moving into position to make a right or left turn;
4. When an opening car door or other obstruction in an adjacent parking lane requires movement
out of the lane.
B. Wherever a bike path has been provided immediately adjacent to a roadway, a bicyclist shall use
that path and shall not use the roadway if official signs or markings so direct; except that a bicyclist
shall not be required to use or remain on a bike path:
1. When the path is of insufficient width to permit safe bicycle operation; or
2. When the condition of the surface, or the presence of water, dirt, glass or other foreign objects
upon the surface prevents safe bicycle operation on the path. (2003 Code § 10-12-07)
7-6-8: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS:
A. A bicycle may be operated upon a sidewalk and upon and within a crosswalk, except where
prohibited by official traffic control devices.
B. Any bicyclist riding upon a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and within a crosswalk, shall yield
the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible warning before overtaking and passing
such pedestrian.
C. A bicyclist riding upon a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and within a crosswalk, shall have all
the rights and duties applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances. (2003 Code § 10-
12-08)
7-6-9: PASSING OTHER VEHICLES:
The operator of a bicycle may pass another vehicle upon the right when traveling on a two-way
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 180/528
roadway and may pass on the left when traveling in the left lane of a one-way roadway, but only under
conditions permitting such movement in safety. A bicyclist shall not pass between two (2) lanes of
motor vehicles proceeding in the same direction. (2003 Code § 10-12-09)
7-6-10: BICYCLIST NOT REQUIRED TO DISMOUNT WHEN STOPPING:
Whenever a bicycle operator is required to bring the bicycle to a stop in conformance with the official
traffic control devices, the operator shall halt forward motion, but shall not be required to dismount or
remove his/her feet from the pedals. (2003 Code § 10-12-10)
7-6-11: TURN SIGNALS:
The operator of a bicycle intending to turn shall signal his intent to turn with the appropriate hand and
arm signal at least one hundred feet (100') prior to turning. The hand signal need not be continuous.
(2003 Code § 10-12-11)
7-6-12: RIDING IN GROUPS:
Persons riding bicycles shall not ride more than two (2) abreast, except upon bike paths of twelve feet
(12') or more. Bicyclists operating two (2) abreast upon a roadway or bike path shall return to a single
file configuration when a vehicle approaches from behind in the same lane. (2003 Code § 10-12-12)
7-6-13: BICYCLE PARKING:
Bicycles shall not be parked in such a manner as to obstruct or impede the movement of pedestrians,
motor vehicles or other bicycles, or to cause damage to trees, shrubs or other living plants. (2003
Code § 10-12-13)
7-6-14: USE OF BIKE PATHS AND BIKE LANES BY OTHER NONMOTORIZED
MODES OF TRANSPORTATION:
A. When a pedestrian is traveling upon a bike path or bike lane:
1. A bicyclist approaching the pedestrian from the rear shall be required to give audible warning
when overtaking and passing such pedestrian;
2. A bicyclist and a pedestrian approaching each other shall each be required to move to and
remain upon their right hand half of the surface.
B. A bicyclist shall always yield the right of way to a pedestrian who is physically disabled. (2003 Code
§ 10-12-14)
7-6-15: GROUP EVENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 181/528
A bicycle race, parade or other group event for bicyclists may be conducted upon public rights of way
in the city if a permit is obtained. Permit applications shall be made through the office of the city clerk.
(2003 Code § 10-12-15)
7-6-16: UNLAWFUL USE OF BIKE LANES AND BIKE PATHS:
It shall be unlawful for any person without authorization from the local authority having jurisdiction
thereof to cut, alter, break, injure, damage or perform work upon any bike path or bike lane in the city.
(2003 Code § 10-12-16)
7-6-17: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction,
subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 10-12-17; amd. 2012
Code)
Chapter 7
ABANDONED, UNATTENDED VEHICLES; REMOVAL
7-7-1: AUTHORITY TO TOW OR CONTRACT TOWING:
The city may enter into one or more exclusive contracts with one or more towing operators for
purposes of ensuring safe and consistent towing services at reasonable prices. (2003 Code § 10-07-
07)
Title 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
8-1-1: OILING STREETS:
A. Notice Of Intent To Oil Streets: The street department must give notice of its intent to oil streets in
the city not less than twelve (12) nor more than thirty (30) hours prior to the time such oiling is to
commence. Such notice is to be given by the posting of notice thereof at a conspicuous place at
the beginning and at the end points on such street where the oiling will be done. (2003 Code § 3-
06-03)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 182/528
B. Operation Of Vehicles On Oiled Streets: No person owning or operating an automobile shall
operate such automobile on said street after the commencement of oiling operations, unless with
permission of the superintendent of streets, and any and all persons owning or having the control
of any automobile shall remove the same from the vicinity of such oiling operations on such street
prior to the commencement of such operations, and in the event such oiling operation be
commenced, if, in the opinion of the superintendent of streets, any automobile parked on or in the
vicinity of such street is in danger of being sprayed by such oil, or if such superintendent believes
that such automobile should be removed for any other reason whatsoever, said superintendent
may cause said automobile to be towed from such location to a city parking lot. The charge for
such towing to be at the expense of the owner or operator of such automobile. The automobile not
to be returned to the owner or operator until such charge be paid. (2003 Code § 3-06-04)
C. Streets Blockaded: Immediately prior to the commencement of such oiling operations, the
superintendent of streets shall cause the street to be oiled to be blockaded to all unauthorized
travel. (2003 Code § 3-06-05)
8-1-2: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS:
A. Owner Or Occupant Responsibility: Owners, tenants or occupants of any premises within the city
abutting or adjoining any public sidewalk shall remove all snow and ice from any such sidewalk.
B. Notice To Remove: It shall be the duty of the city to notify any owner, tenant or occupant of property
herein described to remove or otherwise correct the objectionable matters herein legislated
against, which notice shall be sent by registered mail to the last known address of such owner,
tenant or occupant, notifying him that he has a period of twenty four (24) hours from and after
receipt of such notice within which to correct or otherwise remove the objections set forth in said
notice.
C. Removal By City; Cost Of Lien: Upon failure of the owner, tenant or occupant of said premises to
comply with the terms and conditions of said notice, then and in that event the city shall have the
right to remove such snow and ice and assess the cost thereof against the premises abutting the
sidewalks. Such assessment shall be certified to the county assessor or other proper county
official having charge of the making of the assessment roll, and such assessment shall be placed
on the assessment roll and collected in the same manner as other municipal taxes are collected.
(2003 Code § 8-01-01)
D. Penalty: Unless otherwise stated herein, a violation of any provision in this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 8-01-
14; amd. 2012 Code)
8-1-3: OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC SIDEWALKS:
A. Definitions:
OBSTRUCTIONS: A hindrance, obstacle or barrier interfering with the use of a public sidewalk,
including merchandise offered or displayed for sale thereon, or any other impediment placed on
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 183/528
said sidewalk without approval of the governing body. The word obstruction shall not be deemed
to include within its meaning any of the following impediments:
1. An obstruction of a temporary character incidental to a lawful use, such as an obstruction
relating to the improvement or repair of the sidewalk.
2. An obstruction made, created or caused by the city in order to serve some necessary public
purpose, such as beautification planters, parking meters, traffic control signs or devices, or
other such obstructions installed at the instruction of the governing body.
3. An obstruction for a temporary period caused by loading or unloading merchandise
necessary with reference to the business of the user and with reasonable reference to the
rights of the public.
4. An obstruction created by the temporary use of the sidewalk as a place for depositing
building materials while the adjacent property owner is making improvements on his land,
with reasonable reference to rights of the public.
5. An obstruction placed in, under, over or on a public sidewalk with express permission of the
governing body.
PUBLIC SIDEWALKS: That part of a public street or highway in the city designed for the use of
pedestrians and being exclusively reserved for them. The term public sidewalk shall not be
interpreted as meaning any part of a sidewalk that leads to the entrance of a private residence.
B. Public Sidewalk Obstructions:
1. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity shall cause an obstruction to be placed in,
upon, over or under a public sidewalk.
2. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity owning or occupying property shall place, allow
to be placed, nor allow to grow, any obstruction over a public sidewalk closer than seven and
one-half feet (71/2') above any such sidewalk. (2003 Code § 8-01-02)
C. Penalty: Unless otherwise stated herein, a violation of any provision in this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 8-01-
14; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 2
SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
8-2-1: OWNER DUTY TO CONSTRUCT, REPAIR OR REPLACE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 184/528
It is the duty of the person owning or having control of real property along or abutting any curb or
sidewalk, to construct, repair or replace the curb or sidewalk so as to provide safe, all weather
passage for pedestrians, and to provide adequate street drainage and pavement protection, for the
safety and convenience of the traveling public. (2003 Code § 8-01-03)
8-2-2: ABILITY TO REQUIRE CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT:
A. Specified: If the city council finds that curbs or sidewalks are dangerous and unsafe, requiring
construction, repair or replacement thereof, the city council may, at its option:
1. Serve written notice on the owner or person in control of the real property adjacent to the curb or
sidewalk, informing that person of the unsafe condition and requiring that person to construct,
repair or replace the curb or sidewalk, as specified by the city council, within twenty one (21)
days after receipt of the notice. In the event the necessary construction, repair or replacement
does not take place, the city council may proceed according to subsection B of this section; or
2. Provide, by general ordinance, for the construction, repair or replacement of the unsafe curb or
sidewalk, and assess the cost thereof to the adjacent property owner. Collection of the
assessment may be done pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-1008.
B. Establishing Local Improvement District: Nothing herein shall preclude the city council from
establishing a local improvement district for the construction, repair or replacement of curbs and
sidewalks, pursuant to Idaho Code title 50, chapter 17. (2003 Code § 8-01-04)
8-2-3: INSPECTION:
It is hereby made the duty of the public works director to cause an inspection to be made from time to
time of the condition of the sidewalks of the city, and when, in his judgment, any sidewalks are
dangerous or unsafe for public travel, he shall report his finding to the city council, and it shall cause
the sidewalks to be removed, replaced or repaired as occasion may require in order to ensure safety
for pedestrians. (2003 Code § 8-01-05)
8-2-4: IMPROVEMENT ORDERS:
Upon receiving the report specified in section 8-2-3 of this chapter, the city council shall ascertain the
necessity of making such improvements, and if, in the opinion of the city council, the same should be
made, an order shall be entered upon its minutes, giving the name of the owner, if known; if not
known, it shall be listed to "unknown owners", with the description of the property affected and the
nature of the improvement required, which shall designate that the improvement shall be made within
thirty (30) days after service or publication of notice as provided in section 8-2-5 of this chapter. (2003
Code § 8-01-06)
8-2-5: NOTICE OF ORDER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 185/528
A. Procedure: A notice of the contents of the order provided for in section 8-2-4 of this chapter shall be
served upon the owner of the property adjoining the proposed improvement, and due return of the
service of such notice shall be made and placed on file in the office of the city clerk; provided,
however, that said notice may be served either by personal service, or by registered mail
addressed to the location of the property; provided, further, that when any property is owned by a
corporation, association, stock company or other entity, notice shall be served upon the president,
secretary or other managing agent thereof in the same manner as herein provided.
B. Unknown Owner: Whenever the property adjoining the proposed improvement is unoccupied, and
the whereabouts of the owner is unknown, the notice shall be published for two (2) consecutive
issues in an official newspaper of the city. If the owner is unknown, it shall be sufficient to
designate the owner as "unknown owners", with a description of the property proposed to be
improved, together with a description of the character of the improvement required, and proof of
any such publication shall be filed with the city clerk. (2003 Code § 8-01-07)
8-2-6: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
In the event of the property owner failing to comply with the terms of the notice within the time
hereinbefore specified, after the service or publication of same, the city shall be deemed to have
acquired jurisdiction to make the improvements and shall proceed to remove, replace and repair with
standard material any such sidewalk according to the specifications of this chapter, under the
supervision and direction of the public works director, who shall keep an accurate account of the cost
and expense of said improvement, and forthwith certify the same to the city council. (2003 Code § 8-
01-08; amd. 2012 Code)
8-2-7: ASSESSMENT ROLL:
The city clerk shall provide an assessment roll, to be known as "assessment roll for sidewalk
improvements", which shall contain appropriate columns for the name of the property owner,
description of the property and the amount of assessment. The city council shall examine the
expenditures certified to by the public works director, and if found correct, shall order the city clerk to
enter same in the assessment roll herein provided, and from and after such entry the amount charged
against the property shall be and the same is hereby made a lien thereon to the same extent and in
like manner as other special assessments authorized to be levied by the city. (2003 Code § 8-01-09;
amd. 2012 Code)
8-2-8: DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS:
The assessment shall bear interest at the rate of interest permitted for judgments pursuant to Idaho
Code from and after the entry thereof in the assessment roll, and the city clerk shall, as soon as may
be, after the completion of the assessment roll, give notice to the property owners therein affected, to
pay their assessments, as now required by law, and if not paid within the time specified in said notice,
the same shall become delinquent, and a penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added, and the
assessment, together with accrued interest and the penalty, shall be certified to the county tax
collector and be by him placed upon the tax roll for collection, and same shall be collected in the same
manner, with like effect and subject to the same penalties, as other city taxes. (2003 Code § 8-01-10)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 186/528
8-2-9: SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS:
All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications published in the
Idaho standards for public works construction and on file in the office of the public works department.
(2003 Code § 8-01-11)
8-2-10: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to lay and construct any cement sidewalk or curbing within the
public right of way in the city, without having first obtained from the building department a permit so
to do. (2003 Code § 8-01-12; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Applications for permit shall state the exact and correct description of the property in front of which
said sidewalk and curb is to be laid, owner of the premises, name of applicant for permit and width
of sidewalk. The acceptance of a permit by the building official to lay and construct a sidewalk or
curbing in the city by any person shall be deemed an agreement on the part of such person to
construct said sidewalk and curb in accordance with the specifications herein provided for. It shall
be unlawful for any person to construct any such sidewalk or curbing in violation of the
specifications herein set out. All sidewalks and curbs constructed under permit shall be subject to
the supervision and inspection of the department of public works. (2003 Code § 8-01-12)
8-2-11: STAMPING NAME OF CONTRACTOR:
Every person who shall lay or cause to be laid any sidewalks within the corporate limits shall plainly
stamp or print into said sidewalk the name of the person by whom the sidewalk was laid, together with
the year the sidewalk was laid. Letters and figures of not less than one inch (1") in width and of not
more than two inches (2") in height shall be used, and with spaces of not more than one inch (1")
between said letters and figures shall be stamped or printed at each end of any portion of sidewalk
constructed at any one time and in case the portion of sidewalk constructed at any one time shall
exceed one hundred fifty feet (150') in length, the name and date shall be stamped or printed at each
end and at intervals of every one hundred fifty feet (150') on said sidewalk. (2003 Code § 8-01-13)
8-2-12: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise stated herein, a violation of any provision in this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 8-01-14;
amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 3
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY CONSTRUCTION;
EXCAVATIONS
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 187/528
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed below:
ACT: The underground facilities damage prevention act as set forth in Idaho Code section 55-2201 et
seq.
CONSTRUCTION: The construction, placement or laying of any asphalt or concrete pavement,
sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter, water line, sanitary sewer line, storm drain line, telephone line,
electrical line, cable TV line, gas line or any other similar structure or appurtenant facilities in any
street, alley, easement or other public right of way of the city.
EXCAVATION: Any operation in which earth, rock or other material in the ground is moved or
otherwise displaced by any means, including, but not limited to, explosives.
EXCAVATOR: Any person who engages directly in excavation.
REPAIR: The improvement, alteration, modification or replacement of any asphalt or concrete
pavement, sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter, water line, sanitary sewer line, storm drain line, telephone
line, conduit or facilities, electrical line, cable TV line, gas line or facilities, or any other structure or
facilities in any street, alley, easement or other public right of way of the city.
UNDERGROUND FACILITY: Any item buried or placed belowground for use in connection with the
storage or conveyance of water, unless being delivered primarily for irrigation, sewage, electronic
signal, telephonic or telegraphic communications, cable television, fiber optic, electrical energy,
petroleum products, gas, gaseous vapors, hazardous liquids or other substances, including, but not
limited to, pipes, sewers, conduits, cables, valves, lines, wires, manholes, attachments and those
parts of poles or anchors located belowground.
WORKING DAYS: All days except Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.
WORKING HOURS: The hours from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. of any working
day. (2003 Code § 8-06-01)
8-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in any construction, repair or excavation in any street, alley, easement or
other public right of way within the city without first obtaining a permit from the city. No permit under
this chapter shall be valid until or unless the notice provisions of Idaho Code section 55-2201 et seq.,
have been complied with. The permit shall clearly define the area within which the permittee may do
such construction, repair or excavation. A copy of the permit shall be kept on file with the city for a
period of not less than five (5) years after its issuance. (2003 Code § 8-06-02)
8-3-3: EXCEPTIONS TO PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
Unless facts exist which would reasonably cause an excavator to believe that an underground facility
exists within the depth of the intended excavation, a permit shall not be required for the following
excavations:
A. The tilling of soil to a depth of less than fifteen inches (15") for agricultural purposes;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 188/528
B. For replacement of highway guardrail posts, signposts, delineator posts, culverts, electric poles,
telephone poles and traffic control device supports in the same location and depth of the replaced
item within a public highway right of way. (2003 Code § 8-06-03)
8-3-4: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No permit shall be issued pursuant to this chapter unless the applicant presents with the application,
or has on file with the public works director, a certificate of insurance from an insurance company
qualified to write insurance contracts within the state, certifying that the applicant has a policy of public
liability insurance in an amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) single
limit liability for personal injury, death and property damage; provided, however, if the work to be done
under the permit is limited to excavation in an easement situated entirely on private property or is for
construction of a concrete sidewalk, driveway or curb and gutter within a street right of way, but
parallel with and adjacent to private property, the amount of such insurance shall be not less than one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) single limit for personal injury, death and property damage.
Said insurance policy shall contain a clause requiring that the city be given at least thirty (30) days'
advance written notice in the event of expiration or anticipated cancellation. The permit shall be
revoked at the time such insurance expires or is canceled unless a certificate of comparable insurance
is filed with the public works director prior to the time of cancellation or expiration of the original policy
of insurance. (2003 Code § 8-06-04)
8-3-5: BOND REQUIRED:
A. Before a permit may be issued hereunder, the applicant for a permit must furnish and leave on file
with the city clerk either a cash bond or a corporate surety bond issued by a company licensed to
do business in the state, and in a form approved by the city, in an amount equal to one hundred
twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated cost of restoration conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the applicant and permittee that it will fix and replace the restoration work with
respect to such streets, alleys, fixtures or other property located in, under or over such streets or
alleys, and so affected by such work, to the satisfaction of the city; and such bond shall be further
conditioned that in the event of the failure of applicant and permittee to do such restoration work,
the city may recover from said cash so deposited, or from the surety of such bond so posted, all
costs and expenses to be incurred by the city to see that the street or alley, and other fixtures or
property, is restored to a satisfactory condition, the penalty of such bond to cover any legal
expenses and court costs which may be incurred by the city for the purpose of securing faithful
compliance with the application and permit; and conditioned further that said bond shall be
deemed to continue in full force and effect until the public works director shall have issued a
completion certificate.
B. Provided, however, that in lieu of the foregoing bond, any person, firm, or corporation may provide
a continuous surety performance bond in a reasonable amount issued by a company licensed to
do business in the state, and in a form to be approved by the city, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of such person, firm or corporation to the following effect: that if such person, firm or
corporation secures a permit under this chapter, that permittee shall comply with all the rules,
regulations, orders, requirements and obligations as required to be complied with by a person, firm
or corporation furnishing a bond as required above; provided, further, that if the aggregate of the
estimated cost of restoration work of all projects of an applicant or permittee in progress at any one
time exceeds the amount of such continuous surety performance bond, then the amount of such
bond must be increased to cover the aggregate of the estimated costs of all restoration projects
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 189/528
with which applicant permittee is connected and for which a completion certificate has not been
issued. Such blanket performance bond may be adjusted, from time to time, to coincide with the
requirement of the amount of such bond must equal the aggregate estimated cost of all restoration
work not then completed.
C. No permit hereunder will be issued to an applicant who is delinquent for thirty (30) days or more
with respect to restoration costs for which applicant has been previously billed.
D. The city may proceed against and collect from the bond or bonding company of an applicant
permittee for any restoration charges which have been billed and which have not been paid within
thirty (30) days after billing. (2003 Code § 8-06-14)
8-3-6: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Applications for construction, repair and excavation permits shall be made at the office of public
works. The application shall state the applicant's name, business or home address, the applicant's city
right of way contractor's license number (if any), telephone number, the location of the construction,
the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property where such repair or
excavation will occur, the date notification was given to all one number locator services or the owner of
any underground public facility, as defined under the act, and the nature of the work to be performed
at the location specified. If the applicant complies with the provisions of this chapter and the proposed
construction, repair or excavation work complies with this code and will not endanger public health,
safety or welfare, the city shall issue the permit, provided the city may issue the permit subject to such
conditions as are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. No permit shall be issued
to any person who does not possess all licenses required by state or local law. (2003 Code § 8-06-05)
8-3-7: ADOPTION OF IDAHO STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC WORKS
CONSTRUCTION:
The Idaho standards for public works construction document, 2005 edition (ISPWC), hereby is
adopted by the city, to be used for construction and quality control of public works infrastructure
projects. A copy of the ISPWC document may be obtained from the public works department. All
subsequent editions and/or supplements to the ISPWC document, hereby automatically are adopted
by the city as they become available unless one or more sections or parts specifically are excluded by
resolution or ordinance. (2003 Code § 8-06-16; amd. 2012 Code)
8-3-8: LOCATION OF MAINS AND LINES; PROCEDURE:
If the permittee desires the city to locate any water main, sewer main or other utility line, the permittee
shall give written or oral notice to the public works director or his designated representative not more
than seven (7) working days nor less than one working day prior to commencing construction, repair
or excavation. If the permittee, after commencing work, shall cease construction, repair or excavation
for more than one working day, then notice shall again be given to the public works director or his
designated representative not more than seven (7) working days nor less than one working day prior
to the time when construction, repair or excavation shall again commence. (2003 Code § 8-06-06)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 190/528
8-3-9: COMPLETION OF WORK AND BACKFILLING:
All work shall be expeditiously performed and completed as soon as reasonably possible. Upon
completion of construction or repair, the permittee shall promptly backfill any street, alley, easement or
other public right of way in which permittee has made any excavation. All work and backfilling shall be
done in accordance with the city standard drawings and engineering specifications adopted by the
city. (2003 Code § 8-06-07)
A. This subsection covers the work of installing nonshrink backfill materials in certain trench cuts
located within the city of Blackfoot rights of way. The city of Blackfoot maintains an IWORQ's
pavement management system that grades all rights of way on a scale of 1 to 10, with a 10 being
a right of way in excellent condition. This subsection shall apply to all trench cuts within rights of
way that are designated as a 4 or higher. The designation is available from the city of Blackfoot at
the time of obtaining a permit for the trench cut.
All requirements for excavation shall meet with the city of Blackfoot specifications when working
within the city's rights of way.
After the permittee has excavated and disposed of all material from the trench area and upon
completion of the installation and testing of the installed line, the permittee shall wrap all
mechanical fittings with plastic sheeting (minimum 4 mil) in a manner which will prevent bonding of
the nonshrink material to the fitting. The permittee shall then place compact gravel to a level of one
foot (1') above the installed line. The permittee shall then place nonshrink backfill material in the
trench using a method that fills all voids to the top of the existing subgrade elevation. After
sufficient time for the nonshrink backfill material to cure in order to carry the traffic loads, the
permittee shall then replace the asphalt plant mix surfacing and aggregate base in accordance
with specifications of the city of Blackfoot.
The nonshrink backfill material shall be encasement concrete with a minimum cement content of
fifty (50) pounds to the cubic yard, maximum water to cement ratio of 0.80, a maximum slump of
ten (10), and a zero to ten percent (10%) air content.
All backfilling made pursuant to this subsection shall be supervised at the time of backfilling and
approved by a representative of the street department of the city of Blackfoot. The permittee must
schedule in advance with the street department for a representative to be present at the time of the
backfill. (Ord. 2128, 1-6-2015, eff. 1-6-2015)
8-3-10: TIME TO COMPLETE REPAIRS:
Permanent asphalt repairs shall be completed by the permittee not later than three (3) days after the
excavation has been backfilled, unless otherwise authorized by the public works director or his
designated representative. If weather conditions prohibit permanent repairs, the public works director,
or his designated representative, may authorize the use and installation of temporary cold patches.
Such temporary cold patches shall be replaced by the permittee as soon as weather permits. (2003
Code § 8-06-08)
8-3-11: MAINTENANCE AND SAFEGUARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 191/528
The permittee shall continuously maintain the construction, repair or excavation site in a safe condition
and keep the site free from any condition that may cause risk of harm to any person or property at all
times after the work has commenced and until all work, including permanent patching, has been
completed and accepted by the city. During such time, the permittee also shall provide, install and
continuously maintain proper safeguards, signs and barricades at the construction, repair or
excavation site. Such signs and barricades shall conform to the requirements and standards set forth
in the most recent edition of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" published by the U.S.
department of transportation, federal highway administration, or any other manual adopted by the
state department of transportation, pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code section 49-201. (2003
Code § 8-06-09)
8-3-12: WARRANTY OF REPAIRS:
The permittee shall warrant to the city the adequacy and continued satisfactory condition and function
of all backfill and permanent patches installed by permittee or by any agent or employee of permittee
for a period of one year after the permanent patch has been accepted by the public works director.
Such warranty shall extend only to any unsatisfactory condition or function caused by inferior design,
workmanship and materials furnished by permittee or by any agent or employee of permittee. (2003
Code § 8-06-10)
8-3-13: REPAIRS BY CITY:
If the permittee fails to install permanent patching within three (3) days after completion of backfill, or if
the permittee fails to honor the warranty set forth in section 8-3-12 of this chapter after demand by the
city, the city may complete the work and make such repairs. If such repairs are completed by the city,
the city may charge the cost of the repairs to the permittee. The cost of repairs shall be based upon
the actual charges and cost to the city of repairs at the time the repair was completed. If the permittee
is charged with the city's costs of repairs, the permittee shall pay such cost within five (5) days after
the city has given written notice to permittee of the cost. (2003 Code § 8-06-11)
8-3-14: REMEDY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
If any permittee fails to perform any duty imposed by this chapter, or if any permittee fails to pay the
costs assessed pursuant to section 8-3-13 of this chapter within the time provided therein, the city, at
its option and upon prior written notice to permittee, may suspend or revoke any contractor's license
issued by the city to the permittee, cancel or revoke all permits held by the permittee and refuse to
issue to the permittee further permits for construction, repair or excavation in public rights of way or
easements of the city. In addition to the foregoing remedies, a misdemeanor criminal action may be
filed against the permittee for violating this chapter. (2003 Code § 8-06-12)
8-3-15: NO DUTY UPON CITY:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to impose any private duty or obligation upon the
city to properly or accurately locate any utility line or facility or to ensure that a permittee fully complies
with the provisions hereof. (2003 Code § 8-06-13)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 192/528
8-3-16: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise stated herein, a violation of any provision in this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 8-06-15)
Chapter 4
ENCROACHMENTS
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have
the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular, and words in the singular number include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ENCROACH: The use, intrusion, enclosure or occupation of a street, sidewalk, parkway or the unused
portion of a street.
OBSTRUCTION: Any obstacle or thing impeding, or inconveniencing or rendering dangerous, public
travel upon and along a street, alley or sidewalk.
PARKWAY: That portion of public right of way situated between the curb line of any street and the
property line of property abutting and adjoining any street. In the absence of a curb, the curb line of a
street shall be deemed to be the edge of that portion of public right of way maintained and open to the
use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any
kind.
SIDEWALK: The portion of the parkway of a street set aside and intended for the use of pedestrians.
STREET: Highways, roads, alleys and bridges dedicated, purchased or otherwise acquired for the
public, including the unimproved or unused portion thereof, maintained and open to use by the public.
(2003 Code § 8-04-01)
8-4-2: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except as provided by this chapter:
A. To cause, create or maintain any encroachment, or obstruction, upon or within any street.
B. To place, install or maintain any object, substance or matter in lieu of trees, shrubs, bushes, grass
or vegetation upon or within any street.
C. To erect or maintain poles, wires, pipes or structures upon or below the surface of any street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 193/528
D. To drive any vehicle or ride an animal upon any sidewalk or parkway. (2003 Code § 8-04-02)
8-4-3: PLANTINGS OR MATERIALS IN PARKWAY; PERMIT:
A. Application For Permit: Any owner or occupant of property abutting and adjoining any street may,
upon and within the parkway of such street:
1. Improve, adorn or plant trees, shrubs, bushes, grass or vegetation; and
2. Place, install and maintain any object, substance or matter in lieu of trees, shrubs, bushes,
grass or vegetation.
Provided such owner or occupant shall first file an application for a permit with the building
official, who shall have exclusive jurisdiction and supervision over any planting of trees, shrubs,
bushes, grass or vegetation, or the installation and maintenance of objects, substances or
matters in lieu of trees, shrubs, bushes, grass or vegetation upon and within the parkway of a
street. All permits as herein provided shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Rejection Of Permit; Appeal To Council: In the event an application for a permit is rejected by the
building official, the owner or occupant of property may, within ten (10) days following the date of
the rejection of such application by the city, appeal to the city council. (2003 Code § 8-04-03)
8-4-4: ENCROACHMENT PERMIT; APPLICATION AND CONDITIONS:
A. Application For Permit: A person seeking to encroach, obstruct or use a street, sidewalk or
parkway, including the unused or unimproved portion of a street, must file an application with the
building official, who shall present the same for the approval or disapproval of the city council. The
application shall include plans and specifications of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and
extent of the proposed obstruction, encroachment, or use of the street, sidewalk or parkway by
which to demonstrate that relevant provisions of this code and other relevant laws, ordinances,
rules, regulations and orders will be complied with, the legal description of the property abutting the
street, sidewalk or parkway upon or within which such encroachment, obstruction or the use shall
be or is intended to be performed, and any other additional information necessary to make a fair
determination of whether to allow or permit the encroachment, obstruction or use.
B. Conditions Of Permit: A permit granted pursuant to the provisions of subsection A of this section
shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. Limited Rights Of Permittee: The person to whom a permit is given or granted shall acquire no
property or contractual right in and to the street, sidewalk or parkway and such permit may be
revoked whenever the city council deems it necessary as a proper police measure.
2. Compliance With Regulations: The person to whom a permit is issued shall comply with all laws,
orders and regulations of the city and with any direction of any public officer, pursuant to law,
which shall impose any duty upon such person, or such person shall at his sole expense obtain
all licenses or permits which may be required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 194/528
3. Indemnification; Insurance Required: The person to whom a permit is issued shall indemnify and
save and hold harmless the city from and for any and all losses, claims, actions and judgments
for damages or injuries to persons or property and losses and expenses caused or incurred by
the permittee, its servants, agents, employees, guests and business invitees. In addition, the
permittee shall maintain and keep in full force and effect liability insurance in which the city shall
be named as a named insured in amounts established by the city council. The limits of insurance
shall not be deemed a limitation of the permittee's covenant to indemnify and save and hold
harmless the city.
4. Restoration By Permittee: Upon revocation of any permit given or granted, or in case of any
disturbance or damage to pavement, sidewalk or other surface or structure, permittee shall, at its
own expense, and in the manner required by the city, replace and restore such in a condition
acceptable to the city. (2003 Code § 8-04-04)
8-4-5: ILLEGAL OBSTRUCTIONS; ABATEMENT:
A. Removal Required: If any encroachment or obstruction has been placed, installed, erected and
maintained, or a use made and maintained for private or business purposes, upon a street,
sidewalk or parkway without prior permission and consent, the building official shall, in writing,
require immediate removal thereof. (2003 Code § 8-04-06)
B. Removal By City; Costs: If such encroachment or obstruction or use has not been removed, or
commenced to be removed, and diligently prosecuted, prior to the expiration of ten (10) days from
such notification, by the person who caused or owns or controls the encroachment, or obstruction,
or use, the official must commence proper action to abate the same as a nuisance, and if judgment
is recovered in favor of the city, the owner, occupant or person maintaining such nuisance may, in
addition to having the same abated, be charged a fee in such amount as established by resolution
of the city council for every day such nuisance remained after notice as well as all costs. (2003
Code § 8-04-06; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 5
STREET NAMES AND ADDRESSES
8-5-1: PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY:
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of providing uniform street name and address number grid
systems, and for proper administration and enforcement of these systems. This chapter shall apply to
all lands within the city. (2003 Code § 8-02-01)
8-5-2: DESIGNATION OF STREET NAMES:
There hereby is established in the city the following rules and regulations of the naming of streets. The
street names presently in place and previously passed by the city council hereby are established.
Thereafter, all new streets shall be established in accordance with the same general standards
hereinafter set forth and made a part of the official street name list.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 195/528
A. Standards: The following standards shall be used in determining or approving street names:
1. Duplication Of Names Prohibited: There shall be no duplication of street names by sound or
spelling within any address numbering grid system area. Differentiation shall not be by the
addition of suffixes such as "road", "street", "lane", etc. Street and road name duplications may
be permitted only where the streets involved are situated within two (2) or more separate
addressing grid system areas, when it can be determined that such duplication will not cause
confusion or jeopardize the public safety.
2. Future Street Dedications: Names for future street dedications shall be suggested by the person
or agency proposing the street dedication, subject to all provisions of this chapter. The planning
and zoning commission shall determine what constitutes a separate street.
3. Suffixes: The following suffixes shall be used in designating street names:
a. Street: An east-west right of way generally running in a straight line that provides vehicular
and pedestrian access to adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been legally
accepted, except streets in existence at this date.
b. Avenue: A north-south right of way generally running in a straight line that provides vehicular
and pedestrian access to adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been legally
accepted, except avenues in existence at this date.
c. Drive: A right of way generally meandering in an east-west direction that provides vehicular
and pedestrian access to adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been legally
accepted.
d. Way: A right of way generally meandering in a north-south direction that provides vehicular
and pedestrian access to adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been legally
accepted.
e. Court: An east-west dead end street connecting to a drive or street at one end only and at the
other end providing a cul-de-sac with a radius of forty five feet (45') at the face of curb to the
center of the circle.
f. Place: A north-south dead end street connecting to a drive or street at one end only and at the
other end providing a cul-de-sac with a radius of forty five feet (45') at the face of curb to the
center of the circle.
g. Lane: A private street, officially accepted as such, but not maintained by the city or the county.
Its acceptance is based upon an application request and approval. Any private lane that has
two (2) or more addresses must be officially named.
h. Boulevard: Normally eighty foot (80') or greater right of way which provides vehicular and
pedestrian access to adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been officially accepted
by the city or county and which is separated by a median strip, usually landscaped.
i. Road: A designated major arterial which extends to both urban and rural areas, dedicated and
maintained by the city or county.
4. Circle Or Dead End Streets: Five (5) platted lots or less coming immediately off of any right of
way shall carry the suffix "circle" after the name of the street from which it emerges and shall be
numbered according to the grid of such street. Short dead end streets with five (5) or less
addresses, coming immediately off of a road of arterial or collector status, may also be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 196/528
designated as "circles" and carry the name of the streets from which they emerge, if such dead
end streets will not or cannot be extended and provided with their own names in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
5. Existing Names; Preference: Where the proposed street is on the same alignment, and is a
continuation of an existing street, the name of the existing street shall be applied. Where a street
is on the same alignment but is not linked to an existing street, the planning and zoning
commission shall designate a name, giving preference to existing names.
6. One Designation: Where a proposed street dedication unites two (2) differently named streets
located on the same alignment, the planning and zoning commission shall designate one of the
existing names.
7. Prefixes: Streets may be given the prefix "north", "south", "east" or "west" if they cross address
numbering grid system baselines.
8. Change In Direction: If a street makes a very obvious change in direction, a new street name
shall be assigned. Whenever this situation occurs, the change of street name should occur at an
intersection rather than the point where the direction changes.
B. Private Streets:
1. Official List: Officially accepted private streets (lanes) shall be listed on an official street name
list with the accompanying designation of "private". Applications for private street names must be
made to and approved by the planning and zoning commission. Names used must not conflict
with any existing street names, public or private.
2. Street Signs:
a. The city shall make, install and maintain street signs on private streets at approved locations.
The financial obligations for the sign or signs shall be the owners of properties which front
upon such streets.
b. Any private street off of an officially accepted street shall have signs indicating its name and
status as "private".
C. Subdivisions:
1. Shown On Plats: Proposed subdivision street names shall be shown on preliminary and final
subdivision plats when submitted to the planning and zoning commission. The commission shall
not approve such plats until the street names have been checked against the official street name
map and list.
2. Partial And Half Streets: All half streets or partial streets shall be named in accordance with the
definitions here noted.
3. Overall Theme: Subdividers shall be encouraged to use an overall theme when naming their
streets.
4. Determination Of Names: It shall be the decision of the commission to determine what name is
to be used when two (2) or more streets are in alignment.
5. Plat Approval: No plat shall be approved by the city council for filing until all provisions of this
chapter have been complied with. Approval of a final plat for filing in the county recorder's office
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 197/528
shall constitute acceptance of all street names shown thereon.
6. Street Signs: It shall be the responsibility of any subdivider dedicating a new street to finance
street name signs at each and every intersection.
D. Changes In Street Names:
1. Reasons For Change: Where necessary or desirable, applications may be made to the
commission to change a street name, or the commission may do so at its discretion, for reasons
of duplication, similar pronunciation or spelling, or for other reasons relating to public safety or
convenience.
2. Commission Determination: In the case of street name changes necessitated due to duplication,
similar pronunciation or spelling, the commission shall determine the street to be changed and
select the new name to be used. In so doing, the commission shall take into consideration the
number of existing addresses on the streets in question, the length of time each street has used
the name in question, the date of the original dedication of said streets and any other factors
pertinent to the changes in question. The commission may hold public hearings on such
changes.
3. Check With Official Map And List: No street names may be changed until the proposed ones
have been checked with the official street name map and list.
4. Avoid Inconvenience: All changes shall be made in such a manner so as to create the least
possible inconvenience to residents and property owners in the area. No change shall become
effective for at least thirty (30) days after official action by the commission.
5. Signs; Location And Lettering: All street name signs shall be located in such manner as to be
clearly visible to persons operating vehicles on the road. The lettering of the street name shall be
a minimum of three and one-half inches (31/2") in height; however, all letters designating north,
south, east or west shall be two inches (2") in height. All lettering shall be of such color and
width to contrast sharply with the board or plate upon which the lettering is placed. Said board or
plate shall be a minimum of six inches (6") in width. All street name signs shall have the street
names lettered on both sides and shall be so positioned that the name is visible from both
directions of the street. (2003 Code § 8-02-02)
8-5-3: STREET ADDRESS NUMBERING:
All street address numbers shall conform to the grid system shown on the official address number grid
map kept on file at the city hall office.
A. Assigned By City: All address numbers shall be assigned by the city. No other person or
organization, public or private, shall assign any address number to any residence, business,
industry or use.
B. Guidelines In Assigning Numbers: The following shall be the guidelines in assigning such address
numbers by the city:
1. Businesses And Dwelling Units: Only one number shall be assigned to each business, use or
dwelling unit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 198/528
2. Vacant Lots: Numbers shall be assigned to vacant lots within platted subdivisions and shall
otherwise be assigned in such a manner that adequate numbers are reserved for possible future
developments or resubdivisions of land.
3. Street Frontage: All addresses shall be assigned on the street upon which the structure fronts.
When vehicular access is used from a point other than the street frontage, the number shall be
placed so as to be visible from the street side of the building.
4. Even And Odd Numbers: All addresses one side of a street shall be designated as either even
or odd numbers, but not both.
5. Owner To Post Legible Numbers: The owner of each structure shall post the assigned address
number in such a manner that it is clearly visible from the street. The numbers shall be at least
three and one-half inches (31/2") high. Numbers must be displayed prior to occupancy. (2003
Code § 8-02-06)
a. Address Numbers In Alleyways And On Multi-Occupancy Buildings: Any building with an
access door located in an alleyway or side street, or with multiple access doors on a single
building, or as ordered by the fire chief or fire marshal, shall post the assigned address
number in such a manner that it is clearly visible and in accordance with the current fire code.
(Ord. 2142, 5-3-2016, eff. 5-3-2016)
6. Change Of Nonconforming Numbers: Existing address numbers not in conformance with the
official address number grid system map may be changed by the city council giving official
written notice at least ninety (90) days in advance of the effective date to property owners
affected by such changes. New address numbers must be posted on the property by the
effective date. (2003 Code § 8-02-06)
8-5-4: VARIANCES AND APPEALS:
A. Grant Of Variance By Council: The standards and requirements of these regulations may be
modified or varied by the city council where the enforcement of the rules hereunder will result in
extraordinary hardship; provided, that substantial justice is done and the public interest is secured
hereunder. In granting any such variance or modification, the city council may require conditions
thereof as will, in its judgment, secure substantial compliance with the general principles hereof.
B. Appeals: Appeals may be had by any person from a decision of the commission to the city council
within ten (10) days after its decision. (2003 Code § 8-02-07)
8-5-5: FAILURE OF COMMISSION TO ACT:
If in an instance the commission fails to act or carry out its responsibilities according to the regulations
contained herein, the city council shall assume all the duties of the commission as herein specified in
relation to the application concerned. (2003 Code § 8-02-08)
8-5-6: VIOLATIONS:
A. Specified:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 199/528
1. Signs To Comply With Map: No person shall erect or install a street name sign that is not in
accordance with the official street name map.
2. Defacing Street Name Signs: No person shall remove, alter, change or otherwise deface a street
name sign that exists in accordance with the official street name map.
3. Posting Address Required: All persons shall post the address number of his property as
designated by the city council and as required by this chapter.
B. Action To Correct Violation: Upon knowledge of a violation, the city council may require the city
attorney to commence action to correct the violation and to punish the same. (2003 Code § 8-02-
09)
8-5-7: PENALTY:
Each violation of these regulations shall be a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. Each violation for each day it shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(2003 Code § 8-02-09; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 6
IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE CANALS AND DITCHES
8-6-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to regulate the use and maintenance of irrigation and
drainage canals and ditches to ensure that each property owner, and his property, receives the full
and lawful amount of water and the full amount of head and pressure. (2003 Code § 8-03-01)
8-6-2: MAINTENANCE REQUIRED:
A. Definition: For purposes of this chapter, "maintenance" shall be defined as sufficient upkeep, repair,
cleaning, debris removal, weed removal, break or hole repair, rodent killing, or construction such
that a free flow of water is maintained and a downstream user has the water head, amount and
pressure that he is legally entitled to.
B. Maintenance Of Canals, Ditches And Embankments: It hereby is declared to be unlawful for any
property owner of land through which an irrigation canal or ditch or a drainage canal or ditch
traverses such land to fail to maintain in good order and repair any such canal or ditch that
traverses through his property such that said canal or ditch is ready to transport water. Additionally,
such owner of the land through which such a canal or ditch traverses shall maintain the
embankments thereof in good repair, in order to prevent the water from wasting during the
irrigating season, and shall not at any time permit a greater quantity of water to be turned into said
ditch or canal than the banks thereof will easily contain or than can be used for beneficial or useful
purpose. (2003 Code § 8-03-02)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 200/528
8-6-3: FAILURE TO MAINTAIN CONSIDERED A NUISANCE:
The failure to maintain a canal or ditch as in this chapter required is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(2003 Code § 8-03-03)
8-6-4: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE; NOTICE:
A. Order To Remove: The city clerk, any member of the police department, fire department or building
department, jointly hereafter referred to as "city official", may order any nuisance herein in this
chapter corrected, abated or removed after ten (10) days' prior notice of intention to correct, abate
or remove the nuisance.
B. Notice Of Abatement Or Removal:
1. Posting Or Serving: Notice of such order shall be posted upon said land. Copies of said notice
shall be served upon the owner of the real estate on which the nuisance is located. If the owner
of the land cannot be found or located, the notice posted on the property shall be sufficient.
2. Content Of Notice: If it is determined by the city official that a public "nuisance", as defined in
section 8-6-3 of this chapter, exists on any lot, place or parcel of real property, the city official
shall cause a notice to be issued to correct, abate or remove such nuisance. Such notice shall
be headed "Notice To Clean Ditch Or Canal", shall contain a description of the property in
general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the nuisance, shall describe the
nuisance in terms reasonably sufficient to identify the same, shall direct the abatement of the
nuisance, shall specify the penalty provisions as provided herein, and shall specify the appeal
process as provided herein; and shall state that if the city corrects, removes or abates the
nuisance, the city shall assess the cost thereof against the property with the real property taxes.
(2003 Code § 8-03-04)
8-6-5: APPEAL:
Within ten (10) days from the date of posting, or personal service of the required notice, the owner or
person occupying or controlling such lot, place or real property affected may appeal to the city council.
Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk. At the regular meeting or regular
adjourned meeting of the city council, not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty six (26) days
after receipt of the appeal, the city council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal, and the
decision of the city council thereupon shall be final and conclusive. In the event that the nuisance
involves flooding, the city may abate, correct or remove the nuisance regardless of any appeal and
may take immediate action without notice to the owner. (2003 Code § 8-03-05)
8-6-6: OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be the duty of the owner or person occupying or controlling any lot, place or real estate in the
city which has been declared a public nuisance as provided herein within ten (10) days from the date
of notification, as provided herein, or in case of an appeal to the city council, within ten (10) days from
the determination thereof, unless the same is sustained, to correct, remove or abate the nuisance as
stated. (2003 Code § 8-03-06)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 201/528
8-6-7: CITY REMOVAL; ACTION AGAINST OWNER:
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal or any owner or occupant so notified to remove the public
"nuisance", as defined in section 8-6-3 of this chapter, within the time specified in this chapter, the city
official may notify the city attorney in writing of the last known legal owner and property description in
general terms. The city attorney may cause legal action to be taken through the magistrate's court for
action as follows: (2003 Code § 8-03-07)
A. Imposition Of Penalty; Civil Action: The owner of any lot, place or real property within the city who
shall permit or allow the existence of a public "nuisance", as defined in section 8-6-3 of this
chapter, upon any lot or premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, or who shall violate any of
the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. The city attorney, in his discretion, may also take civil action to obtain
an order from said court enjoining the maintenance of said public nuisance and the city shall be
awarded its court costs and attorney fees for prosecuting the action. (2003 Code § 8-03-07; amd.
2012 Code)
B. Special Assessment For Costs: Regardless of the action by the city attorney or in addition thereto,
upon direction of the city council and at the city council's discretion, upon the failure, neglect or
refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to remove the public "nuisance", as defined in section
8-6-3 of this chapter, within the time specified in this chapter, the city official knowing of the
violation shall notify the city clerk's office in writing of the known legal owner, if known, and property
description in general terms and the nature of the violation. The city clerk's office shall proceed
with the work specified in the notice. The cost of the work shall be transmitted to the city council,
who shall cause the same to be paid and levy a special assessment against the property as
allowed in Idaho Code section 50-1008. The owner of the property shall be notified of the
assessment and may pay the same prior to its certification on the tax rolls. (2003 Code § 8-03-07)
8-6-8: PENALTY FOR INTERFERENCE:
It shall be a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code, for any
person to interfere with the city official in correcting, abating or removing a nuisance as provided
herein. (2003 Code § 8-03-08; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 7
TREES AND SHRUBBERY
8-7-1: TRIMMING TREES AND SHRUBS OVERHANGING PUBLIC WAYS:
A. Trees: Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall trim all trees on property
owned or occupied by him, overhanging the sidewalks, streets or alleys, so that the branches
thereon will not interfere with pedestrian or public travel.
B. Hedges And Shrubbery: Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall trim all
hedges and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of said hedges and/or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 202/528
shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk in the city. (2003 Code § 8-05-01)
8-7-2: INJURY TO TREES OR SHRUBBERY:
It hereby is declared unlawful for any person not the owner thereof, or without lawful authority so to
do, to wilfully injure, deface, disfigure or destroy any fruit, shade or ornamental tree or shrub, or to
injure, destroy, cut or pick any flower or plant, growing, standing, or being either on private ground or
any street, parking, public park or place within the city. (2003 Code § 8-05-02)
8-7-3: TREES OUTSIDE PROPERTY LINE:
The mayor and city council hereby are given full and complete control over all trees growing within the
confines of the city limits which are outside the property lines of the respective lots, plots and tracts.
(2003 Code § 8-05-03)
Chapter 8
PARK REGULATIONS
8-8-1: GENERAL RULES APPLICABLE TO ALL PARKS:
A. Purposes And Authority: This section is for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the
appropriate use by the public and in the furtherance of the intended usage of the city parks, and it
is enacted upon the authority derived from the constitution of the state, article XII section 2, and
from Idaho Code sections 50-302 and 50-303, and for the health, safety and welfare of the public.
B. Hours: Unless otherwise specified below, the parks of the city shall be open and available for use
from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to dusk.
C. Dogs:
1. Leash Required: When parks are open to the public, canines, possessing a valid dog license,
are allowed in the parks so long as they are leashed and within control of their owner. Violation
of this subsection may be cited as a city code violation and processed under section 1-4-6 of this
code.
2. Clean Up Required: Any person owning, harboring, keeping, possessing, caring or having
custodial duties over any canine shall clean up all excrement or other waste from such canine
and deposit the same in a trash bin. Violation of this subsection may be cited as a city code
violation and processed under section 1-4-6 of this code. (Ord. 2077, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
D. Criminals Banned From Parks: Any person convicted of a felony or misdemeanor committed within
a public park shall be banned from all city parks for a period of one year from the date of
conviction. Violation of this subsection shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2077, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 203/528
E. Littering: Every person using any city park shall clean up all refuse, litter or other items brought in or
used by such person. Failure to so clean up shall be considered littering.
F. Glass Containers Prohibited: Glass containers in city parks are prohibited. Violation of this
subsection may be cited as a city code violation and processed under section 1-4-6 of this code.
(Ord. 2077, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
G. Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited: Except in Jensen Grove Park and Memorial Park with a valid
permit, or except in the city owned RV park as set forth in section 8-8-3 of this chapter, alcoholic
beverages are prohibited in all parks owned or maintained by the city. Violation of this subsection
shall be a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord.
2144, 6-7-2016, eff. 6-7-2016)
H. Reservation Fees: The mayor and city council shall adopt fees for the use of park facilities in order
to recover some of the costs of the city to process the various applications and a portion of the
maintenance costs of the picnic shelters, picnic tables, softball fields, and parks of the city.
I. Application For Reservation Required: Persons, associations, corporations and other entities,
desiring to reserve park picnic shelters, ball fields or the amphitheater shall apply at the city clerk's
office to reserve a time of use.
J. Use Without Reservation; Removal: If persons, associations, corporations, and other entities, using
the picnic shelters, ball fields or amphitheater have not reserved the time and paid the appropriate
fee, and are using such facilities at a time that has been reserved for another person, association,
corporation or other entity, if they refuse to vacate the shelter, they shall be removed from the
shelter by the police department and they may be cited for trespass. City functions and events
shall have precedence over all other functions and events.
K. Reservation List Maintained: A list of reservations for a particular picnic shelter, ball fields and
amphitheater shall be maintained at City Hall. (Ord. 2077, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
L. Smoking In Designated Areas Only: Smoking tobacco products shall be prohibited in all City parks.
Notwithstanding the foregoing prohibition of smoking tobacco in all City parks, the City Council
may, by resolution duly passed at a City Council meeting, designate that smoking tobacco
products may be allowed in specific designated smoking areas in one or more City parks. Such
areas shall be designated by clearly visible signage. In the event that the City Council designates
such an area, smoking tobacco products shall be limited to the designated area. Smoking tobacco
products in any area of a City park not designated as a smoking area shall be prohibited. Any
person who pleads guilty or is found guilty of violating this subsection shall be guilty of an infraction
with a set fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus applicable court cost. (Ord. 2119, 3-4-2014)
8-8-2: JENSEN GROVE PARK AND MEMORIAL PARK:
A. Alcohol Permit: Alcohol will be allowed in the amphitheater, the picnic areas and the ball fields of
Jensen Grove Park and Memorial Park, upon granting of a permit by the City. No alcohol shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 204/528
permitted outside of the picnic areas, the ball fields or the amphitheater.
1. Alcohol Permitted: Only beer and wine may be permitted.
2. Application: A person desiring to obtain an alcohol permit shall submit an application to the City
Clerk's Office and pay the appropriate fee.
3. Fee: The fee for an alcohol permit in the designated areas shall be set by the City Council. Such
fee shall be nonrefundable. The fee shall be in addition to the reservation and cleaning fees and
deposits required under other sections of this Code.
4. Drunkenness: Drunkenness in the park shall be prohibited.
B. Large Events: Events and functions that are expected to have more than one hundred (100) people
present or that may require that significant portions of the park be closed to the general public shall
require City Council approval. (2003 Code § 8-07-02)
C. Boat Launch Fee: The City Council may, by resolution, establish a fee to be charged to anyone that
launches a boat or other watercraft into Jensen Grove Lake. Failure to pay the fee prior to
launching a boat or watercraft after passage of said resolution shall constitute a City Code violation
and shall be punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) per violation. (Ord. 2087, 7-7-2009, eff. 7-
7-2009)
D. Hours: Jensen Grove Park, including the amphitheater, park, picnic areas, playgrounds, parking lot,
beach, greenbelt walkways, and skate park shall be open at all times unless otherwise directed by
City Council. The Jensen Grove Lake and all waterways available for watercraft shall be open from
thirty (30) minutes after sunrise to thirty (30) minutes before sunset during periods of the year
sufficient water is available for watercraft use. All boats must be removed from the water thirty (30)
minutes before sunset and may not be placed in the water until thirty (30) minutes after sunrise.
(Ord. 2160, 10-3-2017)
8-8-3: CITY OWNED RV PARK:
A. Alcohol: During the time period of the year that RV spaces are available for rent from the City, as
set by the City Parks and Recreation Department, alcohol will be allowed in the RV parking area
without a permit. No alcohol shall be permitted outside of the RV parking area.
B. Drunkenness: Drunkenness in the RV park shall be prohibited. (Ord. 2144, 6-7-2016, eff. 6-7-2016)
Chapter 9
CEMETERY REGULATIONS
8-9-1: CEMETERY NAMED:
The name of the cemetery situated about one-half (1/2) mile north of the city, in section 35, township 2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 205/528
south of range 35, east of Boise Meridian, owned and belonging to the city is Grove City Cemetery.
(Ord. 2093, 4-20-2010, eff. 4-20-2010)
8-9-2: CLERK TO CONVEY LOTS; SALE PRICE:
A. The city clerk is hereby empowered to sell lots, adult burial spaces, which shall be one-third (1/3) of
a lot, infant burial spaces, and places of interment of cremated remains, in Grove City Cemetery,
and to collect the purchase price therefor, as well as all other fees and charges provided for herein,
and it shall be the city clerk's duty to pay all such funds into the treasury once each month. The city
clerk should deliver to the purchaser of each lot, or burial space, a certificate signed by the mayor
and countersigned by the city clerk under the seal of the city, specifying that the person to whom
the same is issued is the owner of such lot or burial space. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2010, eff. 4-20-2010)
B. The sale price of each cemetery lot shall be in such amount as established by resolution of the city
council, and the sale price of each burial space proportionately priced, when such lot or burial
space is sold to a resident of the city, or for burial of any person who, at the time of death, was a
resident of the city. The sale price of each cemetery lot shall be in such amount as established by
resolution of the city council, and the price of each burial space shall be proportionately priced,
when sold to a person for burial of a deceased person who at the time of death was a nonresident
of the city. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2010, eff. 4-20-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
8-9-3: MARKERS OR MONUMENTS REQUIRED:
The owners of lots or relatives of deceased persons buried in the cemetery are hereby required to
erect headstones or other suitable markers or monuments at the heads of the graves consistent with
this chapter. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2010, eff. 4-20-2010)
8-9-4: RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF CEMETERY:
A. Fences; Land Disturbance: No person shall erect any fence, corner post or other boundary mark
upon any lot in said cemetery, nor grade the ground or land thereof, except under the direction of
the sexton.
B. Certificate Of Title Required: No person shall be permitted to inter the body of a deceased person
without first obtaining a certificate of title to the lot or plot, or furnishing written permission from the
owner thereof, which permission shall be filed with the city clerk, and no person shall disinter any
body except under direction.
C. Prohibited Items: The following items shall not be allowed to be placed on, near or around any
burial lot in the cemetery:
1. Bottles, vases and similar containers made of glass.
2. Any and all pets. No pets shall be allowed in the cemetery at any time.
3. Solar lights or lights of any kind at ground level.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 206/528
4. Toys and similar objects that cannot be secured, including items of clothing.
5. Benches, unless they are made of concrete and incorporated into and become part of the
headstone and are set in concrete to generally accepted construction standards, and approved
by the sexton prior to installation.
6. Food and drinks, alcoholic beverages, cigarettes, and similar materials.
7. Rocks, gravel, and other landscaping material.
D. Smoking Tobacco Products: Smoking tobacco products in the cemetery is prohibited except in
specifically designated areas, if any.
E. Alcoholic Beverages: Possession of or use of alcoholic beverages in the cemetery is prohibited.
(Ord. 2123, 7-1-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)
8-9-5: FEES:
The fees for services to be rendered at the cemetery with respect to opening, caring for, and
disinterment of graves shall be paid in advance to the city clerk. Such fees shall be as specified by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2010, eff. 4-20-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
8-9-6: PERMANENT MEMORIALS:
A. Flowers shall be allowed in nonglass, permanently secured vases.
B. Shepherd's hooks are allowed, but they must be set within a concrete wash at least three inches
(3") in width around all sides and flush to the ground to permit mowing. Items hanging from
shepherd's hooks may be allowed, but must be secured or fastened in such a manner that they
cannot be blown off by wind.
C. Over the headstone monuments, statues and like items are allowed, but only if they are secured on
top of or securely connected to the headstone.
D. Slow growing shrubs and perennial flowers may be planted if they are well maintained, and are
within twelve inches (12") to either side of the headstone (but not in front or behind the headstone).
E. Winter decorations are allowed, however, any such decorations not removed by April 1 of each
year shall be discarded by the city.
F. All nonsecured and nonpermanent summer type monuments that are not removed by October 1 of
each year shall be discarded by the city. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2010, eff. 4-20-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 207/528
Chapter 10
CITY LIBRARY
8-10-1: STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The provisions of Idaho Code section 33-2601 et seq., hereby are adopted and incorporated as the
governing law of the city library. (2003 Code § 2-02-01)
Chapter 11
MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL
8-11-1: NAME:
The name of the swimming pool operated by the city shall be the Blackfoot municipal swimming pool.
(2003 Code § 8-08-01)
8-11-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION:
The rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of the swimming pool shall be adopted by
resolution by the city council. (2003 Code § 8-08-02)
8-11-3: PRIVATE FRANCHISE:
The city may enter into a license, contract or franchise agreement with one or more individuals or
entities to operate the swimming pool. (2003 Code § 8-08-03)
Chapter 12
MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE
8-12-1: TITLE:
The title of this chapter shall be the GOLF COURSE ORDINANCE. (2003 Code § 8-09-01)
8-12-2: SUPERVISION OF GOLF COURSE:
The golf course shall be under the supervision of the Mayor. (2003 Code § 8-09-02)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 208/528
8-12-3: BUDGET:
An operating budget for the golf course shall be included in the annual budget to be adopted by the
City. (2003 Code § 8-09-03)
8-12-4: GOLF PROFESSIONAL:
The City shall contract with, or employee, in Councils' discretion, a golf professional to manage and
operate the golf course and related facilities. (Ord. 2155, 5-2-2017)
8-12-5: DUTIES OF GOLF PROFESSIONAL:
The golf professional shall have the responsibility for the operation of the golf course, subject to the
direct supervision of the Mayor. The golf professional shall have the responsibility of supervising play
on the course, and shall have the sole and final authority with respect to the determination of starting
positions of players on the course. (2003 Code § 8-09-05)
8-12-6: CLUBHOUSE AND FOOD CONCESSION:
The clubhouse shall be maintained in clean condition and kept free of litter and rubbish. The food
concession at the clubhouse shall be managed by the golf professional, as well as the pro shop.
Sanitary conditions in the clubhouse food concession shall be maintained to State Health Department
standards. (Ord. 2155, 5-2-2017)
8-12-7: JUNIOR GOLF CLINIC:
The golf professional shall conduct at least one (1) junior golf clinic during the summer months of each
year, such clinic to be available to individuals of the age of eighteen (18) years and under. The charge
for such clinic shall be in accordance with the schedule of charges adopted by the City Council with
respect to the use of golf course facilities. Clinics shall consist of four (4) days, with one (1) clinic
session per day. (Ord. 2155, 5-2-2017)
8-12-8: GOLF COURSE ADVISORY BOARD:
There hereby is created a Golf Course Advisory Board, to be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by the City Council. The Mayor may appoint a Council member to serve as an ex officio member of
the board with no voting rights. Such Council member shall act as a liaison between the Mayor and
City Council and the Golf Course Advisory Board. (Ord. 2155, 5-2-2017)
8-12-9: QUALIFICATIONS, TERM OF OFFICE, COMPENSATION OF GOLF COURSE
ADVISORY BOARD:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 209/528
Members of the Golf Course Advisory Board may be City or County resident taxpayers. Members may
be removed after a public hearing by a majority vote of the full Council. Members shall serve without
compensation. (Ord. 2155, 5-2-2017)
8-12-10: RULES, ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
The Golf Course Advisory Board shall elect its own Chairman and adopt its own rules and regulations
pertaining to its function and operation. Meetings shall be held at least once monthly for not less than
six (6) months in each year. A majority of the members of the board shall be necessary to constitute a
quorum. (Ord. 2155, 5-2-2017)
8-12-11: DUTIES OF GOLF COURSE ADVISORY BOARD:
The Golf Course Advisory Board shall observe the operation, maintenance and management of the
golf course, and shall, as needed, confer, through the Chairperson of the board, in an advisory
capacity, with the Mayor or Council member in charge of the Park and Recreation Department
concerning such matters. All recommendations made to the Council member in charge by such board
Chairperson shall be duly considered by him and be taken into consideration in the management of
the golf course, so long as the recommendations are consistent with effective operation of the course.
(Ord. 2155, 5-2-2017)
8-12-12: GOLF COURSE FEES:
Fees for the use of the golf course facility shall be in accordance with the schedule of fees to be
adopted by the City Council from time to time, a copy of which schedule shall be kept on file in the City
Clerk's Office, with another copy to be kept on file at the golf course clubhouse. Such schedules shall
be available for public inspection at any time during business hours of the City Clerk or the golf
professional. (2003 Code § 8-09-12)
8-12-13: GOLF CARTS:
A. License; Fees: All golf carts operated on the Municipal golf course shall be annually registered and
licensed with the City. Licenses shall expire December 31 each year. Fees shall be as adopted
from time to time by the City Council.
B. Sticker: A license sticker, issued by the golf professional upon payment of the annual registration
and license fee, shall be attached and displayed on each golf cart operated on the golf course.
Licenses for golf course stored carts shall designate such by the letter "S" after the numerical
license number. (Ord. 2155, 5-2-2017)
8-12-14: TOURNAMENTS:
Green fees may be waived by the City Council for tournament play. (Ord. 2155, 5-2-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 210/528
Chapter 13
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
8-13-1: OFFICIAL NAME:
The official name of the airport of the city shall be Blackfoot McCarley Field. Wherever the term
"airport" is used elsewhere in this chapter, it shall be deemed to refer to Blackfoot McCarley Field.
(2003 Code § 8-10-01)
8-13-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is intended that Blackfoot McCarley Field:
A. Become economically self-sustaining insofar as possible;
B. That the airport premises and all activities thereon be for aeronautical purposes and the attendant
needs of such users;
C. That no person be granted an exclusive right to conduct any commercial aeronautical activity
thereon;
D. That no person using the airport facility be discriminated against because of that person's race,
religion, sex, color, creed, or national origin. (2003 Code § 8-10-02)
8-13-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation of or
flight in the air, except a parachute or other contrivance, designed for such navigation, but used
primarily as safety equipment.
AIRPORT: Any area of land or water owned or operated by the city or its agents and which is used or
intended for use for the landing and takeoff of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used or
intended for use for airport buildings or other airport facilities or rights of way, together with all airport
buildings and facilities located thereon.
COMMERCIAL USE: Any operation from the airport for compensation or hire. The test of commercial
operation is whether such operation is incidental to the operator's other business, or is, in and of itself,
an enterprise for profit.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association
or body politic; and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 211/528
USE FEE: A measurable way of assessing fees for the use of the airport.
VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled. (2003 Code § 8-10-03)
8-13-4: AIRPORT MANAGER:
The airport manager shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council, and shall:
A. Act as airport manager.
B. Make recommendations from time to time to the mayor with respect to the establishment and
revision of regulations governing the conduct and use of the airport.
C. Alert the mayor to rules and directives adopted by the federal aviation agency of the United States
Of America and the department of aeronautics of the state as they relate to the airport to the end
that the airport may be in compliance with necessary regulations governing its operation and use.
D. Serve at a compensation to be decided by the city council.
E. See that the operations of the airport are conducted in accordance with applicable state and federal
laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of the airport or aircraft using such facilities.
F. Not allow waste on the airport premises or permit refuse or debris to accumulate in or about the
premises.
G. See that the yard, lawns, trees and shrubs surrounding and adjacent to the administration building
are maintained and kept in good condition.
H. In the event the city is operating the airport under a lease, see that the terms of the lease
agreement are complied with by the lessee.
I. Have the responsibility of supervising the use of the airport by all persons, subject to the overall
supervision of the mayor.
J. Follow the instructions given him from time to time by the mayor.
K. Have the responsibility of assigning flight priorities, and making other determinations with respect to
the use of the airport facilities as circumstances may warrant from time to time. (2003 Code § 8-10-
04)
8-13-5: SUPERVISION OF AIRPORT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 212/528
The airport shall be under the general supervision of the mayor, and the airport manager shall be
directly responsible to and subject to the control of the mayor. (2003 Code § 8-10-05)
8-13-6: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS
GOVERNING THE AIRPORT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or neglect to comply with any lawful order or instruction given
to such person by the airport manager with respect to the use of the facilities at the airport. (2003
Code § 8-10-06)
8-13-7: BUDGET; FEES RECEIVED FROM AIRPORT OPERATIONS:
A. Budget: An operating budget for the airport shall be included in the annual budget to be adopted by
the city. Such budget requests shall take into consideration recommendations of the airport
manager and airport committee made to the mayor. The responsibility for the submission of said
budget requests shall nevertheless be the sole responsibility of the mayor, subject to the approval
of the city council at its budget hearing.
B. Fees: All fees collected from airport operations shall be placed in a special fund to be used only for
airport maintenance and operation. (2003 Code § 8-10-07)
8-13-8: MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL:
The city shall employ personnel for the purpose of maintaining the airport, as needed, under the
direction of the mayor, the salary for such personnel to be paid from the operating budget referred to
in section 8-13-7 of this chapter. (2003 Code § 8-10-08)
8-13-9: AIRPORT COMMITTEE:
There hereby is created an airport committee, to consist of a total of five (5) members to be appointed
by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. (2003 Code § 8-10-09)
8-13-10: QUALIFICATION AND TERM OF OFFICE OF AIRPORT COMMITTEE:
Four (4) members of the airport committee shall be resident taxpayers of the city or the county. One of
those four (4) residents shall be associated with commercial aviation activities at the city airport; a
second such resident member shall be a private aircraft owner, not engaged in commercial activities
related to aviation; a third such resident member shall have no relationship to flying or aviation, either
as an owner or operator of an aircraft, nor interested in a firm or corporation having an interest in
matters pertaining to aviation, airports or related activities; the fourth such resident member may, but
need not be, associated with aviation activities at the city airport. The fifth member of the airport
committee shall be associated with commercial aviation at the city airport or shall be a private aircraft
owner who uses the city airport on a regular basis. Such fifth member must be a resident of the state.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 213/528
The term of office for the first three (3) appointive members of the committee shall be one, two (2) and
three (3) years, to be determined by lot, and thereafter the term of each member shall be three (3)
years. The term of office for the last two (2) appointive members shall be for a term of three (3) years.
Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms shall be filled by the mayor and
confirmed by the city council. Members may be removed, after a public hearing, by the mayor,
confirmed by a majority vote of the full city council. Members shall serve without compensation. (2003
Code § 8-10-10)
8-13-11: DUTIES OF AIRPORT COMMITTEE:
The airport committee shall observe the operation, maintenance and management of the airport and
shall, from time to time, confer with the airport manager in an advisory capacity and with the mayor or
the council member appointed by the mayor to oversee the airport. All recommendations made to the
mayor or council member by such committee chairperson shall be duly considered by him and be
taken into consideration in the management of the airport, so long as the recommendations are
consistent with effective operation of the airport. Any such recommendation so made shall not be
binding upon the mayor or council member, but if not given satisfactory consideration, the airport
committee may then submit such recommendations to the city council for further consideration. The
chairperson of the airport committee shall be the only member of the committee having the authority to
make such recommendations to the mayor or council member. (2003 Code § 8-10-11)
8-13-12: RULES, ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS OF AIRPORT COMMITTEE:
The airport committee shall elect its own chairperson and adopt its own rules and regulations
pertaining to its function and operation. (2003 Code § 8-10-12)
8-13-13: RULES AND REGULATIONS RELATING TO PAYMENT OF FEES FOR USE
OF AIRPORT:
Fees to be charged for the use of airport facilities shall be in accordance with a schedule of fees to be
adopted by the governing body from time to time, a copy of which schedule of fees shall be filed with
the city clerk in the city hall and the airport manager at the airport office. Schedules and fee records
shall be available for examination by interested persons during regular business hours of the city
clerk. Fee records shall be audited by the city treasurer annually. Said schedule of fees may be
amended or altered by the governing body from time to time. The following rules and regulations shall
pertain to the payment of such fees:
A. Any fee charged to the user of the aircraft shall be payable when the charge is incurred, unless
otherwise prescribed in this chapter, and such fees shall be paid to the city clerk or airport
manager as herein provided. Fees collected by the airport manager shall be accounted for to the
city clerk at least once monthly. If a fee payable to the airport manager is incurred when the airport
office is not open, the fee shall be paid promptly as soon as the airport office opens.
B. Transient fees, daily fees and use fees shall be paid to the airport manager; and all other fees are
payable to the city clerk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 214/528
C. The airport manager shall conduct periodic inspections to determine whether fees are being
collected, paid and accounted for as required by the provisions of this chapter. (2003 Code § 8-10-
13)
8-13-14: USE OF TIE DOWNS:
Use of any tie down space in the tie down area of the airport shall be subject to the following terms
and conditions:
A. The owner, user or occupier of such space shall be deemed to have examined the physical facilities
of such tie down area from time to time, and by the use of same shall be deemed to have accepted
the same in the condition in which the area was at the time he began his initial use of such area,
and shall likewise by his continued use of such area be deemed to have accepted the condition in
which the same is maintained from time to time.
B. In the event the owner, user or occupier of such space is dissatisfied with the manner in which the
same is being maintained then, his recourse shall be to terminate his use of such facilities
forthwith. (2003 Code § 8-10-14)
8-13-15: RESTRICTIONS ON AIRPORT ACCESS AND USE:
A. Access to the airport shall be controlled by the airport manager and all accessways may be closed
and locked and ingress and egress permitted only by the airport manager.
B. Access to the airport by a mobile fuel tanker or other fuel conveyance or containment means may
only be had upon the permit of the airport manager and in strict compliance with the safety rules
and regulations adopted in this chapter and applicable codes.
C. No vehicles not directly related to the private or commercial use of aircraft shall be allowed on the
airport. Such vehicles shall be towed away at the owner's expense.
D. No materials, substances, vehicles or other matter not directly related to the private or commercial
use of aircraft shall be stored upon the airport.
E. No inoperable, partial or wrecked aircraft or components thereof shall be placed or allowed to
remain on any airport property not leased or rented by the owner of said aircraft or components.
F. No business not directly related to the private or commercial use of aircraft shall be conducted at
the airport or in a private hangar.
G. No automobile repair, auto restoration or the like shall be conducted at the airport or in a private
hangar. (2003 Code § 8-10-15)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 215/528
8-13-16: PAYMENT OF FEES:
The city shall have a common law lien for services upon any aircraft using the airport, for any fees
charged for the use of the airport and its facilities and unpaid by the owner or operator of said aircraft,
including court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred in enforcing such lien. The city shall have
the right to retain and hold possession of said aircraft and all property situated therein until the amount
of said charges and money have been fully paid, and to sell such aircraft, or other property situated
therein, for payment of such lien, charges, costs and attorney fees, and such aircraft and other
property shall not be subject to attachment or execution by any other person until such lien storage
charge and costs of satisfying such lien are fully satisfied. (2003 Code § 8-10-16)
8-13-17: DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY TO SATISFY LIEN:
The city shall retain such aircraft and other property situated therein upon which the city has a lien as
mentioned in section 8-13-16 of this chapter, for a period of thirty (30) days, at the expiration of which
time, if such lien shall not be fully satisfied, the city may proceed to sell such aircraft or other property,
or any part thereof, at a public auction after posting notice of sale as provided by law upon execution,
and by mailing notice at least ten (10) days prior to the sale, by certified or registered mail, of the time
and place of such sale to the owner of such aircraft at his last known address. The proceeds of sale
shall be applied first to the costs of sale and attorney fees, and then to the discharge of the lien. The
remainder, if any, must be paid to the owner. (2003 Code § 8-10-17)
8-13-18: LEASING OF SPACE FOR HANGAR:
In the event the city council deems it for the best interests of the city, hangar space at the airport may
be leased, subject to the following terms and conditions:
A. Rental for the same shall be paid at a rate to be determined by the city council in accordance with a
schedule of fees with respect thereto, adopted by the city council.
B. Any improvements placed on the leased premises consisting of buildings or structures of any kind
may be removed by the lessee at the expiration of the lease term; provided, that such lessee shall
restore the leased premises, at lessee's sole expense, to as good a condition as the same were in
at the commencement of the lease term; and provided further, that failure of a lessee to remove
such improvements within sixty (60) days from the date of expiration of his leasehold shall
constitute an abandonment of the same and investment of title thereto in the city.
C. No hangar space shall be leased for a term of more than twenty (20) years, with an option to renew
for an additional twenty (20) year term. The option to renew shall continue at the end of each term.
D. Rent for the term of the lease shall be paid in equal annual installments, prorated over the life of the
lease; provided, that the first installment shall be prorated to March 1 next, with said prorated
amount to be paid upon execution of any such lease, with annual payments to be paid on or before
March 1 of each year thereafter. No refund shall be given in the event the lessee desires to
discontinue the use of the leased premises before the expiration date thereof. In the event any
lease is discontinued before its termination date, the question of whether unpaid rent shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 216/528
required to be paid for the remaining portion of the term of the lease shall be determined solely by
the city. (2003 Code § 8-10-18)
E. Leases of an airport hangar may be assigned or subleased by lessee to a third party. Any such
assignment or sublease shall be subject to all duties, obligations and restrictions contained within
city code, the lease agreement, federal, state, or county laws or regulations. (Ord. 2132, 5-5-2015,
eff. 5-5-2015)
F. Lessee shall pay for all improvements placed on the hangar space leased to lessee as well as all
utility extensions, the same to be constructed in accordance with the city building code
requirements.
G. Any improvements placed or constructed on leased premises shall be placed or constructed
thereon in accordance with the building and zoning requirements of the city in effect at the time of
the placement or construction of such improvements on such premises.
H. Lessee shall secure and maintain general public liability insurance protecting and indemnifying the
lessor and tenant against all claims for damages to person or property or for loss of life or of
property occurring upon, in, or about the leased property, the streets, gutters, sidewalks or curbs
adjacent thereto, to such limits as the lessor may reasonably, from time to time, require in respect
to injuries to any one person, in respect to any one accident or disaster or incident of negligence,
and in respect to property damage. Any lease agreement written containing the provisions of this
section shall be conditioned upon the city being able to change the limits of such policies so
required from time to time, as the city may reasonably require.
I. All airport leases are to contain rental adjustment provisions that provide for an adjustment of the
rental sum by multiplying the original rental by a fraction determined by placing the U.S. consumer
price index for all urban consumers (CPI-U), U.S. city average for July, 1983, as determined by the
U.S. department of labor, bureau of labor statistics, as the denominator, and the most current CPIU
available at the time of such adjustment, as the numerator; each such rental adjustment to be on
the fifth year anniversary of the lease agreement and each five (5) year multiples thereafter
throughout the term of said lease.
J. All lessees are to promptly submit such operational reports as may periodically be requested by the
city. (2003 Code § 8-10-18)
8-13-19: FRAUDULENT PROCUREMENT OF USE OF AIRPORT FACILITIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain use of the airport facilities, such as tie down spaces,
runways, leasehold spaces or hangars, fuel dispensing facilities, metered pump, or other services
available at the airport, with intent to defraud the city by not paying for the same. Any person who
violates any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided
in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 8-10-19; amd. 2012 Code)
8-13-20: PERMIT FOR COMMERCIAL USE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 217/528
A. No person may use the airport facilities for commercial aircraft related purposes without having:
1. A valid permit from the city for the purpose of conducting commercial business at the airport;
and
2. A valid leasehold contract; and
3. Proof of payment of fees or rents charged for such uses.
B. Failure or refusal of an operator, lessee or owner to be in compliance with this section shall be just
cause for cancellation of such obligor's airport lease and permits held by such operator.
C. Any person using airport facilities for commercial purposes must pay for the use of the same
according to the schedule of fees on file with the city clerk's office or airport manager, and also
comply with the following rules and regulations:
1. Pay leasehold rent pursuant to the terms of the leasing contract.
2. In addition to the insurance requirements of subsection 8-13-18H of this chapter, provide proof
of product liability insurance as the city may reasonably require.
3. Pay permit fees as of January 1 of each year, or as of the date of intended operation under such
a permit so secured.
4. Tie down space rental shall be paid on the first day of each month preceding the use of such a
space. If a space is to be used for only a fraction of a month, the fee therefor shall be paid in
advance at a daily rate according to the schedule of fees herein referred to. (2003 Code § 8-10-
20)
8-13-21: FAILURE TO PAY CHARGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Use any facilities or services available at the airport without paying for the use thereof as set forth
in this chapter.
B. Fail to pay fees for use of airport facilities at the time, place, in the amount and manner as required
by this chapter. (2003 Code § 8-10-21)
C. Violation of any of the terms of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 8-10-21; amd. 2012 Code)
8-13-22: SAFETY RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. No dispensing, transfer or storage of flammable or combustible liquids shall be permitted inside of
any building or structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 218/528
B. No flammable or combustible liquid shall be dispensed into or removed from the fuel system of an
aircraft within any aircraft hangar.
C. No flammable or combustible liquid shall be dispensed into or removed from a container, tank,
vehicle or aircraft, except in a location approved by the airport manager.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to clean any aircraft, engines or parts of aircraft in an aircraft
hangar or within fifty feet (50') of another aircraft, building or hangar with any flammable liquid.
E. Airport hangar lessees must comply with all city, state and federal regulations that pertain to the
operation of the airport and the airplanes, fuel and equipment stored and/or used at the airport.
(2003 Code § 8-10-22)
Title 9
PUBLIC UTILITIES
Chapter 1
WATER USE AND SERVICE
9-1-1: PURPOSE:
It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to and for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the public and inhabitants of the city, and for the purpose of controlling
the use and connection to, and for providing an equitable distribution of the costs and expenses of
maintenance, operation, upkeep and repair of the entire municipal water system, which includes the
water supply, water storage and water distribution facilities of the city, to charge and collect service
charges or fees upon all lots, lands, property and premises served or benefited by the municipal water
system, which system and facilities consists generally of all wells, storage reservoirs, transmission
mains, structures, buildings, treatment facilities, valves, service connections, service meters, fittings,
mechanical equipment and all other facilities as required for the furnishing and distribution of water as
a public system to the customers of the city; and to provide for the control, use and administration of
the installation of private domestic water systems where a public water system is not available. (2003
Code § 9-01-01)
9-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be
as follows:
AUTHORIZED WATER USER: Any person making authorized and proper use of the municipal water
system and/or the water delivered thereby, and who has made application for water service and such
application has been granted and has paid for such service, water and all fees required. An authorized
water user may be an owner, his tenant by lease or rental, a developer, etc.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 219/528
CITY: Refers to the city of Blackfoot, Bingham County, Idaho, or its authorized or designated agent,
representative or deputy thereto.
CITY WATER SERVICE LINE: That portion of any individual water service line that runs from its
connection with the public water main to, and including, the corporation stop, valve box and meter that
is installed in the service line. It will usually be installed within the limits of the public right of way or
utility easement and, after installation, it is to be owned and maintained by the city. The service line is
considered private and is the responsibility of the property owner beginning at the right of way line or
utility easement boundary line.
EQUIVALENT CONNECTION: The connection to a typical residential house on an individual lot that is
occupied by an average single-family dwelling is designated as one equivalent connection.
MASTER WATER PLAN: Any document that the city has accepted by official action of the city council
that describes or otherwise indicates an overall view of proposed future water system needs, minimum
water main sizing and/or minimum water main spacing. This plan is updated periodically as the
community grows and demands change.
MONTH: The period between scheduled water meter readings. The city will, as nearly as possible,
schedule the water meter readings thirty (30) days apart.
MULTIPLE BUILDING DEVELOPMENT: Includes the various types of developments that would have
common or joint ownership areas such as condominiums, townhouses, mobile home parks or courts,
shopping centers, professional offices, etc.
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM: Includes all components and facilities of the public water system that
are owned, operated or maintained by the city for domestic and other uses.
OVERSIZED MAIN: Any water main that is required to have a larger inside diameter than is necessary
based on the estimated flow of the service area for which the main is being installed.
OWNER: Refers to the property owner, lessee, occupant or water user that is served by the municipal
water system or desires to be served by the municipal water system.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
POINT OF CONNECTION: The right of way line or utility easement boundary.
PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE CONNECTION: A separate and independent connection from the municipal
water main that connects directly to a sprinkler system or fire control device that has been, or is to be,
installed in any building for the purpose of fire control within the specific building and said connection
is to be for no other purpose.
PRIVATE WATER SERVICE LINE: The portion of the water service line that runs from the building
being served to the point of connection with the city water service line.
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM: Any water system for domestic use that is not owned, operated and
maintained by the city.
PROPERTY: Refers to all property, whether privately or publicly owned, within the service limits of the
municipal water system, excluding therefrom lands that have been dedicated for public street or
highway rights of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 220/528
PUBLIC WATER SERVICE LINE: See definition of City Water Service Line.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SPRINKLER IRRIGATION: Refers to any system for the purpose of watering lawns, gardens, shrubs,
trees, etc., as they are normally grown in the out of doors or open spaces.
SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of the city waterworks is the individual appointed by the city
council to be in charge of, and oversee, the water system. He shall, under the direction of the city
engineer, mayor and city council, have charge of the municipal water supply system. The
superintendent's duties shall include, but not be limited to, maintenance, operation, supervision and/or
inspection of all additions or modifications. The superintendent shall report, on a regular basis, to the
city engineer the condition of the municipal water system.
UNAUTHORIZED WATER USER: Any person who makes any use of the municipal water system or
the water delivered thereby who is not an authorized water user or who improperly or illegally uses the
water system, or who causes damage or injury to the system in any fashion.
WATER MAIN: Any pipeline owned by the city for the purpose of transportation and/or distribution of
water to serve more than one water service line or user. (2003 Code § 9-01-02)
9-1-3: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER; CITY AUTHORITY:
A. Application: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all property within the corporate limits of
the city, and any special users outside of the corporate limits of the city, including all property
owned or occupied by the United States Of America, the state and the county.
B. City Authority: The water system for the supply of the city shall be under the sole and exclusive
control of the mayor and city council, who may, from time to time, direct the construction of such
works, placing of mains, service pipes and fire hydrants, as the necessities of the city may require.
(2003 Code § 9-01-03)
9-1-4: USE OF CITY WATER REQUIRED:
A. Connection To City System: The owner or occupant of any house, building or property used for
residential, commercial, industrial, governmental or recreational use, or any other purpose,
situated within the city which is abutting on or having a permanent right of access to any street,
alley or right of way in which there is located a city water line is hereby required to use the city
water system; provided, that said city water is within three hundred feet (300') of any property line
where said building to be served is located.
B. Disconnection Of Private System Required: At such time as the owner or tenant connects his
property to municipal service, it is mandatory that the private water supply be terminated and that it
not be connected or cross connected in any way to the water lines served by the city water system.
The disconnection of the private water supply line shall be inspected and approved by the city
engineer and/or the waterworks superintendent, or his designated representative. (2003 Code § 9-
01-04)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 221/528
9-1-5: APPLICATION FOR WATER SUPPLY:
A. Application Required: Whenever any owner desires to obtain a supply of water from the city
waterworks, he shall make application therefor on forms supplied by the city and sign such form
agreeing to be governed by such rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter, as may
be prescribed by the mayor and city council for the control of the water supply. An application fee,
deposit and/or other fees may be required. Such fees shall be set by the city council by resolution.
B. Contents Of Application; Grant Of Application: The applicant must state the location, kind of
building and the entire area of the ground to be supplied, and fully and truly state the purpose for
which the water is to be used, and shall furnish a set of floor plans showing all water uses.
Whereupon, if the application is granted, the superintendent of the waterworks may authorize the
extension, at the expense of the applicant, and at no expense to the city, the service pipe and
meter tile, meter yoke, meter tile lid, curb stop and any other fittings that are necessary to install
service to the inside line of the curb at the point most convenient for supplying the applicant. (2003
Code § 9-01-05)
9-1-6: POINT OF LIABILITY FOR MAINTENANCE:
A. User Responsibility: All users shall have the responsibility of, and be liable for, and shall pay for, all
costs and expenses of maintaining their own water service line extending from the property
improvement to a point of connection. The city's responsibility for maintenance of the individual
user service line extends from the water main tap to the point of connection.
B. Damage To Water System: Responsibility for damage to the city water system is as outlined in
subsection 9-1-32B of this chapter.
C. Nonconflicting Provisions: This section shall not be construed to be in conflict with section 9-1-31 of
this chapter. (2003 Code § 9-01-06)
9-1-7: WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS AND WATER LINES:
All materials and workmanship in the installation of private water service lines and connections to the
city water service line shall conform to the following regulations:
A. Permit Required: No person other than one authorized by permit or license from the city shall
uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any municipal water
main, city water service line or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from
the city. The permit is not to be used until all water installation charges and fees have been paid in
full and all required tests have been completed and accepted by the waterworks superintendent.
B. Application For Permit; Fees: To obtain municipal water service, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented
by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city
and requested by the city. A permit and inspection fee may apply if so set by resolution of the city
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 222/528
council. Such fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. The owner or his agent
shall pay a connection fee to the city at the time the application is filed. The application fee shall be
set by the city council by resolution.
C. Service Line Installation: The owner may request permission from the city to install the water
service line, including tap to the city water main, city stop valve, service line, valve, meter vault and
cover under private contract. Such installation shall be in conformance with any applicable
plumbing codes and state department of environmental quality rules and codes. The installation
also shall conform to all city standards for water system construction. When installation of a water
service line and appurtenances causes damage to any property, public or private, other than the
owner's property, the owner shall be responsible for all repair costs, including repair to streets,
sidewalks, curbs, gutters, sewer lines, irrigation facilities, storm drains, lawns, fences, gas lines,
other water mains, telephone lines and electrical lines.
D. Old Private Service Lines: Old private water service lines may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and being tested as required by the city, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.
E. Conformance With Building And Plumbing Codes; Inspection:
1. The materials of construction of the private water service line and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the applicable building and plumbing codes and standards as have been or may
be adopted by the city.
2. The private water service connection to the city water service line shall conform to the
requirements of the applicable building and plumbing codes and standards as adopted by the
city.
3. All connections to or extensions of the service line, as previously installed by the city, or under
its authorization, shall be made in accordance with the requirements of the state plumbing code
for such an installation. The connection of the service line shall be inspected by the city before
the installation is backfilled and before the water is turned on for use at the premises.
F. Service Line Size And Location:
1. The private water service line from the building to the point of connection with the city water
service line shall be as specified by the water department, city engineer or city building officer.
The city shall determine the size of the city water service line and water meter.
2. The alignment of the private water service line from the outlet of the building to the city water
service line shall be reasonably straight and perpendicular to the water main and shall be
located such that the distance between the water service line and the sewer service line shall be
a minimum of ten feet (10').
G. Cross Connection Prohibited: No person shall make or permit the cross connection of any private
water supply to a water line that is served by the municipal water system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 223/528
H. Notify City For Inspection: The applicant for the city water service line permit shall notify the city
when the connection of the private water service line to the city water service line is ready for
inspection.
I. Excavations Guarded; Restoration: All excavations for all water service installations shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored
in a manner satisfactory to the city.
J. Private Fire Service Connection: The installation of a private fire service connection shall comply in
all respects to the requirements for a city water service line and the owner, or his agent, will be
required to pay all costs for connection and extension of the facility from the municipal water main.
K. Connections Made By Plumber: The connection of the private water service line to the public water
service line and the connection of a private fire service connection to the municipal water main
shall be made by a plumber holding a valid license.
L. Meter, Stop Valve And Stopcock:
1. A separate and independent city water service meter and stop valve shall be provided for every
authorized water user.
2. To each service pipe there shall be attached at the inside line of the curb a stopcock and key
box which shall be paid for by the water consumer and be under the exclusive control of the
superintendent of the waterworks. (2003 Code § 9-01-07)
9-1-8: REJECTION OF MATERIALS OR WORKMANSHIP:
The city may reject any materials or workmanship for cause and upon such, the rejected material shall
be removed and replaced with approved material. Disapproved workmanship shall cause the removal
and replacement of all materials involved, including appurtenances such as excavations, backfilling
and other work items. (2003 Code § 9-01-08)
9-1-9: BACKFILLING AND SURFACE REPAIR:
A. Owner Responsibility; Costs: All backfilling and surface repair required by a water service
installation shall be the owner's responsibility. When the city makes installation of a city water
service, all costs of surface repair and backfilling shall be included in the installation charge.
B. Work Under Private Contract: When the owner has the water service installation done under private
contract, the costs for surface repair shall be the owner's responsibility.
C. Cuts Must Be Paved Within One Week: In no case shall a pavement cut go unpaved for more than
one week. During cold weather or when hot asphalt is not available, cold mix asphalt may be used
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 224/528
as a temporary patch. Such temporary patch must be replaced within two (2) weeks or as soon as
weather permits.
D. Conformance With Special Specifications; Inspection And Approval: All surface repair and
backfilling shall conform to special specifications promulgated by the city for water line installation
and shall be subject to inspection by and approval of the city, or where applicable, the county
highway district. (2003 Code § 9-01-09)
9-1-10: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTIONS OR TESTING:
A. Free access to all places supplied with water, at all reasonable hours, shall be allowed the water
superintendent, assistant water superintendent, city engineer, mayor, city clerk, committee from the
city council, or their designee, to examine the apparatus, the amount used, and the manner of use
of the same, and any water user violating any of the rules and regulations controlling the water
supply shall be subject to penalty as provided for in section 9-1-35 of this chapter.
B. The city, through its authorized representative bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted, during proper and reasonable hours of the day, to enter all properties, premises or
buildings to which water is furnished from the municipal water system for testing or for any other
purpose necessary for the proper administration of the water system in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Also, the city, through its authorized representative bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the
city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, repair and maintenance of any portion of the municipal water system lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved. (2003 Code § 9-01-10)
9-1-11: WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS:
A. Permit Required: No extensions of city or privately owned water mains fed by the city water system
shall be made without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city engineer. Each main line
extension must conform to the current and applicable public works construction standards adopted
by the city.
B. Compliance With City Policies; Responsibility For Costs: All proposed extensions of the municipal
water system to serve undeveloped areas within the existing corporate limits, newly annexed areas
or areas outside the corporate limits shall comply with existing water system extension policies and
standards and with the overall master plan for the city municipal water supply system. Costs for all
extensions to any property shall be the responsibility of that property owner or his agent. Cost for
water service extensions within the property for which the extension is requested shall also be the
responsibility of the owner or his agent. When it is necessary to install oversized mains as part of
an extension, the cost of all oversized lines will be the responsibility of the owner or his agent.
Such water line extensions, public or private, shall be extended to the farthest boundary of the
property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 225/528
C. Fire Hydrants And Service Lines: It shall also be the property owner's or his agent's responsibilities
to install all necessary fire hydrants and city water service lines for all extensions of the municipal
water system at no expense to the city. Unless a special permit is granted by the city, all municipal
water system extensions, including the city water service lines, to newly developing areas shall be
installed prior to the construction of any new streets.
D. Approval Of Plans: All design and construction of any extensions to the municipal water system
shall comply with the official specifications as adopted by the city for the water distribution system.
In approving a plan for extension to the municipal water system, the city reserves the right to
stipulate other requirements such as a special permit fee, rights of way limits, sequence of
construction, time limits for having existing service disrupted, the filing of a performance bond and
other similar measures as may be required to protect the public. No work shall commence on any
such extension of the municipal water system until the extension project has been approved by the
city engineer.
E. City Service Line; Permit And Fees: If it is necessary for the city to provide a city water service line
after the extension has been accepted by the city, the owner, or his agent, shall be required to pay
the hookup and other applicable fees and standard installation charge as well as the standard
permit and inspection fee. (2003 Code § 9-01-11)
9-1-12: EXTENT OF SERVICE:
The service pipes must be so arranged that the supply to each separate house or premises may be
controlled by a separate stopcock placed within or near the curb. Where water is already supplied
through one service to several houses or families, the superintendent may, at his discretion, either
decline to furnish water until separate services are provided, or continue the supply on condition that
one person shall pay for all on the same service. (2003 Code § 9-01-12)
9-1-13: BASIS FOR AUTHORIZED WATER USER CHARGES:
A. System Established: There hereby is established a system of periodic service charges and fees for
the authorized use of, and for service rendered by, the municipal water system, and which charges
and fees shall be as near as possible, uniform as to the different users served by said municipal
water system. The rates, charges and fees provided by this chapter are hereby levied and
assessed against the authorized water user or owner, and his property, having any water service
connection with the municipal water system.
B. Property Subject To Charges: It is specifically enacted that all improved property in the city to which
the municipal water system is available, but is not used by the owner or occupier of said parcel of
land, is still subject to user charges under the provisions of this chapter to cover the cost of
standby fire protection facilities and other benefits. (2003 Code § 9-01-14)
9-1-14: WATER USER AND EQUIVALENT CONNECTION:
Each user and parcel being subject to water user charges as provided for hereinabove is assessed for
the purpose of establishing the equivalent connection rating and the monthly service charge or fee to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 226/528
be charged or assessed to and against the property. The assessment takes into consideration the
estimated volume of water to be used, the uniformity of the use of the water, the standby benefits of
the water system for fire protection and for other factors so as to as nearly as possible fix the rate,
charge or fee upon the same relative basis as is imposed upon other like property within the city that
has the municipal water service available. (2003 Code § 9-01-15)
9-1-15: CONNECTION TO CITY WATER SYSTEM OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
In order to obtain municipal water system service to parcels that are either partially or entirely outside
of the corporate city limits, the following provisions must be complied with:
A. There shall be an application form which shall provide that the applicant will agree to the terms and
conditions required by this section as a consideration for obtaining such service. The city council
shall establish an application fee, which fee shall be based upon various classes of applications as
recommended by the public works director given the amount of staff review required for processing
the application. The application form shall specify the legal description of the parcels for which
service is being applied, the name and address of the legal owners of the parcels, and purpose of
the requested service.
B. A completed application must be filed with the public works department.
C. Following the filing of a completed application form and the payment of the application fee, the
public works director shall then review the circumstances presented by the application in
accordance with the terms and conditions and regulations of this chapter as are relevant to the
application and which shall also include a review of the effect the granting of the application will
have on the ability of the municipal water system to provide an acceptable level of service to
developed parcels with existing service and reasonable service capacity to be held in reserve for in
city users.
D. The public works director shall then review the findings and recommendations with the applicant for
comment.
E. Upon being satisfied that the application for service is complete and that all information needed to
determine serviceability has been presented, the public works director shall then submit the
application and a report of recommendations to the city council regarding the application.
Nevertheless, if the public works director determines that the proposed developments is not
serviceable, he may deny the application.
F. The city council, in the exercise of its discretion, may either grant or deny the application after
review of the application and the report of recommendations of the public works director.
G. In the event the city council grants the application, it shall include as a condition that the legal
owners and/or applicable occupants of the parcels shall enter into an agreement for the extension
of domestic water service outside the city limits (hereinafter in this section referred to as the
"agreement"), which agreement form shall provide that the legal owners of the parcels agree that
the provisions of the city's ordinances, regulations and policies, and inspection fees, which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 227/528
appertain to the regulation, control and use of its domestic water system, including hookup and
service fees as apply to terms of the "agreement", and which form shall also provide that the
owners of the parcels agree to the annexation into the city of the parcels serviced; and the city
council may also impose such other conditions of granting the application as are reasonable to
assure the protection of the level of service to previously developed parcels within the city limits.
H. The water user of the parcels serviced pursuant to a granted application under this section shall be
considered a user and subject to the terms and conditions of the agreement so long as the
property being served remains outside of the corporate limits of the city.
I. Notwithstanding subsection E of this section, if the requested connection is for a residence, or a
multi-family residence or commercial or industrial user development that requires only a two inch
(2") or smaller service, and if water service is readily available to the affected parcel without
extension of service, then, if the public works director deems it in the best interests of the city to do
so, said connection may be authorized by the public works director without action by the city
council. If the director declines to approve the connection, the request may, upon consent of the
mayor, proceed to the city council for final decision. (2003 Code § 9-01-16)
9-1-16: POWER OF MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL TO SET CHARGES:
The mayor and city council shall determine and set all applicable fees and charges for use of the
water system. Such fees and charges may be set by resolution. (2003 Code § 9-01-17)
9-1-17: PURPOSE OF MONTHLY WATER USER CHARGE:
The monthly water user charge is established to cover administrative, operation, maintenance and
replacement costs of the system, and to provide a fund to pay for capital improvement costs,
additions, oversized extensions to the system, or redemption of bonds that have been used to finance
system improvements, all as a part of the city's responsibility to provide adequate domestic water
service and facilities for the city. The monthly water user charge shall be set by resolution of the city
council and shall be effective upon the date and time cited in the resolution. For new connections, the
water user charge is to begin when the connection to the city service line has been inspected and
approved, or within sixty (60) days after the city service line has been installed, whichever is the
earliest. (2003 Code § 9-01-18)
9-1-18: MONTHLY RATES:
A. User Charge:
1. All owners who receive or have the right to receive the benefit of the municipal water system
shall, in return for said benefit, pay monthly user charges as described below. The monthly user
charge shall be based on the amount of water used and the amount of fire and health protection
provided by the municipal water supply system, plus the cost of reading the meters, preparing
and sending utility bills, collecting monthly fees, and administering and overseeing the system by
various city employees and contractors. The owners of all property within the corporate limits,
which property is within three hundred feet (300') of the municipal water supply system or within
six hundred feet (600') of a fire hydrant, shall pay a minimum monthly user charge. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 228/528
minimum monthly user charge for all uses shall be based on the most recent cost of service
study. All other water service connections shall be prorated as to the number of EDUs assigned
to that water user by this chapter, or as determined by the public works director, and will be
computed on an individual basis. Any user having more than one classification of use shall be
charged for the sum of classifications.
2. The minimum monthly user charge shall be set by resolution of the city council and be based on
an EDU unit. Any owner that has a total EDU rating less than one shall pay a minimum monthly
user charge for one full EDU. Any owner which has an EDU rating greater than one shall pay a
minimum monthly user charge that is the product of that user's EDU rating multiplied by charge
per EDU. Example: A laundry having twelve (12) machines would have an equivalent connection
rating of 4.00 + (2 x 0.25) = 4.50 and a subsequent minimum monthly user charge of (4.50) x ($
the charge per EDU).
3. Each owner will pay a monthly user fee based on the quantity of water used and the schedule of
water use fee in table I, as established by resolution of the city council and on file in the city
office. Each owner shall pay, as full compensation for the benefits derived from the municipal
water supply system, the minimum monthly user fee or the monthly user fee, whichever is
greater. Should an owner request a city water service line to be disconnected, for any reason,
there shall be paid to the city a disconnection fee as set by the water superintendent, with
approval of the city council. The owner must request the city to place the line back in service.
There will be a charge set by the water superintendent with approval of the city council
associated with the reactivation of the existing service line. All monthly water rates will be
charged against the property for which the city water service line is installed. The owner of
record is liable for that amount, which must be paid before the water service is resumed. In the
event an owner leaves an unclaimed balance in his account, that amount shall be kept for six (6)
months, after which time it shall revert to the general fund of the city. The owner of the property
serviced shall pay for the monthly user charge and such owner will be billed for such monthly
user charge.
B. Charges For Water, Service Line Installations And Other Fees:
1. The charges for water shall be as set by resolution.
2. In case a water meter fails to register correctly the water used, the owner shall pay for the water
on the basis of the average reading of the meter for the previous three (3) months. Water meter
installation charges shall be as follows:
a. For all meters and service lines installed, the charge shall be set by the public works director.
All installed meters shall be property of the city.
b. Service applicability fees, as set by resolution by the city council.
C. Private Fire Service:
1. Available only on monthly flat rate charge when used for fire protection only; owner to install all
lines to the city mains at his expense. All connections to be supervised by the city and to
conform to city requirements and city codes. Fees shall be set by the city council by resolution.
2. All private fire service lines shall be equipped with gate valve or thermal automatic openings and
backflow prevention as approved by the water superintendent.
3. Private fire service lines shall be used for fire control only. Any other use is unlawful.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 229/528
D. Fire Hydrant Use: Water drawn from any fire hydrant, public or private, except when a private fire
hydrant resides behind or downstream of a water meter, shall have a fire hydrant meter installed by
the water department for a set up fee, daily availability fee and a consumption fee to be set by
resolution. In no case shall any water be drawn from a public or private fire hydrant by a person or
company, excluding authorized city personnel, without the permission of the city water
superintendent. Failure to obtain permission, permit and/or fire hydrant meter may be cited for theft
of city services and public endangerment. It is the responsibility of the person drawing water from
any fire hydrant to ensure that all backflow prevention measures, procedures and equipment are in
place prior to connecting to said fire hydrant. (2003 Code § 9-01-19; amd. 2012 Code)
9-1-19: PAYMENT OF USER CHARGES; LATE FEE:
All utility charges shall be due and payable to the city clerk between the first and tenth day of each
calendar month for the billing from the previous month. Upon failure to pay the same, as prescribed,
each owner shall pay, in addition to the amount due, a late fee in such amount as established by
resolution of the city council. (2003 Code § 9-01-20; amd. 2012 Code)
9-1-20: DELINQUENCIES; CITY PROCEDURE:
A. Termination Of Service; Notice: The city clerk shall furnish each property owner a statement of the
amount due for utility service for the preceding month or up to the time that the water meter has
been read and for other charges relating to the water system and other utility service; and if any
owner neglects to pay his utility bill by the due date, the utility user's account shall be delinquent.
Owners shall be notified by regular mail of this delinquency and if the bill is not paid in full within
ten (10) days after service of this notification on the owner, the right to utility service shall cease
and terminate. A fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council shall be
charged each time an individual or entity's water services are reconnected after a disconnect due
to nonpayment. (2003 Code § 9-01-21; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Termination Of Water Service For Reasons Other Than Nonpayment Of City Utility Bills: City water
services may be terminated for the following:
1. Failure to comply with building permits or failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy prior to
occupying a building.
2. Failure to comply with a minimum maintenance citation or order.
3. Failure to pay any fine, assessment, charge, penalty or fee to the city when it becomes due.
4. Any other failure to comply with a duly issued city code violation citation.
C. Lien Imposed: All delinquent charges or fees, as provided by this section, not paid after the final
determination of the delinquent account, shall be imposed as a lien against and upon the property
or premises against which such charge or fee is levied or assessed; and the city clerk shall, at the
time of certifying the city taxes, certify such delinquencies together with all penalties to the county
tax collector, and when so certified, the same shall be a lien upon the property. All monies
collected by the city clerk under the provisions of this section shall be paid over to the city treasurer
in the same manner as is required for the payment of other city monies. (2003 Code § 9-01-21)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 230/528
9-1-21: TURNING ON WATER AFTER TURNOFF FOR NONPAYMENT:
If any person, after the water has been turned off from the premises on account of nonpayment of
rates, or for failure to pay charges for the repair of water lines, assessed to the owner, or for other
violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to the water supply, shall turn on or permit to be turned
on, or use or permit the water to be used without authority, he shall be subject to the penalties
provided for in section 9-1-35 of this chapter. (2003 Code § 9-01-22)
9-1-22: AUTHORITY TO AMEND REGULATIONS:
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the mayor and city council from amending, altering, or adding
to the provisions of this chapter in relation to the water supply or the rules of same which may be
adopted in conformity therewith; provided, that no alteration in water rates shall apply to any charge
upon, or contract made with, an owner under this chapter until after the expiration of the time for which
such charge was made or contract entered into. Hereafter when, and/or if, the mayor and city council
deem it advisable to alter the water or installation rates or charges as in this chapter recorded, such
changes shall be made by resolution. (2003 Code § 9-01-23)
9-1-23: WATER FUND:
All fees and charges received and collected under the authority of this chapter shall be credited to a
fund to be designated as the water fund. The accounts of said fund shall show all receipts and
expenditures for the administration, maintenance, operation, expansion, upkeep and repair of the
domestic water system and any payments into a sinking fund established for the purpose of paying
principal of and interest on the water indebtedness of the city, which shall from time to time be
outstanding. As provided by law, when budgeted and appropriated, the funds and credits to the
account of the water fund shall be available for the payment of the requirements for the maintenance,
operation, expansion, repairs and upkeep of the domestic water system of the city, and to the extent
legally available, for payment into a sinking fund established for the payment of the principal and
interest on any water bond indebtedness of the city which shall from time to time be outstanding.
(2003 Code § 9-01-24)
9-1-24: PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS:
Where the municipal water system is not available under the provisions of this chapter, or when
placed outside of the public right of way or within a planned unit development or commercial or
industrial development, a private water system may be installed; provided, that the system complies
with all the provisions of this chapter.
A. Permit Required; Fee: Before commencement of construction of a private water system, the owner
shall first obtain written permit from the city. The application for said permit shall be made on a
form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by plans, specifications and other
information as may be deemed necessary by the city engineer. A permit and inspection fee set by
resolution shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. This fee is refunded when a
building permit is filed and paid for.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 231/528
B. Inspection Of System: A permit for a private water system shall not permit the use of the system
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city. The city shall be allowed to inspect
the work at any stage of construction and, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the
work is ready for various inspections, and before any underground works are covered. The
inspection shall be made by the city engineer or his designee by the end of the next working day
after receipt of notice from applicant.
C. Compliance With State Regulations: The type, capacities, location and layout of a private water
system shall comply with all of the rules and regulations and recommendations of the state
department of environmental and community services (health and welfare).
D. Mandatory Connection With City Water When Available: The owner or occupant of any house,
building or property used for residential, commercial, industrial, governmental or recreational use,
or other purpose, situated within the city which is abutting on or having a permanent right of access
to any street, alley or right of way in which there is located a city water line is hereby required to
cease using any other water system and at his expense to connect such building directly with the
city water in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within fifteen (15) days after the date of
official notice from the city to do so; provided, however, that the city water is within three hundred
feet (300') of any property line where said building to be served is located. At such time as the
municipal water system becomes available to the property served by the private water system, and
the owner or tenant connects his property to municipal service as required, it is mandatory that the
private water supply is not connected or cross connected in any way to the water lines served by
the municipal water system.
E. Conduct Of Private System; Health And Safety: The owners shall operate and maintain the private
water facility in a manner conducive to public health and safety at all times, and at no expense to
the city.
F. Provisions Additional To State Regulations: No statement contained in this section shall be
construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state health
and welfare. (2003 Code § 9-01-25)
9-1-25: WATER LINE DEVELOPMENT:
The primary cost and responsibility for water line development shall be that of the owner, subdivider or
developer. It shall be the owner, subdivider or the developer's responsibility to purchase and lay water
lines from the present water supply to the proposed project and to the boundary of the project farthest
from the original water supply line. The city, however, recognizes that in certain instances it may be
desirable from the city's standpoint, to have a larger line installed than required to serve the specific
development in question. When such a situation exists, it is the city's policy to require the larger line,
and to varying degrees, depending on each specific situation, possibly participate in the increased
costs necessitated by the larger line. (2003 Code § 9-01-26)
9-1-26: STOPPAGE OF WORK:
The public works director has the authority to stop work on any water system installation or
improvement. Work shall remain stopped until the public works director is satisfied that the problem
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 232/528
has been corrected and written approval to resume work has been obtained from the public works
director. (2003 Code § 9-01-27)
9-1-27: CITY NOT LIABLE FOR SHORTAGE:
The city shall not be held liable for damage to any person or property by reason of stoppage or other
interruption of the water supply, caused by scarcity of water, lack of pressure, accident to works or
mains, alterations, additions or repairs, or from other unavoidable causes. (2003 Code § 9-01-29)
9-1-28: LAWN SPRINKLING AND WATER USE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Lawn And Garden Sprinkling:
1. Sprinkling To Cease During Fire: Fountains and sprinkling for lawns, yards or gardens shall not
be operated during or after any alarm of fire until the signal is given that the fire is out. No
fountain attachment shall be of greater than three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter, and there shall
be a stopcock to each fountain attachment and the same shall be under the control of the
superintendent of waterworks. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section 9-1-35 of this chapter.
2. Sprinkling Hose Size: Sprinklers for lawns, gardens and yards may not be larger than threefourths
inch (3/4") in diameter, and in any time of scarcity of water, whenever it shall, in the
judgment of the mayor and city council be necessary and they shall so direct, the mayor shall, by
proclamation, still further limit the use of water for other than domestic purposes; and in his
discretion provide that lawn sprinklers and hydrants shall be used only on alternate days in
certain designated localities and any person violating the provisions of this section or of any
proclamation made by the mayor shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as
provided in section 9-1-35 of this chapter.
B. Water Use Restricted: Watering troughs for animals shall not be allowed a constant flow of water
but shall be allowed to use such quantity as shall supply the actual wants of the stock having
access thereto, nor shall continuous streams of water be permitted to flow from hydrants, faucets
or stops over wash basins, water closets or urinals. (2003 Code § 9-01-30)
9-1-29: POST HOLE DIGGING:
No telegraph or telephone posts, or other posts, shall be put down or set within four feet (4') of any
water service pipe, nor within six feet (6') of any main pipe. (2003 Code § 9-01-31)
9-1-30: FIRE HYDRANTS:
A. Authority To Operate; Obstructing Access: It shall be unlawful for any person, except one duly
authorized by the city, to open, close, operate, turn on, turn off, interfere with, attach any pipe or
hose to or connect anything with any fire hydrant or auxiliary valve belonging to the city. Further, it
shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the access to any fire hydrant by placing around or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 233/528
thereon any stone, brick, lumber, dirt or other material, or to wilfully or carelessly injure the same.
(2003 Code § 9-01-32)
B. Damaging Hydrants: Any person who shall wilfully or carelessly run any vehicle against a fire
hydrant, or draw or attempt to draw water therefrom, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code,
and be liable for all damages done to said hydrant. (2003 Code § 9-01-32; amd. 2012 Code)
9-1-31: PROTECTION OF PIPES:
All water users shall keep their pipes, connections and other apparatus in good repair and protected
from frost at their own expense; but no person, except under the direction of the superintendent of
waterworks, shall be allowed to dig into the street or sidewalk for the purpose of laying, removing or
repairing any service pipe. (2003 Code § 9-01-33)
9-1-32: WASTE OF WATER OR INJURY TO WATER SYSTEM:
A. Waste Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any water user to waste water or allow it to be wasted by
imperfect water stops, valves or leaky pipes that are not under the jurisdiction of the city, or to
permit the malicious or wilful consumption of water, having no beneficial use. The city, based on
meter readings, will make a determination of where water has been wasted and shall notify the
user of that determination. It shall then be the user's responsibility to make the necessary repairs,
or to institute actions that will correct the situation within ten (10) days of the city's notification to
the user. All costs incurred, including the cost of wasted water and any repairs, shall be the
responsibility of the user and if it is necessary that the city correct the situation or make repairs, the
cost and charges therefor may be assessed and added to the owner's water bill.
B. Damage Or Injury To System:
1. No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the water system.
2. No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, pipeline, fire hydrant, fitting connection
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal water system. (2003 Code § 9-01-
34)
9-1-33: USERS LIABLE FOR VIOLATION:
If any owner shall permit any person from any other premises, or any unauthorized user to use or
obtain water from his premises or water fixtures, whether inside or outside of his buildings, the water
supply of such owner may be cut off and the amount paid therefor, if any, forfeited; and such
unauthorized person shall for taking said water be liable to a fine, plus costs. Any user or owner
suspected of having violated the provisions of this chapter, other than nonpayment of user fees,
assessments or charges for repairs, shall be notified of the violation and be notified that if the violation
is not corrected within ten (10) days, the superintendent shall shut off his water; provided, however, in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 234/528
the event of an emergency, the superintendent may shut off the water without notification. (2003 Code
§ 9-01-35)
9-1-34: PUBLIC WORKS INFRASTRUCTURE:
Section 8-3-7 of this code shall apply to public works infrastructure construction and public works
projects. (2003 Code § 9-01-37)
9-1-35: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Notice Of Violation; Responsibility For Remedy: Any person found to be violating any provisions of
this chapter, other than for nonpayment of a water bill, shall be served by the city with a written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing ten (10) days for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations and if necessary make all corrections and repairs to the system or pay for same if the
city has to make the correction or repair. (2003 Code § 9-01-36)
B. Penalty Imposed; Discontinue Service: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the
time limit provided for in this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code, and shall have his water service terminated. Each day in
which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (2003 Code § 9-01-36;
amd. 2012 Code)
C. Liability To City For Loss Or Damage: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of
such violation and, for other than nonpayment of water bill violations, may have their water supply
terminated after the above ten (10) day notice period has expired.
D. Cumulative Penalties: These penalties shall not be construed to be exclusive but shall be
construed to be cumulative of, and in addition to, any other penalties provided for in this city code
or the criminal code of the state. As an example, a person stealing water could be criminally
charged with theft or a person injuring the water system could be criminally charged with malicious
injury to property. For all criminal violations relating or pertaining to the water system, the notice
provisions provided for in this chapter shall not apply. (2003 Code § 9-01-36)
Chapter 2
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
9-2-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted for the benefit of consumers receiving their water supply from the city by
protecting the water supply system of the city from actual or potential pollution or contamination
through cross connections. (2003 Code § 9-03-01)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 235/528
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BACKFLOW: The flow, in the opposite direction from that intended, of any foreign substance which
may enter the water supply system or of any contaminated or polluted water.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: An approved device which counteracts back pressure and/or
prevents back siphonage. A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, a double check
valve assembly, a pressure or atmospheric vacuum breaker shall be considered approved if it has
successfully passed the performance tests of the University Of Southern California engineering center,
or other testing laboratories acceptable to the city and the state of Idaho department of environmental
quality.
CITY: The city of Blackfoot, or any authorized agent thereof.
CONTAMINATION: The infiltration of either solids, liquids or gases into the water supply system which
does constitute public health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical arrangement whereby the water supply system is connected
either directly or indirectly with any unapproved water supply, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage
reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains or may contain any substance capable of
pollution or contamination.
CUSTOMER: Any persons and/or premises receiving water from the city water supply system.
POLLUTION: The infiltration of either solids, liquids or gases into the water supply system which,
although not constituting a public health hazard, does impair the water quality with respect to taste,
odor, color or turbidity.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM: The potable water supply system provided by the city. (2003 Code § 9-
03-02)
9-2-3: PROTECTION AGAINST CROSS CONNECTIONS:
No water service or fire sprinkler system connection shall remain or be installed to any customer
unless the water supply system is adequately protected against cross connection by backflow
prevention devices commensurate with the degree of hazard that either does or potentially may exist.
The installation or maintenance of a cross connection that may endanger the water supply system
quality shall be unlawful and is prohibited. Any such cross connections now existing or hereafter
installed shall be abated. The control or elimination of cross connections shall be in accordance with
this chapter, the most current Pacific Northwest section - American water works association cross
connection control manual for accepted procedures and practices, and the Idaho regulations for public
drinking water systems, section 01-8601.04, dated July 1985, or subsequent revisions, together with
any other publications pertaining to cross connection control approved by the director of the state
department of environmental quality. (2003 Code § 9-03-03)
9-2-4: USE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 236/528
A. Installation Requirements; Certain Circumstances: Backflow prevention devices shall be installed, if
possible, within the confines of the affected building in a readily accessible location with adequate
clearances for maintenance and testing. If the preceding installation is not possible, the device
shall be installed in an accessible, aboveground, locked, heated, enclosure adjacent to the
structure. The structure shall be situated above seasonal high groundwater, shall contain a floor
drain, shall provide adequate room for testing and maintenance and shall protect the device
against freezing. Backflow prevention devices shall be installed under any circumstances included
in, but not limited to, the following:
1. Premises housing an auxiliary water supply that has not been approved by the city for its quality
and protection.
2. Premises having intricate plumbing arrangements which make it difficult to ascertain whether or
not cross connections exist.
3. Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross connections could not be made
during reasonable hours, at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross connections do not
exist.
4. Premises where any substance handled under pressure could enter into the water supply
system. This shall include the handling of process and cooling waters.
5. Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being created or recreated.
B. Types Of Facilities Requiring Devices:
1. The following types of facilities shall fall into one of the above categories where a backflow
prevention device is required to protect the water supply system, unless the city and the state
department of environmental quality determine that no hazard exists:
a. Sewage treatment plants.
b. Laboratories.
c. Food processing plants.
d. Chemical or other industrial plants.
e. Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics.
f. Agricultural chemical storage, formulation and distribution facilities.
g. Petroleum processing or storage plants.
h. Car washes.
i. Other facilities specified by the city and the state department of environmental quality.
2. Certain public facilities present potential sources of cross connections. All of the following
facilities and any others the city specify shall be required to install backflow prevention devices
as required by the city:
a. Schools.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 237/528
b. Movie theaters.
c. Recreation and sports grounds.
d. Restaurants.
e. Stores (wholesale or retail).
C. Types Of Devices For Use: The type of backflow prevention device required for a particular
situation shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard presented. The following guides shall
be used:
1. Where the water supply system could be contaminated as a result of cross connection, an air
gap separation or a reduced pressure backflow prevention device shall be installed.
2. Where cross connection could result in pollution of the water supply system, either of the above
devices or a double check valve assembly shall be used.
3. Back siphonage, such as from irrigation sprinkler systems, may be prevented by the use of
either atmospheric vacuum breakers or pressure vacuum breakers, as directed by the city and
the state department of environmental quality.
D. Stagnant Water; Double Check Valve Assembly: Facilities having plumbing arrangements
connected to the water supply system, where the water remains stagnant for prolonged periods of
time, shall be required to install a double check valve assembly. (2003 Code § 9-03-04)
9-2-5: SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION:
A. Supervision; Expense: Backflow prevention devices required by this chapter shall be installed
under the supervision of and with the approval of the city. Such installations shall be completely at
the customer's expense.
B. Inspection And Testing:
1. Inspecting Firm; Customer's Expense: Backflow prevention devices installed prior to the
effective date hereof, shall be inspected and tested by a testing firm of the customer's choice
that is qualified and approved by the city to inspect and test said devices. This work shall be at
the customer's expense and the results forwarded to the city. Any protection device installed
prior to the effective date hereof that is not approved by the city shall be replaced by an
approved device, at the customer's expense.
2. Replacement Of Faulty Parts: Annual inspection and testing of all installed backflow prevention
devices shall be carried out by a qualified and approved testing firm of the customer's choice.
Any parts found faulty shall be replaced. All inspection, testing and parts replacement data shall
be forwarded to the city. All of this work shall be carried out at the customer's expense.
3. Frequency Of Testing: When the city considers it necessary, because of the degree of hazard
involved should any cross connection occur, inspection and testing may be more frequent than
annually.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 238/528
4. Right Of Entry Allowed: During reasonable hours, all customers shall permit entry of the city to
inspect for cross connections.
5. Newly Constructed Premises; Compliance Required: No water service shall be supplied to any
newly constructed premises until the said premises has successfully passed the city inspection
for cross connections and complies with this chapter.
C. Verify Need For Cross Connection: Inspection shall be made by the city waterworks department to
verify requirement of a cross connection control device. Inspection shall be made by the city
waterworks department after the device has been installed and prior to its certification. Request for
inspection shall be the responsibility of the customer.
D. Final Determination: The water department shall make the final determination regarding cross
connections. (2003 Code § 9-03-05)
9-2-6: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Grounds For Termination Of Water Service:
1. The following shall be grounds for termination of water service to a customer:
a. Failure to install, maintain, inspect and test any backflow prevention device required by this
chapter.
b. Refusal of access, during reasonable hours, to any property for the purpose of determining
whether or not cross connections exist.
c. Any owner who refuses to comply with current procedures and practices required by this
chapter.
2. Only upon the customer's complete compliance with this chapter shall the service be resumed.
B. Penalty Imposed: Any customer who violates or refuses to comply with this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall for each offense be subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 9-03-06)
Chapter 3
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
9-3-1: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
A. Declaration Of Policy:
1. It is hereby declared that the city owns and operates a municipal sewer system and that the
sewer system has been expanded and a wastewater treatment plant constructed. It is the policy
of the city to operate the sewer system for the benefit of the residents of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 239/528
2. Additionally, due to the integral nature of the requirement of water to operate the sewer system,
violation of the sewer provisions may require termination of water service and to efficiently
enforce these sewer provisions, such water termination is specifically authorized and is the
policy of the city.
a. In the case of private water systems, the sewer may be cut and capped at the user's expense.
Return to service must be completed by a licensed contractor.
B. Purpose: It hereby is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to and for the
protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public and inhabitants of the city, and for the
purpose of controlling the use and connection to and for providing an equitable distribution of the
costs and expenses of maintenance, operation, upkeep and repair of the entire sewerage system
which includes the sewer collection system and sewage disposal facilities of the city:
1. To charge and collect service charges or fees upon all lots, lands, property and premises served
or benefited by the sewerage system of the city, which system and facilities consist generally of
all pipelines, conduits, catch basins, manholes, cleanouts, sewer mains, intercepting sewers,
outfall sewers, lift stations, pumps, structures, mechanical equipment and facilities for the
treatment and disposal of sewage or sewage byproducts;
2. To provide for industrial cost recovery from all industrial users; and
3. To provide for the control, use and administration of the installation of private sewage disposal
systems where a public sanitary sewer is not available. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be
as follows:
ACT: The federal water pollution control act entitled public law 92-500, and its amendments of 1972,
as administered by the United States environmental protection agency (EPA).
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees
centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the
discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (5') outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the point of connection with the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
CITY: Refers to the city of Blackfoot, Bingham County, Idaho, or its authorized or designated agent,
representative, or deputy thereto.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU): The average volume of domestic waste discharged from an
average residential dwelling unit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 240/528
FLOW: The volume of sewage being discharged into the sewage system.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY: Financial recovery by the city, from the industrial users of the
sewerage system, of that portion of the U.S. government grant amount allocable to the treatment of
wastes from such users pursuant to section 204(b) of the act.
INDUSTRIAL USERS: A. Any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works identified in
the standard industrial classification manual (SIC), 1972, office of management and budget, or North
American industry classification system (NAICS), 1997, U.S. office of management and budget as
amended and supplemented under the following divisions:
1. SIC division A: Agriculture, forestry and fishing; NAICS sector 11: Agriculture, forestry, fishing
and hunting.
2. SIC division B: Mining; NAICS sector 21: Mining.
3. SIC division D: Manufacturing; NAICS sector 31-33: Manufacturing.
4. SIC division E: Transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary services; NAICS
sector 48-49: Transportation and warehousing; NAICS sector 51: Communications; NAICS
sector 22: Utilities.
5. SIC division G: Retail Trade; NAICS sector 44-46: Retail trade; NAICS sector 72:
Accommodations and food services.
6. SIC division I: Services; NAICS sector 54: Professional, scientific, and technical services;
NAICS sector 56: Administrative and support and waste management and remediation
services; NAICS sector 61: Educational services; NAICS sector 62: Health care and social
assistance; NAICS sector 71: Arts, entertainment, and recreation; NAICS sector 81: Other
services (except public administration).
B. An industrial user is also defined as follows:
1. A nongovernmental, nonresidential user that discharges more than the equivalent of ten
thousand (10,000) gallons per day of sanitary waste and which is identified in the standard
industrial classification manual under divisions A, B, D, E and I;
2. A user that discharges any wastewater containing toxic pollutants or which has any other
adverse effect on the treatment works; or
3. A commercial user of an individual system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 241/528
C. A user in the SIC divisions and NAICS sectors listed may be excluded if it is determined that it
will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences
through the completion and review of the data disclosure form.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business,
as distinct from sanitary sewage.
MULTIPLE BUILDING DEVELOPMENT: Includes the various types of developments that would have
common or joint ownership areas, such as condominiums, townhouses, mobile home parks or courts,
shopping centers, etc.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
OWNER: A person owning real estate that is, or proposes to be, connected to the sewage system.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution with a
pH value of 7 being neutral.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is
controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are
not admitted.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The point at which the building sewer connects to the public sewer.
SEWAGE OR WASTE MATTER: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and
storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT OR WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY: Any devices and
system used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial
wastes of a liquid nature to implement section 201 of the act.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER AVAILABILITY FEE: A onetime fee assessed per equivalent residential unit (ERU) when
connecting to the sewerage system.
SEWER USER: Any individual, firm, company, association, society or corporation or group who has
connected to the sewerage system.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory. "May" is permissive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 242/528
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes for
more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
STORM DRAIN (Sometimes Termed STORM SEWER): A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted water such as
cooling water.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids, organic or inorganic, that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering as
prescribed in "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And Waste Water" and referred to a
nonfilterable residue.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-3: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all property within the corporate limits of the city, and any
special users outside of the corporate limits of the city, including all property owned or occupied by the
United States Of America, the county, and the state. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-4: CITY AUTHORITY:
The sewer system for the transmission, treatment and disposal of sewage for the city shall be under
the sole and exclusive control of the mayor and city council, who may from time to time direct the
construction, expansion, extension, repair and maintenance of the sewer system owned and operated
by the city as the necessity of the city may require. The cost of maintenance and repair of the city
sewer system may be paid out of the general fund. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-5: SUPERINTENDENT OF SEWERS:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the office of a superintendent of sewers, who shall, under
the direction of the city engineer and the mayor and council, have charge of such works, mains,
laterals, trunk lines, treatment plant, connection of service pipes and conduits, and all other
matters pertaining to the city sewer system. The superintendent shall report to the city engineer
monthly, or as often as required, the condition of the sewer system and make such
recommendations as the nature of the service may require. In the absence of a superintendent, or
if the mayor has not appointed one, the city engineer shall act as superintendent of sewers.
B. Duties: The sewer system shall be kept in repair by the superintendent of sewers and no other
person, unless authorized by him, shall work on or operate said system or any part thereof. It shall
be the superintendent's duty at all times to maintain said system in such a working condition that
the sewage of the city is efficiently and sanitarily carried from the premises of the users of said
system and processed in the wastewater treatment plant owned and operated by the city. (Ord.
2122, 5-6-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 243/528
9-3-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. Adoption: The city shall have the authority to adopt by resolution such rules and regulations as it
shall deem appropriate for the maintenance and charges for said use of the sewer system and
treatment facility as are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Amendment: Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the mayor and council from amending, altering
or adding to the provisions of this chapter in relation to the sewer service supplied by the city in
regard to rates, charges, expansion, alteration, repair or any other matter related to the sewer
system, as changed conditions may require from time to time. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-7: AUTHORITY OF CITY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVES:
A. Right Of Entry: The city, through its authorized representatives, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The city shall
have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining,
ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source
of discharge to the public sewers or natural waterways.
B. Observe Safety Rules; Liability Restrictions: While performing the necessary work on private
properties referred to in subsection A of this section, the authorized representative of the city shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the sewer user and the sewer
user shall be held harmless for injury or death to any city authorized representative, and the city
shall indemnify the sewer user against loss or damage to its property by any authorized city
representative, and against liability claims and demands for personal injury and property damage
asserted against the sewer user and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as
such may be caused by negligence or failure of the sewer user to maintain safe conditions as
required in this chapter or as reasonably required by prudent standards.
C. Access To Easements: The city, through its authorized representatives bearing proper credentials
and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a
duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage works lying within
said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-8: REQUIRED USE OF SEWERS:
A. Connection To Public Sewer: The owner or occupant of any house, building or property used for
residential, commercial, industrial, governmental or recreational use, or other purpose, situated
within the city which is abutting on or having a permanent right of access to any street, alley or
right of way in which there is located a public sewer of the city hereby is required to cease using
any other method of disposing of sewage, waste or polluted water, and at his expense to connect
such building directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within
fifteen (15) days after date of official notice from the city to do so; provided, however, that said
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 244/528
sewer is within three hundred feet (300') of any property line of the building to be served or
common property line in a multiple building development.
B. New Subdivision Or Development: The owner or developer of a new subdivision or development,
whether subdivided or not, shall, at his expense, construct the necessary extensions of the public
sewer system to provide public sewer facilities for each lot or building area in his subdivision.
Additionally, the owner or developer shall have the responsibility, at his expense, of installing the
main sewer line to the boundary in his development which is farthest away from the point at which
initial connection is made to the present city sewer main.
C. Prohibited Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit in any unsanitary manner
on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any
human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
D. Discharge Of Sewage To Natural Outlet: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters,
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of
this chapter.
E. Privies And Septic Tanks: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facilities intended or used for the
disposal of sewage. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-9: REGULATIONS FOR USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
The use of the public sewers of the city shall be in accordance with the following regulations:
A. Discharge Of Surface Waters:
1. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged from any connection any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
2. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, complying with the requirements
of section 308 of the act and on approval of the city, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
B. Prohibited Discharges:
1. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or
wastes to any public sewers:
a. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
b. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 245/528
wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant,
including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two-tenths milligram per liter (0.2 mg/l) as
CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
c. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage
works.
d. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as,
but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails
and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
2. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances,
materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the city, that such wastes can
harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the wastewater
treatment process, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in
the wastewater treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
a. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F) (65°C).
b. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty
two degrees (32o) (0o) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
c. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower or greater shall be
subject to the review and approval of the city.
d. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating
solutions whether neutralized or not.
e. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or
toxic substances; or wastes exerting any excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that
any such material received in the composite sewage at the wastewater treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the city for such materials.
f. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances in such
concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
g. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
h. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 12.0.
i. Materials which exert or cause:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 246/528
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth,
lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate).
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions).
(3) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the wastewater treatment works.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs", as defined in
section 9-3-2 of this chapter.
j. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by
the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such
degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
C. City Authority:
1. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers,
which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection
B2 of this section, and which, in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
a. Reject the wastes;
b. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
c. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
d. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by
existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 9-3-20 of this chapter.
2. If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of
the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city and subject to
the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
D. Grease, Oil And Sand Interceptors: Grease, oil and/or sand interceptors shall be required on all
new construction for eating establishments, maintenance shops or any other facility that in the
opinion of the city may discharge grease, oil and/or sand and dirt that may restrict or plug the
POTW sewer lines. In addition, any new food establishment planning to open in an existing
building, must ensure that an appropriate grease interceptor be installed prior to opening for
business, or any major remodeling of an existing building that does not currently have any
interceptor installed, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The interceptor shall be
adequately maintained as to prevent overloading of the interceptor, thereby transmitting wastes to
the POTW sewer lines. These interceptors are subject to periodic inspection by the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 247/528
E. Maintenance Of Treatment Facilities: Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
F. Manhole Installation: When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be
safe and accessible at all times.
G. Measurements, Tests And Analyses: All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance
with 40 CFR 136, including, but not limited to, the latest EPA approved edition of "Standard
Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public
Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable
samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required,
the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property.
H. Special Agreements: No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject
to payment therefor by the industrial concern.
I. Notice Of Violation; Remedial Action: Any property owner or sewer user violating the provisions of
this section shall, upon notice by the city, immediately install such preliminary treatment through
separators, traps and/or chemical, physical or biochemical processes as will make and assure that
the sewage contributed from such property or premises will meet the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-10: PERMISSION TO DISCHARGE OBJECTIONABLE WATER OR WASTES:
A. Review And Approval: The admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes having:
1. Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) greater than three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l),
2. Chemical oxygen demand (COD) greater than nine hundred milligrams per liter (900 mg/l),
3. Suspended solids in excess of three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l),
shall be subject to the review and approval of the city.
B. Preliminary Treatment Provided By Owner: Where necessary, in the opinion of the city, the owner
shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the BOD
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 248/528
to three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l), the COD to nine hundred milligrams per liter (900
mg/l) and the suspended solids to three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l). Plans,
specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment
facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the city and of the state department of health and
welfare, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are
obtained in writing. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-11: BUILDING SEWERS AND SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
All materials and workmanship in the installation of building sewers and service connections shall
conform to the following regulations:
A. Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the city. The permit shall not be issued until all sewer availability fees and other fees
have been paid in full.
B. Classes Of Permits: There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 1) a general permit
for residential and commercial sewer service, and 2) industrial user permits for sewer service to
establishments producing industrial wastes.
1. General Permits: General permits shall be applied for by the owner or his agent on a form
provided by the city clerk. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city at the time the
application is filed. Also, the owner or his agent shall pay to the city, at the time the application is
filed, a sewer availability fee, which shall be established by resolution of the city council; and
2. Industrial Permits: Industrial user permits shall be applied for by the owner or his agent by letter
to the city council accompanied by an executed copy of the industrial user agreement together
with any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
city. Industrial user permits shall be approved by the city council based on recommendation by
the engineer for the city. Approval shall be contingent upon the availability of excess capacity in
the wastewater treatment plant, the provisions of this chapter and any other considerations the
city council deems appropriate. The amount of the permit, inspection fee and sewer availability
fee for an industrial wastes sewer service will vary with each permit and shall be established by
the city at the time of application.
C. Costs Borne By Owner; Liability: All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection
of the building sewer and service connection shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify and hold harmless the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer and the marking of the service connection for
same to the public sewer.
D. Separate Connections For Each Building: A separate and independent building sewer and service
connection shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of
another on an interior lot and no separate sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front
building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 249/528
E. Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and being tested as required by the city, to meet all requirements
of this chapter.
F. Conformance With Building And Plumbing Codes: The materials of construction of the building
sewer and service connections, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and
plumbing codes as have been or may be adopted by the city.
G. Pipe Size; Building Sewer Grade And Slope: The building sewer from the building drain to the
public sewer and the service connection thereto shall not be smaller than four inch (4") diameter
sewer pipe.
1. Grade And Slope: The minimum grade or slope of the building sewer shall be as follows:
a. Four inch (4") diameter sewer pipe shall be laid on a grade of not less than one-fourth inch
(1/4") per foot;
b. Six inch (6") diameter sewer pipe shall be laid on a grade of not less than one-eighth inch
(1/8") per foot; and
c. Eight inch (8") diameter sewer pipe shall be laid on a grade of not less than four feet (4') per
one thousand feet (1,000').
2. Alignment: The alignment of the building sewer from the outlet of the building drain to the public
sewer connection shall be straight, with no bends, warps or sags permitted except with the
permission of the city. The trench bottom shall be cut to proper grade so that when the pipe is
laid the body or barrel of the pipe shall be on solid material. Bell holes are to be excavated in the
trench bottom at all pipe joints.
H. Connecting Surface Water Drainage To Building Sewer: No person shall make connection of roof
downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a
public sanitary sewer.
I. Service Connection Requirements: The service connection to the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing codes as adopted by the city. In addition, the materials
and workmanship of the service connection shall meet the following requirements:
1. Precast Fittings: A precast service connection fitting shall be installed as an increment of the
sewer pipeline or installed as an external fabrication to the sewer pipeline; said fabrication to be
installed within the center one-third (1/3) of an individual laying length of the public sewer pipe,
as a precaution in preventing the breaking of the bell or the spigot end of the sewer pipe. The
service connection fitting shall be installed as a watertight connection to the public sewer, care
being taken not to extend the building sewer line into the public sewer line, therefore, creating a
possible restriction. The invert of the building sewer line at the service connection fitting shall be
at an elevation above the invert of the public sewer at least equal to two-thirds (2/3) of the
diameter of the public sewer. All foreign material shall be removed from the sewer pipe and there
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 250/528
shall be a permanent connection which is airtight and watertight between the public sewer line
and the building sewer line.
2. Connection Tee:
a. The building sewer service connection fitting to reinforced sewer pipelines shall be made as
specified under subsection I1 of this section, except that in cutting a hole in reinforced pipe for
installation of the service connection tee, extreme care shall be exercised to avoid damage to
the pipe. The hole for the tee shall be carefully chipped first to expose the reinforcing steel and
the steel cut by torch or saw. No chisel cutting of the reinforcing steel of any character will be
permitted.
b. In lieu of a standard service connection fitting, a riser service connection may be made to
sewer lines that are deep below ground surface. The branch or riser shall be connected the
same as a tee, except that it shall be set vertically over the public sewer pipe, and extended
vertically upward such that the top of the riser is not to be less than five feet (5') below the
surface of the ground.
J. Notify City For Inspection: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
K. Guarding Excavations; Restoration: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored
in a manner satisfactory to the city. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
L. Backwater Devices Required On New Service Connections:
1. Purpose: To prevent sanitary sewer overflows, from blockages or sewer jetting of mainlines, for
municipal sewer customers.
2. Installation:
a. Installation of a backwater valve, to prevent sewage from the main sewer backing up into the
private sewer lines due to cleaning or plugs in the main, is required for all:
(1) New construction,
(2) Replacements or repairs made to an existing sanitary sewer lateral,
(3) Building permit applicants who are remodeling more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
structure area or where plumbing fixtures are added to the property,
(4) Properties that have been damaged by the blockage of the city sanitary sewer main or the
private lateral,
(5) On all new structures where a pump is used to lift sewage to the sanitary sewer system
main line. The backwater relief device shall be located to protect the structure from damage
in the event that the pump is pumping against a closed backflow device.
b. Installation shall be completed by a plumber licensed with the state of Idaho, and in
accordance with current plumbing code. (Ord. 2143, 5-3-2016, eff. 5-3-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 251/528
9-3-12: INDUSTRIAL USERS:
All industrial users of the sewerage system shall comply with any applicable requirements of sections
204(b), 307 and 308 of the federal water pollution control act and 40 CFR 403. There shall be two (2)
classes of industrial users: a) major contributing industry, and b) minor contributing industry.
A. Contributing Industries Defined: The contributing industries are defined as follows:
1. Major Contributing Industry: A major contributing industry is one that:
a. Will contribute greater than ten percent (10%) of the design hydraulic flow of the treatment
works.
b. Will contribute greater than ten percent (10%) of the design pollutant loading of the treatment
works.
c. Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under
section 307(a) of the act.
d. Has significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the
sewerage system or the quality of its effluent.
e. Is classified as a categorical industry or significant industry.
2. Minor Contributing Industry: A minor contributing industry shall be all industries not included in
the major contributing industry classification as defined in subsection A1 of this section.
B. Requirements:
1. Monitoring Wastes: All major contributing industries' wastes shall be monitored by the city or
industry on a regular basis at intervals not less than monthly, and more frequently as the
characteristics of the specific industrial discharge may dictate. Minor contributing industries shall
be monitored by the city or industry as the characteristics of the specific industrial discharge may
dictate as determined by the city.
2. Reports To City: All major contributing industries shall submit to the city on the first day of the
months of June and December, a statement in writing regarding specific actions taken to achieve
full compliance with the requirements of section 307 of the act.
3. Report Changes In Flow Or Characteristics: Each contributing industry shall report any
substantial (exceeding 10 percent plus or minus) change in flow or characteristics of wastewater
being discharged into the sewerage system. The report shall include quantity and quality of
effluent and duration and frequency of discharge. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-13: INSPECTION AND APPROVAL OF CONNECTIONS:
No connection of any kind to a public sewer line shall be made and no sewage permitted to flow
through such connection except pursuant to inspection of and approval issued by the city. See section
9-3-11 of this chapter for sewer permits, inspection fees, inspection notices, etc. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 252/528
9-3-14: REJECTION OF MATERIALS OR WORKMANSHIP:
The city may reject any material or workmanship for cause and, upon such order, rejected material
shall be removed and replaced with approved material. Disapproved workmanship shall cause the
removal and replacement of all materials involved, including appurtenances, excavation, backfilling
and other work items. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-15: SEWER LINE EXTENSIONS:
A. Compliance With Master Plan: All proposed extensions of the municipal sewerage system to serve
undeveloped areas within the existing corporate limits, newly annexed areas or areas outside the
corporate limits shall comply with the overall master plan for the municipal sewerage system.
B. Owner Responsible For Costs; Exception: Costs for all extensions which lie outside the boundary
limits of the property for which the extension is requested shall be the responsibility of that property
owner or his agent. Cost for sewer extensions within the property for which the extension is
requested shall also be the responsibility of the owner or his agent. Sewer extensions shall be
required to extend to the farthest boundary of the development. When it is necessary to install
oversized lines as part of an extension, the cost of all oversized lines will normally be the
responsibility of the owner or his agent. However, the city may, in its discretion, if it has
uncommitted funds in its sewer construction account, participate in a portion of the cost of any
oversized sewer lines.
C. Newly Developed Areas: Unless a special permit is granted by the city, all municipal sewerage
system extensions into newly developing areas shall be installed prior to the construction of any
new streets.
D. Compliance With City Specifications: All design and construction of any extensions to the municipal
sewerage system shall comply with the official specifications for sewerage system extensions as
adopted by the city.
E. Preparation And Filing Of Plans: The plans for all extensions to the sewerage system shall be
prepared as per the licensing requirements of Idaho Code. Three (3) copies of the said plans shall
be filed with the city. Two (2) copies of the plans shall be filed with the state department of
environmental quality for their review and approval as required by Idaho Code. In approving a plan
for extension to the municipal sewerage system, the city reserves the right to stipulate other
requirements such as a special permit fee, rights of way limits, sequence of construction, time
limits for having existing service disrupted, the filing of a performance bond and other similar
measures as may be required to protect the public. No work shall commence on any such
extension of the municipal sewerage system until the extension project has been approved by the
city.
F. Certification By Registered Engineer: After the construction of any municipal sewer system
extensions, it shall be the obligation of the owner, or his agent, to have a registered professional
engineer certify to the city and to the state department of health and welfare that the said system
extensions were installed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications on file with the
respective agencies. Following certification by the registered professional engineer and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 253/528
acceptance by the city, the entire extension of the municipal sewerage system, including the city
sewer service lines, shall become the property of the city and it shall be the city's responsibility to
maintain and operate the system thereafter.
G. Connections Made After Extension Accepted: If it is necessary for the city to permit a sewer service
connection and/or sewer service line at any time after the extension has been originally accepted
by the city, the owner or his agent shall be required to pay the sewer availability fee as well as the
standard permit and inspection fees as may be established by the city for such purposes. (Ord.
2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-16: BACKFILLING:
Backfilling of building sewers and service connections within the limits of public rights of way or
easements shall conform to special specifications promulgated by the city, for sewer installation, and
shall be subject to inspection by and approval of the city. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-17: SEWER EQUIVALENCY FEE:
A. Payment Of Fee Required: Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, any person, firm,
partnership, corporation or association or property owner who has not otherwise paid for, or
contributed proportionately toward, the costs and expenses of constructing a sewer line, whether
that construction has been performed by the city, a local improvement district or a private entity, or
combination thereof, and who subsequently desires to connect to the city sewer system, shall be
required to pay a sewer equivalency fee. In determining who has or has not paid, or contributed
proportionately, toward the costs and expenses of constructing a sewer line, the sole factor shall
be whether that user, or a predecessor in title of the user's property, has in fact, paid consideration
to the city in cash, services or in-kind, for the construction of the sewer trunk line to which he now
desires to connect, which consideration is commensurate with what the user, or his predecessor in
title, would have paid under this section had the user not paid or contributed previously to the cost
of construction of the sewer line.
B. Fee Set By City Council: The sewer equivalency fee for each parcel of ground connected to a trunk
sewer line shall be established and set by the city council, which shall consider the use to which
the property will be put, the expected flows, the amount of capacity of the trunk line that will be
used by the proposed use, and the type of effluent. The council also shall take into consideration
the amount of land that might be able to be serviced by the trunk sewer line, whether the land be
directly adjacent to the trunk line or not, and also shall take into consideration the cost of the
engineering and construction of the trunk line, in current dollars, and shall consider the interest that
could have been earned on the money used to pay for the original sewer line. The sewer
equivalency fee may be different for residential, commercial, and industrial users and may be
different for differing users within those three (3) classifications depending upon the considerations
referenced above but shall be as consistent as possible under similar factual circumstances. The
sewer equivalency fee shall be assessed in terms of single-family equivalent connections. (Ord.
2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-18: COOPERATIVE AND REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 254/528
A. Reimbursement To Sewer User: Should a sewer user at his own expense construct an extension to
the sewer system in a public right of way or easement with prior approval of the city and in
accordance with the standards and designs of the city and which sewer line extension has been
determined by the city to be able to benefit properties other than the user's, the sewer user
constructing the extension may request that the city enter into an agreement with the user such
that all or a portion of the costs of extending the sewer line will be reimbursed to that sewer user
from the connection charges collected under section 9-3-17 of this chapter from those property
owners who will benefit from the sewer line extension and who otherwise have not paid or
contributed their proportionate share of the construction costs of that sewer line and who are
required to pay the sewer equivalency fee. The city shall not be required to enter into such an
agreement and whether or not to enter into such an agreement shall be at the sole discretion of the
city council; provided, however, that:
1. No reimbursement agreement shall have a duration greater than ten (10) years, unless the city
is a beneficiary of the agreement.
2. No reimbursement agreement shall pay to the sewer user paying for or constructing a sewer line
extension more than one hundred percent (100%) of his actual engineering and construction
costs, it being noted that in most cases at least some of the cost would ordinarily be assessed to
the sewer user's own property.
3. A reimbursement agreement may provide for interest to be paid to the sewer user.
4. The city may charge and may receive a ten percent (10%) administrative fee for handling the
accounting, auditing, and payment of the reimbursement payments made to the sewer user so
extending the sewer line and having reached a reimbursement agreement with the city.
5. All or a part of the sewer equivalency fee associated with the sewer line constructed and paid
pursuant to section 9-3-17 of this chapter may be set aside and earmarked for reimbursement
pursuant to a reimbursement agreement.
6. The reimbursement agreement shall be personal to the sewer user entering into it and shall not
be assigned without the written consent of the city, which consent will not be unreasonably
withheld.
7. The agreement will terminate when the user has been fully reimbursed if the agreed upon
reimbursement amount is paid prior to the end of the term of the agreement.
8. The agreement shall be binding on the sewer user and his assigns, successors, heirs and
executors and may be recorded as an encumbrance against the property of the sewer user.
9. The sewer user shall be required to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all
liability whatsoever until the sewer line has been accepted for maintenance by the city.
10. Said lines, after acceptance, shall become part of the city sewerage system and be the sole
property of the city.
B. Reimbursement To City: Where the city constructs a sewer line extension, either on its own or in
conjunction with another person or entity, the city may enter into a reimbursement agreement as
authorized in subsection A of this section such that the city is reimbursed for its costs of
construction, engineering, legal costs and interest. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-19: BASIS FOR SEWER CHARGES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 255/528
A. System Of Charges Established: There hereby is established a system of connector charges,
permit and inspection fees, industrial cost recovery charges, periodic service charges and other
fees for the use of, and for service rendered by the sewerage works of the city, and which charges,
rates and fees shall be as near as possible, uniform as to the different classes of property served
by said sewerage works. The rates, charges and fees provided by this chapter hereby are levied
and assessed against each lot, parcel of land, building, building unit, apartment, or property having
any connection with the sanitary sewerage works of the city or otherwise discharging sanitary
sewage, industrial wastewater or other liquids directly into the sanitary sewerage works of the city.
The rates, charges and fees shall be billed to and paid by the registered owner of each lot, parcel
of land, building or property served by the sewerage system.
B. Properties Subject To Charges: It specifically is enacted that all property in the city to which a public
sewer is available and is required to connect to the sewer as required in section 9-3-8 of this
chapter, but is not used by the owner or occupier of said parcel of land, nevertheless is subject to
user charges under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-20: POWER OF MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL TO SET CHARGES:
The mayor and city council shall determine and set all applicable fees and charges for use of the
sewer system. This chapter supplants and replaces resolution 240 and amendments thereto. The city
currently does not have the technology or ability to measure each class's exact use of the sewer
system. Therefore, the rates are based on an estimate of each class's contribution or potential
contribution to the loading of the sewer system. A multiplier is assigned to each class pursuant to the
table set forth below. The multiplier is not based solely on the amount of water used and discharged
into the system, but rather, takes into consideration other factors such as the estimated amount of
BODs, CODs, suspended solids, and other contaminates that may be discharged into the system by
the various classes of users, and the estimated number and types of users under each classification.
To determine the monthly sewer charge, the multiplier (or equivalent residential unit, as it is
sometimes called) is multiplied by the rate set from time to time by the city council by resolution or
ordinance. The chart below may also be used in determining the sewer availability fee for new users
to the system, regardless of the pipe size or number of connections to the city's sewerage system.
Classification
Equivalent Residential Unit
Assembly hall or auditorium, no food service, per each:
200 seats 1.00
Additional for bar/food service See food and beverage
service
Automotive service (without car wash): 1.00
Convenience store: treat separately as retail store
Fuel and bathroom only: add per pump island over 4 0.25
Full service: add per each pump island or stall over 4 0.25
Repair only: add per stall over 4 0.25
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 256/528
Bowling alley (with first 3 lanes): 1.00
Additional per lane over 3 0.20
Additional for bar/food service See food and beverage
service
Business for each 4,000 square feet (no food prep): 1.00
Apparel and accessories
Bank or savings and loan
Business office (individual restroom facilities, per office)
Business office (shared restroom facilities)
Car dealer (less wash bays or repair shop): 1.00
Additional per repair stall 0.25
Additional per wash bay 0.25
Department and retail
Drugstore
Durable goods
Florist
Grocery (without resident butcher or baker):
Add for resident butcher and/or baker 1.00
Miscellaneous retail foods (no food or beverage
processing)
1.00
Hardware
Lumberyard, hardware or gardening sales
Nursery or greenhouse
Physical therapy
Post office
Tire store
Campsite ground: 1.00
Add for each campsite over 4 with sewer hookup 0.20
Add for on site restrooms/showers 1.00
Add for RV dump 4.00
Car wash per bay:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 257/528
Self-service 1.50
Automatic with recycled water 1.50
Automatic without recycled water 2.00
Pet wash - self-service 1.00
Churches:
With kitchen per congregation 2.00
Without kitchen per congregation 1.50
Club, or lodge:
With kitchen: for each 75 general membership 1.00
Without kitchen: for each 100 general membership 1.00
Additional for bar See food and beverage
service
Commercial warehouse or storage unit for each 12,500 square
feet
1.00
Food and beverage service (fire occupancy load): 1.00
Bar/lounge: add per each 20 over 20 0.50
Restaurant: for each over 20 0.05
Gym, spa, or fitness center:
With showers per 100 members 1.00
Without shower per 200 members 1.00
Health practitioner (doctor, dentist (wet chair), chiropractor,
specialist):
For up to 3 chairs or exam rooms 1.00
For each chair or exam room over 3 0.25
Hotel or motel: 1.00
Additional per unit with kitchen over 2 0.50
Additional per unit without kitchen over 3 0.33
Industrial use:
Per each 16 employees 1.00
With showers per each 12 employees 1.00
With showers and cafeteria per each 10 employees 1.00
Add industrial process wastewater As per IWA
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 258/528
Institutional: 1.00
Assisted living additional per bed over 2 0.40
Daycare: per 20 children over 20 1.00
Hospital additional per bed over 1 0.80
Jail: add per each bed over 2 0.50
Nursing home additional per bed over 2 0.40
School without cafeteria or showers: per 40 students over 40
1.00
School with cafeteria: per 30 students over 30 1.00
School with showers: per 30 students over 30 1.00
School with cafeteria and showers: per 25 students over 25 1.00
Laundry:
Self-service up to 5 machines 2.00
Additional per machine over 5 0.20
Commercial per machine 1.00
Personal care services: 1.00
Barber: add per station over 4 0.20
Pet groomer: add per station over 2 0.60
Salon: add per station over 2 0.40
Photo lab, printing shop 2.00
Residential units: 1.00
Apartment per dwelling unit
Condominium per living unit
Duplex per dwelling unit
Fourplex per dwelling unit
Mobile home or trailer park, per space
Single-family dwelling
With business additional (if business type is in this chart) 1.00
This table, along with applicable charges per multiplier or equivalent residential unit may be amended
from time to time by resolution of the city council. Commercial users not included in the table shall be
considered to be industrial users and shall be charged rates based on applicable industrial waste
agreements. Any of the users in the table may be classified as industrial users if information on their
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 259/528
contribution flow and/or strength indicates a need to do so. A single user having more than one
classification of use shall be the sum of the fees. The minimum monthly sewer charge shall be one
equivalent residential unit. A reassessment of each commercial user will be completed at a minimum
of once every five (5) years. Within thirty (30) days of notice of assessment, a user may appeal the
assessment to the mayor in writing setting forth the reasons for the appeal and articulating why the
assessment is being disputed. The mayor shall have thirty (30) days to review the appeal and
recommend to the department head that the assessment stand or be amended. The department head
or the user shall have thirty (30) days to appeal the mayor's recommendation to the city council. If
neither party appeals the mayor's recommendation, then such recommendation shall become the
effective assessment until such user is reassessed pursuant to the assessment schedule of the
department. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-21: SEWER CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS; FEES AND CHARGES:
A. Permit Required; Fees:
1. Application For Permit: To obtain municipal sewer service, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented
by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city.
2. Permit And Inspection Fee: A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the
application is filed. Also, the owner or his agent shall pay to the city, at the time the application is
filed, a sewer availability fee in the amount as provided for in subsection B of this section. The
amount of the permit and inspection fee shall be determined by the city council.
B. Sewer Availability Fee:
1. The owner, or his agent, of all properties connecting to the public sewer of the city under the
terms of this chapter shall pay a sewer availability fee as set forth by resolution of the city council
for each equivalent connection or fraction thereof as may be assigned to the property by the city.
The fees are for the privilege of connecting to the city sewer system. All work necessary for
making a proper connection shall be done to the satisfaction of and under the direction of the
city inspector and shall be paid for by the person desiring such connection. Such person shall
pay a permit and inspection fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council.
2. For properties that have an existing public sewer adjacent to their property without direct cost to
the present owner or former owners of the property, there shall be an additional connection
charge as set forth by resolution by the city council for each equivalent connection thereof as
may be assigned to the property by the city.
C. Materials And Construction Methods: The materials of construction of the sewer service line and
the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling of the
trench and surface replacement shall all conform to the requirements of specifications and codes
as have been or may be adopted by the city.
D. Separate Connection For Each Building: A separate and independent city sewer service connection
shall be provided for each building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 260/528
E. Notify City For Inspection: The applicant for the city sewer service connection shall notify the city
when the connection of the sewer service connection and line to the public sewer main is ready for
inspection during normal business hours. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-22: SPECIAL CHARGES; SEWER INSPECTIONS; SEPTIC TANK WASTE
DUMPING:
A. Connection To City Sewer System Outside City Limits: In order to obtain municipal sewer system
service to parcels that are either partially or entirely outside of the corporate city limits, the
following provisions must be complied with:
1. There shall be an application form which shall provide that the applicant will agree to the terms
and conditions required by this section as a consideration for obtaining such service. The city
council shall establish an application fee which fee shall be based upon various classes of
applications as recommended by the public works director given the amount of staff review
required for processing the application. The application form shall specify the legal description of
the parcels for which service is being applied, the name and address of the legal owners of the
parcels and purpose of the requested service.
2. A completed application must be filed with the public works department.
3. Following the filing of a completed application form and the payment of the application fee, the
public works director shall then review the circumstances presented by the application in
accordance with the terms and conditions and regulations of this chapter as are relevant to the
application and which shall also include a review of the effect the granting of the application will
have on the ability of the municipal sewer system to provide an acceptable level of service to
developed parcels with existing service within the city limits which shall not be compromised.
4. The public works director shall then review the findings and recommendations with the applicant
for comment.
5. The public works director shall then submit the application and a report of recommendations to
the city council regarding the application.
6. The city council, in the exercise of its discretion, may either grant or deny the application after
review of the application and the report of recommendations of the public works director.
7. In the event the city council grants the application, it shall include as a condition that the legal
owners of the parcels shall enter into an "agreement for the extension of domestic sewer service
outside the city limits" (hereinafter in this section referred to as the "agreement") which
agreement form shall provide that the legal owners of the parcels agree that the provisions of the
city ordinances, regulations and policies which appertain to the regulation, control and use of its
domestic sewer system including hookup, service fees, and inspection fees, apply as terms of
the "agreement" and which form shall also provide that the owners of the parcels agree to the
annexation into the city of the parcels serviced; and the council may also impose such other
conditions of granting the application as are reasonable to assure the protection of the level of
service to developed parcels within the city limits and to assure that the proprietary funds of the
city domestic sewer service are not used for the extension and/or enlargement of the system
which conditions shall also be included in the "agreement".
8. The sewer user of the parcels serviced pursuant to a granted application under this section shall
be considered a user and subject to the terms and conditions of the "agreement" so long as the
property being served remains outside of the corporate limits of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 261/528
9. Notwithstanding subsection A5 of this section, if the requested connection is for a residence, or
a multi-family residence not exceeding four (4) residential units, and if sewer service is readily
available to the affected parcel without extension of service, then, if the public works director
deems it in the best interests of the city to do so, said connection may be authorized by the
public works director without action by the city council. If the director declines to approve the
connection, the request will proceed to the city council for final decision. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-23: BILLING AND PAYMENT OF MONTHLY CHARGES:
All monthly sewer charges shall be due and payable from the owner to the city clerk between the first
and tenth day of each month for billing from the previous cycle as billed on the city utility bill. For new
construction, the monthly user charge shall be computed from the date the service connection has
been inspected and approved or when the building being served is substantially completed, whichever
is the latest date. Upon failure to pay the utility bill as prescribed, each user shall pay in addition to the
amount due, a late fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-
2014)
9-3-24: DELINQUENCIES; CITY PROCEDURE:
A. Termination Of Water Service For Nonpayment: If a sewer user has not paid his monthly charges
by the tenth of the month, it shall be deemed delinquent. The city shall follow the procedure set
forth in chapter 1 of this title for termination of water services, and shall cause the water supplied to
said sewer user to be turned off from the premises, the city taking notice that, without water, the
sewer system of the user cannot be used and shutting off the water is the only way to prevent the
use of the sewer for nonpayment; provided, if the charges are not paid within ten (10) days after
the delinquency notice, an additional penalty in such amount as established by resolution of the
city council will be added to the account each month.
B. Lien Against Property: All delinquent charges or fees, as provided by this chapter, not paid after the
final determination of the sewer user's account shall be imposed as a lien against and upon the
property or premises against which such charge or fee is levied or assessed, and the city clerk
shall, at the time of certifying the city taxes, certify such delinquencies together with all penalties to
the tax collector and when so certified, the same shall be a lien upon the property and will be
collectible as other taxes.
C. Use At New Location: The owner of any property leaving a delinquency in sewer fees at any
location shall not be entitled to the use of the sewerage system at any new location until all fee
delinquencies are paid.
D. Disposition Of Monies Collected: All monies collected by the city clerk under the provision of this
section shall be paid over to the city treasurer in the same manner as is required for the payment
of other city monies. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-25: DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE FOR NONPAYMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 262/528
A. Discontinue Sewer And Water Service: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all property
within the corporate limits of the city, including all property owned or occupied by the United States
Of America, the county, and the state, and in case of nonpayment or delinquency, the
superintendent of sewers is, after the city has complied with the provisions of section 9-3-27 of this
chapter, hereby authorized and directed to disconnect and/or plug the sewer connection with the
sewer system of the city and direct the water superintendent to terminate the water supply to the
property.
B. Penalty For Turning On Water: If any person, after the water has been turned off from the premises
on account of nonpayment of rates or other violation of this chapter or the rules and regulations
pertaining to the sewer service, shall turn on or permit to be turned on or use or permit the water to
be used, without authority, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-26: SEWERAGE SYSTEM FUND:
A. Fund Established; Purpose: All fees and charges received and collected under authority of this
chapter shall be deposited and credited to a special fund to be designated as the sewage system
fund. The accounts of said fund shall show all receipts and expenditures for the administration,
maintenance, operation, replacement, upkeep and repair of the sewerage works and any
payments into sinking funds as may be established for the purpose of:
1. Paying principal of and interest on the general obligation sewer bonds of the city that shall from
time to time be outstanding;
2. Industrial cost recovery funds for payment to EPA if applicable;
3. Sewerage capital improvement funds for industrial cost recovery payments that are to be used
exclusively for future expansion, upgrading or reconstruction on the sewage system eligible for
EPA assistance; and
4. Other special funds as may be established by the city council.
B. Disposition Of Funds And Credits: As provided by law, when budgeted and appropriated, the funds
and credits to the account of the sewerage system fund shall be available for the payment of the
requirements for the maintenance, operation, repairs and upkeep of the sewerage works of the city
and, to the extent legally available, for payment into a sinking fund established for the payment of
the principal of and interest on the general obligation sewer bonds of the city which shall from time
to time be outstanding. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-27: RECEIPT AND DISBURSEMENT OF MONIES:
All monies collected by the city clerk under the provisions of this chapter shall be paid, received,
disbursed and accounted for as directed by the city council. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-28: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 263/528
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of this chapter, the building sewer
shall be connected to a private sewer disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter
and in accordance with the following special provisions:
A. Permit Required; Permit And Inspection Fee: Before commencement of construction of a private
sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the city. The application
for said permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement
by plans, specifications and other information as may be deemed necessary by the city. A permit
and inspection fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to
the city at the time the application is filed.
B. Inspection And Approval By City: A permit for private sewage disposal system shall not be effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city. The city shall be allowed to inspect
the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
city when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground works are covered.
The inspection shall be made by the city within seventy two (72) hours after receipt of notice from
the applicant, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays being excluded in calculating the elapsed time.
C. Compliance With State Regulations: The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all of the rules and regulations and recommendations of the
Idaho department of health and welfare and/or the Central district health department. No septic
tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
D. Connection To Public Sewer When Available: At such time as a public sewer becomes available to
property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the
public sewer in compliance with this chapter and any septic tank, cesspool or similar private
sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
E. Operation In Sanitary Manner: The owners shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facility in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the city.
F. Septic Tank Pumpings; Disposal And Fee: Septic tank pumpings shall not be deposited in any
manhole, cleanout or sewer opening. The pumpings may be dumped, upon approval from the
superintendent at the wastewater treatment plant at a point designated by the city. The number of
gallons dumped and the nature of the wastes shall be provided to the plant operator prior to
dumping. A fee for the septic tank dumping shall be determined by the city council.
G. Additional State Requirements: No statement contained in this section shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state department of health
and welfare. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-29: MAINTENANCE OF LINES:
All users of the sewer system shall keep their pipe connections and other apparatus in good repair
and protected from freezing at their own expense, but no person, except under the direction of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 264/528
superintendent, shall be allowed to dig into the street, alley, sidewalk or easement beneath which the
lateral and trunk line sewers run or to tap into any such lateral or trunk line in any manner. (Ord. 2122,
5-6-2014)
9-3-30: POINT OF LIABILITY FOR MAINTENANCE:
A. User Responsibility: All users shall have the responsibility of, and be liable for, and shall pay for, all
costs and expenses of maintaining their own sewer lines extending from their property until such
sewer lines pass the vertical plane of the user's property line or until they reach city main sewer
lines, whichever point is reached last. This liability of the user shall include the entire sewer service
connection apparatus and plumbing equipment and materials. Thus, the city's end point of liability
for maintenance shall be at such point as the city main sewer line connects to the user's sewer
service connection, and not thereafter with the user having complete responsibility for the sewer
service connection to the city main sewer lines.
B. Nonconflicting Provisions: This section shall not be construed to be in conflict with any provision
that states that no person shall be allowed to dig into the street, alley, sidewalk or easement
beneath which the lateral and trunk line sewers run or tap into any such lateral or trunk line in any
manner without the superintendent's direction and authorization, in that such person shall still have
to contact the superintendent to obtain his permission to perform work within the street, alley,
sidewalk or easement for which the user is liable. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-31: USERS LIABLE FOR VIOLATION:
No user of the city sewer service shall permit or allow any person from any other premises or any
unauthorized person to discharge sewage into said system and the permit to connect with the sewer
system shall be limited to the person and the premises designated in the permit. Any violation of this
section by either the permit holder or an unauthorized person shall be deemed a misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Any such violations shall be grounds for
the superintendent to withhold sewer service, without notice of termination of service, and the
superintendent may require the water superintendent to terminate water service. In appropriate
circumstances, the superintendent may require that a separate service connection is put in for each
user. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-32: CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGE OR SERVICE INTERRUPTION:
The city shall not be held liable for damages to any sewer user or his property by reason of a
stoppage or other interruption of his water supply or sewer disposal service caused by scarcity of
water, accidents to the works, alterations, additions, or repairs to the sewer or water system, or from
other unavoidable causes beyond the control of the city. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-33: INJURY TO SEWERAGE SYSTEM UNLAWFUL:
A. Damaging Property: No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewerage works.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 265/528
B. Depositing Garbage: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any garbage, rubbish, dead
animals or any substance having a tendency to obstruct the flow of the sewer in any manhole,
cleanout or sewer opening. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-34: PUBLIC WORKS INFRASTRUCTURE:
Section 8-3-7 of this code shall apply to public works infrastructure construction and public works
projects. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-35: PENALTIES:
A. Notice Of Violation; Responsibility For Remedy: Any person found to be violating any provisions of
this chapter, other than for nonpayment of a sewer bill, shall be served by the city with a written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing three (3) working days for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations and if necessary make all corrections and repairs to the system or pay for
same if the city has to make the corrections or repairs.
B. Penalty Imposed: Any person who shall continue any violation, beyond the time limit provided for in
subsection A of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code, for each violation. Each day in
which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Liability To City For Loss Or Damage: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the city by reason
of such violation and, for other than nonpayment of sewer bill violations, may have their sewer and
water supply terminated after the above three (3) working day notice period has expired.
D. Cumulative Penalties: These penalties shall not be construed to be exclusive, but shall be
construed to be cumulative of, and in addition to, any other penalties provided for in this code or
the criminal code of the state; as an example, a person injuring the sewer system could be
criminally charged with malicious injury to property for all violations initially charged as a criminal
violation, the notice provisions provided for in this chapter shall not apply. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
Chapter 4
SEWER PRETREATMENT
9-4-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
9-4-1-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 266/528
A. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works
(POTW) for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws,
including the clean water act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and the general pretreatment regulations (40
CFR part 403). The objectives of this chapter are:
1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with the operation of
the POTW;
2. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the POTW,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;
3. To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level
which allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations;
4. To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of
their employment and to protect the general public;
5. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW;
6. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW by FOG dischargers that will interfere
with the operation of the POTW;
7. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW by FOG dischargers that will cause
combined sewer overflows (CSOs) or sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs);
8. To protect the environment from pollution caused by CSOs and SSOs;
9. To adequately regulate the sale and use of additives added to grease removal systems (GRSs).
B. This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. This chapter authorizes the issuance of
wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities;
establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. (Ord.
2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4-1-2: ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent shall administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the superintendent may be
delegated by the superintendent to other city personnel. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. The use of the singular shall be construed to include
the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use.
ACCESSIBLE: When applied to required pretreatment monitoring or treatment equipment, shall mean
direct access without the necessity of removing any panel, door, vehicle, equipment, materials or other
similar obstruction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 267/528
ACT OR THE ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the clean water act, as
amended, 33 USC section 1251 et seq.
ADDITIVE: Any material, in any physical form, put into a GRS or any drain lines or appurtenances
discharging to a GRS intended in any way to modify the operation of the GRS.
ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY (FINE): A punitive monetary charge unrelated to treatment cost, which
is assessed by the superintendent rather than a court.
APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: For any specified pollutant, city prohibitive standards,
city specific pretreatment standards (local limits), state of Idaho pretreatment standards, or EPA's
national pretreatment standards and categorical pretreatment standards (when effective), whichever
standard is appropriate or most stringent.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: Regional administrator of EPA region 10.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER: A. If the user is a corporation:
1. The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a
principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision
making functions for the corporation; or
2. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities, provided, the
manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the
regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital
investment recommendations and initiating and directing other comprehensive measures to
assure long term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and
accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
B. If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively;
C. If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed
or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility, or his/her designee.
D. The individuals described in subsections A through C of this definition may designate another
authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the
individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge
originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to the city.
AUTOMATIC GREASE REMOVAL SYSTEM (AGRS): AGRS that has provision to automatically
remove separated FOG and/or settled solids from the tank and collect them for disposal.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BMPs: Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in
section 403.5(a)(1) and (b) of the act. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 268/528
procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at twenty degrees
Celsius (20oC) usually expressed as a concentration (milligrams per liter [mg/l]).
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with sections 307(b)
and (c) of the act (33 USC 1317) which applies to a specific category of users and which appears in
40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471.
CATEGORICAL USER: A user regulated by one of EPA's categorical pretreatment standards.
CITY: The city of Blackfoot, Idaho.
COLOR: The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption, relative to distilled
water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance is equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The sample resulting from the combination of individual or grab wastewater
samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time, and taken from the
same sampling point each time.
CONTROL AUTHORITY: Refers to:
A. The POTW if the POTW's pretreatment program submission has been approved in accordance
with requirements of section 403.11 of the act; or
B. The approval authority if the submission has not been approved.
COOLING WATER/NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling that does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product.
Cooling water may be generated from any use, such as air conditioning, heat exchangers, cooling or
refrigeration to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DOMESTIC USER (RESIDENTIAL USER): Any person who contributes, causes or allows the
contribution of wastewater into the city POTW that is of a similar volume and/or chemical makeup as
that of a residential dwelling unit. Discharges from a residential dwelling unit typically include up to one
hundred (100) gallons per capita per day, 0.2 pounds of BOD per capita per day, and 0.17 pounds of
TSS per capita per day.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The U.S. environmental protection agency or,
where appropriate, the director of the region 10 office of water, or other duly authorized official of said
agency.
EXISTING SOURCE: A categorical industrial user, the construction or operation of which commenced
prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which would be
applicable to such source if and when the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with
section 307 of the act.
EXISTING USER: Any noncategorical user which was discharging wastewater prior to the effective
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 269/528
date hereof.
FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG): Those components of wastewater amenable to measurement by
the methods described in "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater", latest
approved edition, or other methods approved by 40 CFR section 136. For the purposes of this
chapter, the term fats, oils and grease shall include polar fats, oils and grease, and other components
extracted from wastewater by these methods, excluding the nonpolar fraction.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT (FSE): Any establishment, commercial or noncommercial,
primarily engaged in the preparing, serving or otherwise making available for consumption foodstuffs
in or on a receptacle that requires washing more than two (2) days per week and that discharges to
the POTW.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime basis without regard to
the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time.
GREASE, GREASES: See definition of Fats, Oils And Grease (FOG).
GREASE IMPACT AREA: Any area of the POTW collection system where grease deposits originating
at FSEs and/or NFDs create maintenance requirements exceeding normal sewer maintenance. These
areas will be delineated by the superintendent and updated as needed.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR, INTERCEPTOR, INTERCEPTOR STYLE GRS: Any relatively large
inground or aboveground tank, generally of precast concrete, with internal plumbing and baffling
intended to act as a GRS or AGRS to serve one or more fixtures and which shall be remotely located.
GREASE REMOVAL SYSTEM (GRS): Any device designed for, and intended for, separating,
collecting and removing waterborne FOG and settleable solids prior to discharging to the POTW. This
includes any AGRS.
GREASE TRAP, TRAP, TRAP STYLE GRS: Any relatively small appurtenance, generally of cast iron
or fabricated steel, with internal configuration and internal or external flow control, intended to function
as a GRS or AGRS.
HIGH STRENGTH WASTE: Any waters or wastewater having a concentration of BOD or total
suspended solids in excess of two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l), or having a
concentration of fats, oil and grease in excess of two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l).
INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any
nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the act. The discharge into the
POTW is normally by means of pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage
ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant
thereto.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE ACCEPTANCE PERMIT (IWA): An authorization or equivalent control
document issued by the city to users discharging wastewater to the POTW. The permit may contain
appropriate pretreatment standards and requirements as set forth in this chapter.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from
other sources, either: a) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations; b)
inhibits or disrupts its sludge processes, use or disposal; or c) is a cause of a violation of the city
NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the
following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local
regulations): section 405 of the clean water act; the solid waste disposal act (SWDA), including title II,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 270/528
commonly referred to as the resource conservation and recovery act (RCRA); any state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA; the
clean air act; the toxic substances control act; and the marine protection, research and sanctuaries
act.
LIQUID WASTE: The discharge from any fixture, appliance or appurtenance in connection with a
plumbing system which does not receive fecal matter.
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT: The maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite
sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
MEDICAL WASTES: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products,
pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially
contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
NEW SOURCE: A. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is (or may be) a
discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such
source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided, that:
1. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source
is located; or
2. The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production
equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
3. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or
installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged
in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.
B. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than
a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation
meeting the criteria of subsection A2 or A3 of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
C. Construction of a new source, as defined herein, has commenced if the owner or operator has:
1. Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site construction program:
a. Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or
b. Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation or removal of existing
buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 271/528
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
2. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which
are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
definition.
NEW USER: A user that is not regulated under federal categorical pretreatment standards, but that
applies to the city for a new building permit or occupies an existing building and plans to commence
discharge of wastewater to the city collection system after the effective date hereof. Any person that
buys an existing facility that is discharging nondomestic wastewater will be considered an "existing
user" if no significant changes are made in the manufacturing operation.
NON-FSE FOG DISCHARGER (NFD): Any establishment, such as a church, synagogue, worship
hall, banquet facility or meeting space, with a commercial style kitchen that is used for preparing,
serving or otherwise making available for consumption foodstuffs in or on a receptacle that requires
washing two (2) days a week or less, and that discharges to the POTW.
NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (NAICS): An industry classification
system that groups establishments into industries based on the activities in which they are primarily
engaged. It was developed by the U.S. office of management and budget and adopted in 1997.
PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the city NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERMITTEE: A person or user issued an industrial waste acceptance permit.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint
stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state or local governmental
entities.
pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the
characteristics of the wastewater, i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, chemical oxygen
demand (COD), toxicity or odor.
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the
alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means (except by diluting the concentration of
the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 272/528
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS: Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits, and/or BMPs established by the city/POTW.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute prohibitions
against the discharge of certain substances, which appear in section 9-4A-1 of this chapter.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A "treatment works", as defined by section 212
of the act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems
used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of
a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also
means the city.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers and septic tanks.
SETTLEABLE SOLIDS: The solids that sinks to the bottom of water, wastewater or other liquid, and
which is amenable to measurement by the methods described in standard methods for the
examination of water and wastewater, latest approved edition or other methods approved by 40 CFR
section 136.
SEWAGE: Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
SEWER: Any pipe, conduit ditch or other device used to collect and transport sewage from the
generating source.
SHALL, MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: A. A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
B. A user that:
1. Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) GPD or more of process wastewater
to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blow down wastewater); or
2. Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average
dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or
3. Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
C. Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection B of this definition has no
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for violating any applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR
section 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial
user.
SLUG LOAD: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the
discharge standards in sections 9-4A-1 through 9-4A-4 of this chapter, or any discharge of a
nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 273/528
discharge.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE: A classification pursuant to the standard
industrial classification manual issued by the United States office of management and budget.
STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting
from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
SUBSTANTIAL REMODEL: Any modification to an existing FSE or NFD kitchen that involves changes
to fifty percent (50%) or more of the floor area of the kitchen.
SUPERINTENDENT: The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW, and
who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or a duly authorized
representative.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is
suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT: The discharge from the POTW into waters of the United States.
USER OR INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of indirect discharge. The source shall not include "domestic
user (residential user)", as defined in this section.
WASTEWATER: Liquid and water carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the POTW that is
designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-
3-2008)
9-4-1-4: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
AGRS: Automatic grease removal system.
AKART: All known available and reasonable technology.
ASPP: Accidental spill prevention plan.
BMP: Best management practices.
BOD: Biochemical oxygen demand.
CFR: Code of federal regulations.
COD: Chemical oxygen demand.
DDF: Data disclosure form.
EPA: U.S. environmental protection agency.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 274/528
FOG: Fats, oils and grease.
FSE: Food service establishment.
GPD: Gallons per day.
GRS: Grease removal system.
IWA: Industrial waste acceptance permit.
l: Liter.
LEL: Lower explosive limit.
mg: Milligrams.
mg/l: Milligrams per liter.
NAICS: North American industry classification system.
NPDES: National pollutant discharge elimination system.
O&M: Operation and maintenance.
POTW: Publicly owned treatment works.
RCRA: Resource conservation and recovery act.
SIC: Standard industrial classifications.
SNC: Significant noncompliance.
SWDA: Solid waste disposal act (42 USC 6901 et seq.).
TSS: Total suspended solids.
USC: United States Code.
VOC: Volatile organic compounds. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4-2: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, industrial waste acceptance permit
applications, industrial waste acceptance permits and monitoring programs, and from city inspection
and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically
requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information
would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that
such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 275/528
or pretreatment program and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data", as defined by 40 CFR section
2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4-3: PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the
POTW is located (at the time of passage hereof, "The Morning News"), a list of the users which,
during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. For the purposes of this provision, an industrial user is in
significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined herein as those in which sixty six percent
(66%) or more of all wastewater measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a
six (6) month period (by any magnitude) the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR section 403.3(I);
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined herein as those in which thirty three percent
(33%) or more of all wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter taken during a
six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of a numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR section 403.3(I) multiplied by
the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants,
except pH);
C. Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement, as defined by 40 CFR
section 403.3(l) (daily maximum, longer term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard)
that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference
or pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the
environment, or has resulted in the city exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR section
403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone
contained in an industrial waste acceptance permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline
monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 276/528
H. Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management
practices, the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4-4: WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES:
Wastewater treatment rates shall be set by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-
3-2008)
9-4-5: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city
pretreatment program, which may include:
A. Fees for industrial waste acceptance permit applications, including the cost of processing such
applications;
B. Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures including, the cost of collection and
analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;
C. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;
D. Fees for filing appeals;
E. Fees for high strength discharges above specified levels set within industrial users' permits; and
F. Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These
fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines
and penalties chargeable by the city. (Ord. 2121, 5-6-2014)
9-4-6: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this
chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-
3-2008)
ARTICLE A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
9-4A-1: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 277/528
A. General Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions
apply to all users of the POTW, whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. Specific Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following
pollutants, substances or wastewater:
1. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to,
waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit
(140°F) (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR section 261.21; (Ord. 2078, 6-3-
2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
2. Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.0, or otherwise causing corrosive
structural damage to the POTW or equipment; (Ord. 2148, 9-6-2016)
3. Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW
resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater than two inches (2") in dimension;
4. Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow
rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will
cause interference with the POTW;
5. Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F)
(40°C), unless the approval authority, upon the request of the POTW, approves alternate
temperature limits;
6. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will
cause interference or pass-through;
7. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a
quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;
8. Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city;
9. Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or
health, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
10. Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as,
but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color
to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city NPDES permit. Color (in combination
with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the
compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten percent (10%) from the
seasonably established norm for aquatic life;
11. Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by
the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
12. Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the superintendent;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 278/528
13. Any sludge, screenings or other residue from the pretreatment of industrial wastes or from
industrial processes;
14. Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city;
15. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent
to fail a toxicity test;
16. Detergents, surface active agents or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in
the POTW;
17. Any liquid, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient,
either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion, or be injurious in
any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive
readings on an explosion meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the
system), be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the
lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter;
18. Grease, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole
blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dusts, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar
asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass
grinding or polishing wastes;
19. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or other disposal system
permits;
20. Any wastewater, which in the opinion of the superintendent can cause harm either to the
sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance, unless
allowed under special agreement by the city (except that no special waiver shall be given from
categorical pretreatment standards);
21. The contents of any tank or other vessel owned or used by any person in the business of
collecting or pumping sewage, effluent, septic tank waste or other wastewater, unless said
person has first obtained testing and approval as may be generally required by the city and paid
all fees assessed for the privilege of said discharge;
22. Any hazardous wastes, as defined in rules published by the state or in federal regulations 40
CFR part 261;
23. Persistent pesticides and/or pesticides regulated by the federal insecticide fungicide
rodenticide act (FIFRA);
24. Sewage sludge, except in accordance with the city NPDES permit; providing, that it specifically
allows the discharge to surface waters of sewage sludge pollutants;
25. Any garbage that has not been properly ground.
C. Discharge Prohibited: Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be
processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. (Ord. 2078, 6-
3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-2: FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 279/528
The national categorical pretreatment standards as amended and promulgated by EPA pursuant to
the act and as found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471, are hereby
incorporated and shall be enforceable under this chapter. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-3: STATE REQUIREMENTS:
State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by all users which are
subject to such standards in any instance in which they are more stringent than federal requirements
and limitations, or those in this chapter, or in other applicable ordinances. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-
3-2008)
9-4A-4: LOCAL LIMITS:
A. Daily Maximum Allowable Discharge Limits: The following pollutant limits are established to protect
against pass-through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess
of the following daily maximum allowable discharge limits:
Arsenic (As) 0.03 mg/l
Cadmium (Cd) 0.0372 mg/l
Chromium (Cr) 0.7403 mg/l
Copper (Cu) 0.6456 mg/l
Cyanide (CN) 0.2835 mg/l
Lead (Pb) 0.3372 mg/l
Mercury (Hg) 0.008 mg/l
Nickel (Ni) 0.6277 mg/l
Oil/grease (nonpolar) 200 mg/l
Silver (Ag) 0.43 mg/l
Zinc (Zn) Allocated to industry in permit by mass proportion method
(Ord. 2139, 2-2-2016, eff. 2-2-2016)
B. Point Of Applicability: The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the
POTW (end of the pipe). All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal, unless
indicated otherwise. The superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition to (or in place of)
the concentration based limitations above. Where a user is subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard and a local limit for a given pollutant, the more stringent limit or applicable pretreatment
standard shall apply. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 280/528
9-4A-5: CITY RIGHT OF REVERSION:
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in industrial waste acceptance permits, more
stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-6: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users setting out special terms under
which they may discharge to the POTW. Such agreement shall be in writing and in no case will a
special agreement waive compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard or federal pretreatment
requirement. However, users may request a net/gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 CFR section 403.15. They may also request a variance from the categorical
pretreatment standard from the approval authority in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.13. (Ord.
2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-7: DILUTION:
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment
standard or requirement. The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users that he believes
may be using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases
when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-8: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
A. Requirements:
1. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter,
and shall achieve compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements set
out in this chapter within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state or the
superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a
level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense.
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted
to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The
review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the
city under the provisions of this chapter.
2. In addition, the superintendent may establish best management practices (BMPs) for particular
groups of users. These BMPs may include, but are not limited to, types or methods of
pretreatment technology to be used, methods of source control, minimum maintenance
requirements, spill prevention practices, or other requirements as deemed necessary.
B. Failure To Maintain: If a failure to maintain any GRS results in partial or complete blockage of the
building sewer, private sewer system discharging to the city sewer system, or other parts of the city
sewer system, or adversely affects the treatment or transmission capabilities of the POTW, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 281/528
requires excessive maintenance by the city, or poses a possible health hazard, the discharger
responsible for the facilities shall be subject to the remedies herein, including cost recovery,
enforcement and penalties. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-9: DEADLINE FOR COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT
REQUIREMENTS:
A. Specified: Compliance by existing sources covered by categorical pretreatment standards shall be
within three (3) years of the date the standard is effective, unless a shorter compliance time is
specified in the appropriate standard. The city shall establish a final compliance deadline date for
any existing user not covered by categorical pretreatment standards or for any categorical user
when the local limits for said user are more restrictive than the federal categorical pretreatment
standards.
B. New Sources And Users: New sources and new users are required to comply with applicable
pretreatment standards within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed 90 days from the beginning
of discharge). New sources and new users shall install, have in operating condition, and shall start
up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before
beginning to discharge.
C. Industrial Waste Acceptance Permit: Any industrial waste acceptance permit issued to a categorical
user shall not contain a compliance date beyond any deadline date established in EPA's
categorical pretreatment standards. Any other existing user or a categorical user that must comply
with a more stringent local limit which is in noncompliance with any local limits shall be provided
with a compliance schedule placed in an industrial waste acceptance permit to ensure compliance
within the shortest time feasible. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-10: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
A. Restrictions May Be Imposed: Whenever deemed necessary, the superintendent may require users
to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate
sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be
necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
B. Storage And Flow Control Facility: Each user discharging into the POTW greater than ten thousand
(10,000) gallons per day or greater than ten percent (10%) of the average daily flow into the
POTW, whichever is less, shall install and maintain, on his property and at his expense, a suitable
storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow over a twenty four (24) hour period.
The facility shall have a capacity for at least ten percent (10%) of the daily discharge volume and
shall be equipped with alarms and a rate of discharge controller, the regulation of which shall be
directed by the superintendent. An industrial waste acceptance permit may be issued solely for
flow equalization.
C. Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 282/528
amounts of grease and oil, or sand, except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the
superintendent and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at its
expense.
D. Combustible Gas Detection Meter: Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances
may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. (Ord. 2078,
6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-11: GREASE REMOVAL SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
All FSEs and NFDs shall have an adequate grease removal system installed and exercise proper
kitchen best management practices to ensure that excess concentrations of FOG are not discharged
to the POTW.
A. New Construction: All new construction FSEs and NFDs shall submit plumbing plans for all
potential grease discharging lines, all GRSs, and connecting piping to the superintendent or his
designee for approval prior to construction. The plumbing shall be installed in accordance with the
approved plans. Failure to submit plans or construct is accordance with approved plans is a
violation of this chapter:
1. All new user food service establishment single occupancy buildings shall install properly sized
interceptor style grease removal systems. Where bona fide space or gradient limitations make
the use of an interceptor style GRS impractical, and with prior approval of the superintendent, an
FSE may install properly sized trap style GRSs. All kitchen drains and any other drains that may
carry grease laden waste shall be connected to this GRS (except the dishwasher if a trap style
GRS is installed). If a trap style GRS is installed, the kitchen may not have a garbage
disposal/garbage grinder/macerator or similar unit installed.
2. All new construction multi-tenant buildings (strip centers) shall include a separate waste line for
all leasable spaces that discharges to a common one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallon or
larger interceptor. When a space is leased, sold or rented to an FSE or NFD, all kitchen drains
and any other drains that may carry grease laden waste shall be connected to this waste line; no
domestic sewage may be connected to this line. The property owner shall be responsible for
proper maintenance of this interceptor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
3. All new user non-FSE FOG discharger single occupancy buildings shall install a properly sized
GRS. Interceptor style GRSs are recommended, but trap style GRSs are permissible. All kitchen
drains and any other drains that may carry grease laden waste shall be connected to this GRS
(except the dishwasher if a trap style GRS is installed). If a trap style GRS is installed, the
kitchen may not have a garbage disposal, garbage grinder, macerator or similar unit installed.
4. Any FSE or NFD undertaking a "substantial remodel", as defined in section 9-4-1-3 of this
chapter, will be considered to be new construction for the purposes of this chapter.
B. Existing Users:
1. Any existing FSE without a functional GRS shall be required to install one. The type of GRS
required will be determined by the superintendent, taking into account cost, available space and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 283/528
gradient, whether the user is in a grease impact area, and any other pertinent information.
Where feasible, all kitchen drains and any other drains that may carry grease laden waste shall
be connected to this GRS (except the dishwasher if a trap style GRS is installed). If a trap style
GRS is installed, the kitchen may not have a garbage disposal, garbage grinder, macerator or
similar unit installed.
2. Any existing NFD without a functional GRS may be required to install one. The type of GRS
required will be determined by the superintendent, taking into account cost, available space and
gradient, whether the user is in a grease impact area, and any other pertinent information.
Where feasible, all kitchen drains and any other drains that may carry grease laden waste shall
be connected to this GRS (except the dishwasher if a trap style GRS is installed). If a trap style
GRS is installed, the kitchen may not have a garbage disposal, garbage grinder, macerator or
similar unit installed.
C. Grease Removal System Maintenance:
1. All grease removal systems shall be maintained to ensure proper operation. At a minimum,
interceptor style GRSs shall be cleaned at least once every ninety (90) days, and trap style
GRSs cleaned at least once per week. These required frequencies may be extended with the
approval of the superintendent. Grease removal systems must be cleaned whenever the
combined thickness of the floating greases and settled solids is equal to, or greater than, twenty
five percent (25%) of the total liquid depth in the GRS.
2. When cleaned, an interceptor style GRS must be completely pumped out, all solids removed,
solidified grease scraped from the interior and the structure and all internal plumbing inspected
for damage and corrosion. The GRS shall be refilled with water prior to being placed back into
operation. If repairs are required, they shall be performed within seven (7) days.
3. Trap style GRSs may be maintained by the FSE or NFD. When cleaned, the trap must have
surface grease and oil removed, settled solids removed, all sides scraped, removable parts
removed and cleaned, be inspected for damage and corrosion, and be properly reassembled. If
repairs are required, they shall be performed within seven (7) days.
4. The material that is removed in the process of cleaning a GRS shall not be discharged back into
the GRS, any part of the POTW, any private sewer, any drainage piping or storm sewer system.
All materials removed shall be handled and disposed of in accordance with federal, state, county
and local laws, rules and regulations.
5. In addition to the maintenance required above, automatic grease removal systems shall be
maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's guidelines.
D. Grease Removal System Additives:
1. No user may use an additive of any type for the GRS without the approval of the superintendent.
The superintendent will adopt procedures for the approval of additives.
2. No vendor may sell, attempt to sell or otherwise distribute any additive in the city without prior
approval of the additive by the superintendent. Any vendor selling, or attempting to sell, or
otherwise distributing any additive intended for use in a GRS that has not been approved for use
by the superintendent is in violation of this chapter and is subject to all enforcement actions
contained herein. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 284/528
E. Grease Removal System Sizing:
1. Trap style grease removal systems shall be sized in accordance with the standards in the
adopted plumbing code. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008; amd. 2012 Code)
2. The minimum size for an interceptor style grease removal system shall be determined using the
following formula:
Size (gallons) = 5D X 0.5HR X LF
Where D = number of seats in dining area, FSEs that typically sell takeaway meals shall use a D
of 50; HR = the number of hours of operation per day; and LF = the loading factor. The loading
factor will be 0.5 except when the FSE or NFD is in a grease impact area or when a garbage
disposal, garbage grinder, macerator or similar unit is installed; then a factor of 1.0 will be used.
3. In no case shall an interceptor smaller than one thousand (1,000) gallons be installed without
prior approval of the superintendent. If a garbage disposal, garbage grinder, macerator or similar
unit is installed, the minimum size is one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons to adequately
retain the added settleable solids loading.
4. The maximum size for an interceptor shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons. If the
calculated minimum size is larger than this, two (2) interceptors of approximately equal size shall
be installed in series. If the calculated minimum size is larger than three thousand (3,000)
gallons, two (2) 1,500-gallon interceptors shall be installed in series. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-
3-2008)
9-4A-12: ACCIDENTAL SPILL PREVENTION PLANS:
The superintendent may require any user to develop and implement an accidental spill prevention
plan (ASPP) or slug control plan. Where deemed necessary by the city, facilities to prevent accidental
discharge or slug discharges of pollutants shall be provided and maintained at the user's cost and
expense. An accidental spill prevention plan or slug control plan showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review and approval before
implementation. The city shall determine which user is required to develop a plan and require said
plan to be submitted within thirty (30) days after notification by the city. Each user shall implement its
ASPP as submitted or as modified after such plan has been reviewed and approved by the city.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the city shall not relieve the user
from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
A. Plan Requirements: Any user required to develop and implement an accidental spill prevention plan
shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following:
1. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
2. Description of stored chemicals;
3. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharge. Such
notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the standards in
sections 9-4A-1 through 9-4A-4 of this article; and
4. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures
include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 285/528
transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
chemicals (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
B. Notice Of Accident: Users shall notify the city wastewater treatment plant immediately after the
occurrence of a slug or accidental discharge of substances regulated by this chapter. The
notification shall include location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration
and volume, and corrective actions. Any affected user shall be liable for any expense, loss or
damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the city on account
thereof under state or federal law.
C. Written Report Of Accident: Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall
submit to the superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and
the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall
not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a
result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such
notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by
this chapter or other applicable law.
D. Signage: Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the user's premises advising
employees whom to call in the event of a slug or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all
employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency notification
procedures. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-13: SEPTIC TANK WASTES:
A. Acceptance; Permit Required: Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at a
designated receiving structure within the treatment plant area, and at such times as are
established by the superintendent. Such wastes shall not violate this section or any other
requirements established or adopted by the city. Industrial waste acceptance permits for individual
vehicles to use such facilities shall be issued by the superintendent.
B. Location; Consent; Analysis: Septic tank waste haulers may only discharge loads at locations
specifically designated by the superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior consent of
the superintendent. The superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards. The superintendent may require the hauler to
provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
C. Waste Tracking Form: Septic tank waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form for every load.
This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler, permit number,
truck identification, sources of waste and volume and characteristics of waste.
D. Fees: Fees for dumping hauled wastes will be established as part of the user fee system as
authorized in section 9-4-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 286/528
ARTICLE B. INDUSTRIAL WASTE ACCEPTANCE
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
9-4B-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining an
industrial waste acceptance permit (IWA) from the superintendent. The permit must be enforceable
and contain all elements as required by 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii)(B). Any violation of the terms and
conditions of an industrial waste acceptance permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
subjects the IWA permittee to the sanctions set forth in this chapter. Obtaining an IWA permit does
not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all city, federal and state pretreatment
standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law.
B. The superintendent may require other users, including liquid waste haulers, to obtain IWA permits
(as necessary) to carry out the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-2: INDUSTRIAL WASTE ACCEPTANCE PERMITTING:
A. Existing SIU: Any SIU that was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date
hereof and that wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall, within one hundred eighty
(180) days after notification by the superintendent submit a permit application to the city in
accordance with section 9-4B-3 of this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the
POTW to continue after one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date hereof, except in
accordance with an industrial waste acceptance permit issued by the superintendent.
B. New Source And New User: At least ninety (90) days prior to the anticipated start up, any new
source, which is a source that becomes a user subsequent to the proposal of an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard, and any new user considered by the city to fit the definition of
SIU shall apply for an IWA permit and shall be required to submit to the city at least the information
listed in subsections 9-4B-3A through 9-4B-3E of this article. A new source or new user cannot
discharge without first receiving an industrial waste acceptance permit from the city. New sources
and new users shall also be required to include in their application information on the method of
pretreatment they intend to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources and new
users shall give estimates of the information requested in subsections 9-4B-3D and 9-4B-3E of this
article.
C. Extrajurisdictional Users: Any existing user who is located beyond the city limits and who is
required to obtain an IWA permit shall submit an industrial waste acceptance permit application as
outlined in section 9-4B-3 of this article. New source and new users who are located beyond the
city limits and who are required to obtain an industrial waste acceptance permit shall comply with
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
All users required to obtain an IWA permit must submit, at a minimum, the following information. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 287/528
superintendent shall approve a form to be used as a permit application. Categorical users submitting
the following information shall have complied with 40 CFR section 403.12(b).
A. Identifying Information: The user shall submit the name and address of the facility, including the
name of the operator and owners.
B. Permits: The user shall submit a list of all environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
C. Description Of Operations: The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of
production, and standard industrial classification of the operation carried out by such industrial
user, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or
could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; number and type of employees;
hours of operation; each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of
production; type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day) and the
time and duration of discharges. This description should also include a schematic process diagram
which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated or manufacturing processes.
Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all
sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size,
location and elevation.
D. Flow Measurement:
1. Categorical user: The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following:
a. Regulated or manufacturing process streams; and
b. Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR
section 403.6(e).
2. Noncategorical user:
a. The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily
flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following:
Total process flow, wastewater treatment plant flow, total plant flow or individual manufacturing
process flow as required by the superintendent.
b. The city may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility
considerations.
E. Measurements Of Pollutants:
1. Categorical User:
a. The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for each regulated or
manufacturing process.
b. In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature
and concentration (or mass where required by the categorical pretreatment standard or as
required by the city) of regulated pollutants (including standards contained in sections 9-4A-1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 288/528
through 9-4A-4 of this chapter, as appropriate) in the discharge from each regulated or
manufacturing process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where
required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall
conform to sampling and analytical procedures outlined in article D of this chapter.
c. The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary
to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
d. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40
CFR section 403.6(e) for a categorical user covered by a categorical pretreatment standard,
this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted as part of the application.
2. Noncategorical User:
a. The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for its wastewater discharge.
b. In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature
and concentration in the discharge (or mass where required by the city) of regulated pollutants
contained in sections 9-4A-1 through 9-4A-4 of this chapter, as appropriate. Both daily
maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample
shall be representative of daily operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical
procedures outlined in article D of this chapter.
c. The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary
to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
d. Where the superintendent developed alternate concentration or mass limits because of
dilution, this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted as part of the
application.
F. Certification: The user shall submit a statement, worded as specified in section 9-4B-4 of this article,
which has been reviewed by an authorized representative of the user, and certified by a qualified
professional, indicating whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
G. Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards, the user shall submit the shortest schedule by which the user
will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The user's schedule shall conform with the
requirements of section 9-4C-4 of this chapter. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established pursuant to section 9-4A-9 of this chapter.
1. Where the user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal allowance
(40 CFR 403.7), the combined waste stream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally
different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) at the time the user submits the report required by
this subsection, the information required by subsection F of this section and this subsection G
shall pertain to the modified limits.
2. If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the
combined waste stream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors
variance (40 CFR 403.13) after the user submits the report required by subsection F of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 289/528
section and this subsection G, then a report containing modified information shall be submitted
by the user within sixty (60) days after the new limit is approved.
H. Additional Information May Be Required: The user shall submit any other information as may be
deemed necessary by the superintendent to evaluate the industrial waste acceptance permit
application.
I. Incomplete, Inaccurate Applications: Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and
will be returned to the user for revision. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-4: SIGNATORY AND CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENT:
All IWA permit applications and user reports must be signed by a responsible officer or manager, or
sole proprietor or general partner as applicable, or duly authorized representative.
A. Responsible Officer Or Manager: For the purpose of this section, a "responsible officer" or
"manager" means:
1. A president, vice president, secretary or treasurer of the corporation in charge of a principal
business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions
for the corporation; or
2. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operating facilities, provided, the
manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the
regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations and initiating and directing other comprehensive measures to assure long
term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the
necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information
for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned
or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. This authorization must
be made in writing by the principal executive officer or ranking elected official and submitted to
the approval authority prior to or together with the report being submitted of the user and contain
the following certification statement:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my
direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel
properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate
and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.
B. Duly Authorized Representative; Written Authorization: A duly authorized representative is an
individual designated by the responsible officer, manager, sole proprietor or general partner in
writing. The written authorization must be submitted to the city and also specifies either an
individual or a position having the responsibility of the overall operation of the facility from which
the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well
field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company. If an authorization in this section is no longer accurate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 290/528
because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility,
or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying
the requirements of this section must be submitted to the city prior to or together with any reports
to be signed by an authorized representative. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-5: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete IWA permit application, the superintendent
will determine whether or not to issue an industrial waste acceptance permit. Upon a determination to
issue, the permit shall be issued within thirty (30) days of full evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished. The superintendent may deny any application for an industrial waste acceptance permit.
(Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-6: CONTENTS OF PERMIT:
IWA permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the superintendent
to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and
protect against damage to the POTW.
A. Required Conditions: Industrial waste acceptance permits must contain the following conditions:
1. A statement that indicates industrial waste acceptance permit duration, which in no event shall
exceed five (5) years;
2. A statement that the industrial waste acceptance permit is nontransferable without prior
notification to and approval from the city, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator
with a copy of the existing industrial waste acceptance permit;
3. Applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, including any special state requirements;
4. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, submittal of technical reports, compliance
schedules, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification
of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on
federal, state and local law; and
5. Requirement for immediate notification to the city where self-monitoring results indicate
noncompliance;
6. Requirement to report a bypass or upset of a pretreatment facility;
7. Requirement to report immediately to the city all discharges, including slug loadings, that could
cause problems to the POTW;
8. Requirement for the SIU who reports noncompliance to repeat the sampling and analysis and
submit results to the city within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation;
9. A statement of applicable civil, criminal and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment
standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 291/528
10. Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the POTW to be necessary.
B. Optional Conditions: Industrial waste acceptance permits may contain, but need not be limited to,
the following conditions:
1. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge and/or requirements
for flow regulation and equalization;
2. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of
appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works;
3. Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special
conditions, including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated or routine discharges;
4. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of
pollutants discharged to the POTW;
5. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater
discharged to the POTW;
6. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and
equipment;
7. A statement that compliance with the industrial waste acceptance permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment
standards, including those which become effective during the term of the industrial waste
acceptance permit;
8. Any special agreements the superintendent chooses to continue or develop between the city
and user;
9. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the superintendent to ensure compliance with this
chapter, and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-7: APPEALS:
Any person, including the user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of an industrial waste
acceptance permit within fourteen (14) days of its issuance.
A. Timely Submission: Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of
the administrative appeal.
B. Petition: In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the industrial waste acceptance permit
provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks
to place in the industrial waste acceptance permit.
C. Stay Of Permit: The effectiveness of the industrial waste acceptance permit shall not be stayed
pending the appeal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 292/528
D. City Failure To Act; Final Determination: If the city fails to act within twenty (20) days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider an industrial waste
acceptance permit, not to issue an industrial waste acceptance permit, or not to modify an
industrial waste acceptance permit, shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of
judicial review.
E. District Court Complaint: Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
industrial waste acceptance permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Bingham
County district court within forty two (42) days of the final administrative decision. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-
2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-8: TERM OF PERMIT:
Industrial waste acceptance permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5)
years. An industrial waste acceptance permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at
the discretion of the superintendent. Each industrial waste acceptance permit will indicate a specific
date upon which it will expire. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-9: MODIFICATION OF PERMIT:
The superintendent may modify the industrial waste acceptance permit for good cause including, but
not limited to, the following:
A. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater
volume or character since the time of industrial waste acceptance permit issuance;
C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of
the authorized discharge;
D. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city POTW, city personnel,
or the receiving waters;
E. Violation of any terms or conditions of the industrial waste acceptance permit;
F. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the industrial waste acceptance
permit application or in any required report;
G. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR
section 403.13;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 293/528
H. To correct typographical or other errors in the industrial waste acceptance permit; or
I. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. (Ord. 2078,
6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-10: TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
A. Notice: Industrial waste acceptance permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner
and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days advance notice to the
superintendent and the superintendent approves the industrial waste acceptance permit transfer.
The notice to the superintendent must include a written certification by the new owner and/or
operator which:
1. States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's
operations and processes;
2. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
3. Assumes full responsibility for complying with the existing industrial waste acceptance permit
beginning on the date of the transfer.
B. Failure To Provide Advance Notice: Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
industrial waste acceptance permit voidable as of the date of facility transfer.
C. New Owner Considered Existing User: Provided that the notice required above occurred and that
there were no significant changes to the manufacturing operation or wastewater discharge, the
new owner will be considered an existing user and will be covered by the existing limits and
requirements in the previous owner's permit. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-11: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. Reasons: Industrial waste acceptance permits may be revoked for, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
1. Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
2. Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed conditions;
3. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the industrial waste acceptance
permit application;
4. Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
5. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
6. Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records;
7. Failure to meet discharge limitations;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 294/528
8. Failure to pay fines;
9. Failure to pay sewer charges;
10. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
11. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the industrial waste acceptance permit application;
12. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility;
13. If the city has to invoke its emergency provision as cited in section 9-4F-7 of this chapter; or
14. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the industrial waste
acceptance permit or this chapter.
B. Void Of Permit: Industrial waste acceptance permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations
or transfer of business ownership. All industrial waste acceptance permits issued to a particular
user are void upon the issuance of a new industrial waste acceptance permit to that user. (Ord.
2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-12: REISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
A user who is required to have an industrial waste acceptance permit shall apply for industrial waste
acceptance permit reissuance by submitting a complete industrial waste acceptance permit
application, in accordance with section 9-4B-3 of this article, a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the
expiration of the user's existing industrial waste acceptance permit. A user whose existing industrial
waste acceptance permit has expired and who has submitted its reapplication in the time period
specified herein shall be deemed to have an effective industrial waste acceptance permit until the city
issues or denies the new industrial waste acceptance permit. A user whose existing industrial waste
acceptance permit has expired and who failed to submit its reapplication in the time period specified
herein will be deemed to be discharging without an industrial waste acceptance permit. (Ord. 2078, 6-
3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
ARTICLE C. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
9-4C-1: BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS:
A. Required: Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40
CFR section 403.6(a)(4) (whichever is later), existing categorical users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW, shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains
the information listed in subsection B of this section. At least ninety (90) days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit
to the city a report which contains the information listed in subsection B of this section. A new
source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants discharged.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 295/528
B. Information Required: Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
1. Identifying Information: The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator
and owner.
2. Environmental Permits: A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
3. Description Of Operations: A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and
standard industrial classifications of the operation carried out by such user. This description
should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW
from the regulated processes.
4. Flow Measurement: Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow,
in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as
necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR section
403.6(e).
5. Measurement Of Pollutants:
a. The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
b. The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass,
where required by the standard or by the city) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from
each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term average
concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set
out in article D of this chapter.
c. Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in article D of this
chapter.
6. Certification: A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment, is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
7. Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 9-4C-4 of this article.
8. Signature And Certification: All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with section 9-4B-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4C-2: FINAL COMPLIANCE REPORT (INITIAL COMPLIANCE REPORT):
A. Required: Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance of an exiting significant
industrial user with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements set forth in this chapter, in
federal categorical standards, or in an IWA permit, or, in the case of a new source or a new user
considered by the city to fit the definition of SIU, within ninety (90) days following commencement
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 296/528
of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, the affected user shall submit to the city a report
containing the information outlined in subsections 9-4B-3D through 9-4B-3F of this chapter.
B. Production Rate: For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the
city in accordance with procedures established in 40 CFR section 403.6(c), this report shall contain
a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production
during the appropriate sampling period. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4C-3: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORT:
A. Required: Any user that is required to have an industrial waste discharge permit and performs selfmonitoring
shall submit to the city by January 14 and July 14 of each year, unless required on
other dates or more frequently by the city, a report indicating the nature of the effluent over the
previous six (6) month reporting period. The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed within
the industrial waste discharge permit. At a minimum, users shall sample their discharge at least
once per six (6) month period beginning January 1 and July 1 of each year.
B. Information Required: The report shall include a record of the concentrations (and mass if specified
in the industrial waste acceptance permit) of the pollutants listed in the industrial waste acceptance
permit that were measured and a record of all flow measurements (average and maximum) taken
at the designated sampling locations and shall also include any additional information required by
this chapter or the industrial waste acceptance permit. Production data shall be reported if required
by the industrial waste acceptance permit. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or
mass, where required) shall be reported. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently than
what was required by the city or by this chapter, using methodologies in 40 CFR part 136, it must
submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge during the reporting period.
C. Production Data: Any user subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the city
or by unit production limits specified in the applicable categorical standards, shall report production
data as outlined in subsection 9-4C-2B of this article.
D. Flows: If the city calculated limits to factor out dilution flows or nonregulated flows, the user will be
responsible for providing flows from the regulated process flows, dilution flows and nonregulated
flows.
E. When Actual Measurement Not Feasible: Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual
measurement; provided, however, that the city may accept reports of average and maximum flows
estimated by verifiable techniques if the city determines that an actual measurement is not
feasible.
F. Samples: Discharges sampled shall be representative of the user's daily operations and samples
shall be taken in accordance with the requirements specified in article D of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 297/528
G. Nonpermitted Users: The city may require reporting by users that are not required to have an
industrial waste acceptance permit, in accordance to 40 CFR 403.12(h), if information or data is
needed to establish a sewer charge, determine the treatability of the effluent, or determine any
other factor which is related to the operation and maintenance of the sewer system.
H. Monitoring: The city may require self-monitoring by the user or, if requested by the user, may agree
to perform the periodic compliance monitoring needed to prepare the periodic compliance report
required under this section. If the city agrees to perform such periodic compliance monitoring, it
may charge the user for such monitoring, based upon the costs incurred by the city for the
sampling and analyses. Any such charges shall be added to the normal sewer charge and shall be
payable as part of the sewer bills. The city is under no obligation to perform periodic compliance
monitoring for a user. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4C-4: COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES FOR MEETING APPLICABLE
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
A. Increments Of Progress: The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g.,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for
major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).
B. Time Limit: No increment referred to in subsection A of this section shall exceed nine (9) months.
C. Progress Report: Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final
date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the city including, at a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the
date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the
steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event
shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff.
6-3-2008)
9-4C-5: NOTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT PRODUCTION CHANGES:
Any user operating under an industrial waste acceptance permit incorporating equivalent mass or
concentration limits shall notify the city within two (2) business days after the user has a reasonable
basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any
user not providing a notice of such anticipated change will be required to comply with the existing
limits contained in its industrial waste acceptance permit. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4C-6: HAZARDOUS WASTE NOTIFICATION:
A. Required: Any user that is discharging more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, as
defined in 40 CFR section 261 (listed or characteristic wastes) in a calendar month, or any facility
discharging any amount of acutely hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR section 261.30(d)
and 261.33(e) is required to provide a onetime notification in writing to the city, to the EPA region
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 298/528
10 office of air, waste and toxic director, and to the state department of environmental quality. Any
existing user exempt from this notification shall comply with the requirements contained herein
within thirty (30) days of becoming aware of a discharge of fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous
wastes in a calendar month or any discharge of acutely hazardous wastes to the city sewer
system.
B. Content Of Notification: Such notification shall include:
1. The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261;
2. The EPA hazardous waste number; and
3. The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).
C. Additional Information: If an industrial user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of
such waste per calendar per month to the sewer system, the notification shall also contain the
following information to the extent it is known or readily available to the industrial user:
1. An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes;
2. An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste streams
discharged during that calendar month; and
3. An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste streams expected to be discharged
during the following twelve (12) months.
D. Exception: These notification requirements do not apply to pollutants already reported under the
self-monitoring requirements.
E. Identification Of Additional Hazardous Wastes: Whenever the EPA publishes final rules identifying
additional hazardous wastes or new characteristics of hazardous waste, a user shall notify the city
of the discharge of such a substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such
regulations.
F. Reduction Program: In the case of any notification made under this section, an industrial user shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes
generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff.
6-3-2008)
9-4C-7: NOTICE OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS, ACCIDENTAL SPILLS, SLUG
LOADS:
Any user shall notify the city immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW,
including any slug loads, as defined in section 9-4-1-3 of this chapter. The notification shall include the
concentration and volume and corrective action. Steps being taken to reduce any adverse impact
should also be noted during the notification. Any user who discharges a slug load of pollutants shall be
liable for any expense, loss or damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed
on the city under state or federal law. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 299/528
9-4C-8: NONCOMPLIANCE REPORTING:
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the city within twenty four
(24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling within five (5)
days and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within thirty (30) days after becoming
aware of the violation, except the user is not required to resample if:
A. The city performs the same sampling as the user at a frequency of at least once per month; or
B. The city performs the same sampling as the user between the time when the initial sampling was
conducted and the time when the user or the city receives the results of this sampling. (Ord. 2078,
6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4C-9: NOTIFICATION OF CHANGED DISCHARGE:
All users promptly shall notify the city in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character
of pollutants in their discharge, including significant manufacturing process changes, pretreatment
modifications, and the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial
notification under 40 CFR section 403.12(p). (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4C-10: REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS:
All users not required to obtain an industrial waste acceptance permit shall provide appropriate reports
to the city as the superintendent may require. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4C-11: RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain and make available for
inspection and copying all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities
required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date,
exact place, method and time of sampling and the name of the persons taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used;
and the results of such analyses including documentation associated with best management
practices. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or POTW, or
where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the superintendent. (Ord.
2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
ARTICLE D. SAMPLING AND ANALYTICAL
REQUIREMENTS
9-4D-1: SAMPLING REQUIREMENTS FOR USERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 300/528
A. Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile
organic compounds. For all other pollutants, twenty four (24) hour composite samples must be
obtained through flow proportional composite sampling techniques unless time proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative
of the discharge and the decision to allow alternative sampling must be documented in the
industrial user file for that facility or facilities. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation)
specified in 40 CFR part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected
during a twenty four (24) hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: For
cyanide, total phenols and sulfides, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite
samples for other parameters unaffected by compositing procedures as documented in approved
EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate.
B. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety (90) day compliance reports, a
minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease,
sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist;
for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the city may authorize a lower
minimum. For the reports required by 40 CFR section 403.12(e) and (h), the city shall require the
number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
C. Samples shall be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist,
immediately downstream from the regulated or manufacturing process if no pretreatment exists, or
at a location determined by the city and specified in the user's wastewater discharge permit. For
categorical users, if other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to
pretreatment, the user shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR section 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with
the applicable categorical pretreatment standards. For other SIUs, for which the city has adjusted
its local limits to factor out dilution flows, the user shall measure the flows and concentrations
necessary to evaluate compliance with the adjusted pretreatment standards.
D. All sample results shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling, and methods of analysis and
shall certify that the waste stream sampled is representative of normal work cycles and expected
pollutant discharges from the user. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently than what was
required in its wastewater discharge permit, using methodologies in 40 CFR part 136, it must
submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge as part of its self-monitoring report.
(Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4D-2: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures
approved by the EPA. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4D-3: CITY MONITORING OF USER'S WASTEWATER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 301/528
The city will follow the same procedures as outlined in sections 9-4D-1 and 9-4D-2 of this article. (Ord.
2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
ARTICLE E. COMPLIANCE MONITORING
9-4E-1: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
The city shall have the right to enter the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this
chapter, and any industrial waste acceptance permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and
whether the user is complying with all requirements thereof. Users shall allow the superintendent
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
A. Permitting Entrance: Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary
arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the
superintendent will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
B. Devices For Monitoring: The superintendent shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the
user's operations.
C. Removal Of Obstructions: Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or
verbal request of the superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access
shall be borne by the user.
D. Delays: Delays in allowing the superintendent access to the user's premises shall be a violation of
this chapter. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4E-2: MONITORING FACILITIES:
A. Required; Location: Each user shall provide and operate at its own expense a monitoring facility to
allow inspection, sampling and flow measurements of each sewer discharge to the city. Each
monitoring facility shall be situated on the user's premises, except, where such a location would be
impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the city may concur with the facility being
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area; providing, that the facility is located so that it will
not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. The superintendent, whenever applicable,
may require the construction and maintenance of sampling facilities at other locations (for
example, at the end of a manufacturing line or a wastewater treatment system).
B. Maintenance Of Facility: There shall be ample room in or near such sampling facility to allow
accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, including the sampling and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 302/528
measuring equipment, shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at
the expense of the user.
C. Agreement For Maintenance By City: The superintendent may enter into an agreement to maintain
the sampling and metering devices for the facility, once such devices meet the standard set forth
by the superintendent. The cost of such maintenance shall be borne by the industry through
monthly billing. Such billing rates shall be comprised of the replacement cost of the equipment over
a reasonable time period, plus reasonable inflation, divided by the life expectancy of the device in
months.
D. Monitoring Equipment: The superintendent may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all
applicable local construction standards and specifications.
E. Calibration Of Devices: All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated
in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations to ensure their accuracy. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-
2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4E-3: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If the superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof,
and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the city designed to verify
compliance with this chapter or any industrial waste acceptance permit or order issued hereunder, or
to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the superintendent shall
seek issuance of a search and/or seizure warrant from the Bingham County district court. Such
warrant shall be served at any hour that flow is being discharged from the facility by the
superintendent in the company of a uniformed police officer of the city or of the county. (Ord. 2078, 6-
3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4E-4: VANDALISM:
No person shall wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with, or
prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person
found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in this chapter. (Ord.
2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
ARTICLE F. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT
REMEDIES
9-4F-1: NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION:
When the superintendent finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of this
chapter, an industrial waste acceptance permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 303/528
standard or requirement, the superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of violation via
certified letter. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a
plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be
submitted by the user to the superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this
section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4F-2: CONSENT ORDERS:
The superintendent may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such
documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 9-4F-4 and 9-4F-5 of this article and shall be
judicially enforceable. Use of a consent order shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4F-3: SHOW CAUSE HEARING:
The superintendent may order via a certified letter a user which has violated or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, an industrial waste acceptance permit or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the superintendent and show cause why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying
the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and
a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4F-4: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
When the superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, an industrial waste acceptance permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a time specified in the order. If the user
does not come into compliance within the time specified in the order, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are
installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address
the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to
minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. Issuance of a compliance order shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008,
eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4F-5: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 304/528
A. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of this
chapter, an industrial waste acceptance permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations
and directing the user to:
1. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
2. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
B. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4F-6: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
A. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, an industrial waste acceptance permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may fine such user in an amount not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day
basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed
for each day during the period of violation.
B. Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional
penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of
one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for
unpaid charges, fines and penalties.
C. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the superintendent to reconsider
the fine, along with full payment of the fine amount within thirty (30) days of being notified of the
fine. Where a request has merit, the superintendent shall convene a hearing on the matter within
thirty (30) days of receiving the request from the user. In the event the user's appeal is successful,
the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The city
may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to
the fine.
D. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4F-7: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
The superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge (after informal notice to the user)
whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably
appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons. The superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge (after notice and
opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents
or may present an endangerment to the environment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 305/528
A. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its
contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the superintendent shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving
stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The superintendent shall allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the
period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 9-4F-8 of this
article are initiated against the user.
B. A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment
shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the superintendent prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under sections 9-4F-3 and 9-4F-8 of this article.
C. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency
suspension under this section. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4F-8: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE (NONEMERGENCY):
A. In addition to the provisions in section 9-4B-11 of this chapter, any user that violates the following
conditions is subject to discharge termination:
1. Violation of industrial waste acceptance permit conditions;
2. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
3. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and
characteristics prior to discharge;
4. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or
sampling; or
5. Violation of the pretreatment standards in article A of this chapter.
B. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity
to show cause under section 9-4F-3 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken.
Exercise of this option by the city shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
ARTICLE G. JUDICIAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL
ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
9-4G-1: JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 306/528
A. Injunctive Relief: When the superintendent finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate)
any provision of this chapter, an industrial waste acceptance permit, or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may petition the Bingham
County district court through the city attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the industrial
waste acceptance permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the
user. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief,
including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive
relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
B. Civil Penalties:
1. A user which has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an industrial
waste acceptance permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long term average discharge
limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
2. The superintendent may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses
associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the
cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.
3. In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant
circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
4. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against a user. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
C. Criminal Prosecution:
1. A user which has wilfully or negligently violated any provision of this chapter, an industrial waste
acceptance permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
2. A user which has wilfully or negligently introduced any substance into the POTW which causes
personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. This penalty shall be in addition to any other
cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law.
3. A user which knowingly made any false statements, representations or certifications in any
application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained,
pursuant to this chapter, industrial waste acceptance permit, or order issued hereunder, or who
falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty
as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
4. In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 307/528
D. Remedies Nonexclusive: The provisions in section 9-4-3 and article F of this chapter, and this
article, are not exclusive remedies. The city reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination
of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement in response to pretreatment violations
will generally be in accordance with the city enforcement response plan. However, the city
reserves the right to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further,
the city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
These actions may be taken concurrently. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4G-2: SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION:
A. Performance Bonds: The superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an industrial waste
acceptance permit to any user which has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a
previous industrial waste acceptance permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a
sum not to exceed a value determined by the superintendent to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance.
B. Liability Insurance: The superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an industrial waste
acceptance permit to any user which has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a
previous industrial waste acceptance permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial
assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
C. Water Supply Severance: Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, an industrial waste acceptance permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only
recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
D. Public Nuisances: A violation of any provision of this chapter, an industrial waste acceptance
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, hereby is
declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the superintendent.
Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this code
governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing,
abating or remedying said nuisance.
E. Informant Rewards: The superintendent may pay up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by a user. In the event that the information
provided results in an administrative fine or civil penalty levied against the user, the superintendent
may disburse up to ten percent (10%) of the collected fine or penalty to the informant. However, a
single reward payment may not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
F. Contractual Awards: Contractor listing users which have not achieved compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the
sale of goods or services to the city. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city
held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or
requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the city. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 308/528
ARTICLE H. AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE
VIOLATIONS
9-4H-1: UPSET:
A. Upset Defined: For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which
there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards
because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An "upset" does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
B. Affirmative Defense: An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection C of this
section are met.
C. Conditions: A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate,
through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
1. An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset;
2. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in
compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
3. The user has submitted the following information to the POTW and treatment plant operator
within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided
orally, a written submission must be provided within 5 days):
a. A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
b. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the
anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
c. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the
noncompliance.
D. Burden Of Proof: In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of
an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Judicial Determination: Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of
upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
standards.
F. Production Control Required: Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with applicable pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or
failure of their treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is
provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source
of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 309/528
9-4H-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the prohibitions in subsections 9-4A-1A and 9-4A-1B3 through B7 of this chapter
if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction
with discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference and that either: a) a
local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly
prior to, and during, the pass-through or interference; or b) no local limit exists, but the discharge did
not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with
applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4H-3: BYPASS:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section:
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the
treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of
natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe
property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. Bypass Permitted: A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of
subsections C and D of this section.
C. Notice Of Bypass:
1. If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW at
least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
2. A user shall submit oral notice to the city of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards within twenty four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the
bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass
and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has
not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written
report on a case by case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty four (24) hours.
D. Bypass Conditions:
1. Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take an enforcement action against a user for a
bypass, unless:
a. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 310/528
b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment
facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
c. The user submitted notices as required under subsection C of this section.
2. The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the
POTW determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection D1 of this section.
(Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
Chapter 5
SANITARY SERVICE SYSTEM
9-5-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MUNICIPAL SANITARY SERVICE SYSTEM OF
THE CITY. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the meaning given
herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future,
words in the plural number include the singular, and words in the singular number include the plural.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ASHES: The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials.
BULKY WASTE: Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture and other waste
materials, other than construction debris, dead animals, hazardous materials or stable matter with
weights or volumes greater than those allowed for cans.
CAN: A receptacle approved by the city.
CITY: The city of Blackfoot, Idaho.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES: Business, industrial and institutional premises and activities, as distinct
from residential or multi-family premises.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS: Waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair
or demolition operation.
CONTRACTOR: The person or entity authorized by the city to operate, conduct, and maintain a
municipal solid waste collection and removal system of the city.
COUNTY: The county of Bingham, state of Idaho.
CUSTOMER: An occupant or owner of any premises, including household, apartment, business,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 311/528
institution or other establishment in the city for which waste service is, or has been, provided.
DEAD ANIMALS: Animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten (10) pounds in weight that
have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or killed for human use.
FRANCHISEE: Any person authorized by the city of Blackfoot, or employed by the city of Blackfoot, to
collect, handle, transport and dispose of waste and/or recyclable materials and who has executed a
franchise agreement with the city of Blackfoot.
GARBAGE: Any and all dead animals of less than ten (10) pounds, in weight, except those
slaughtered for human consumption; every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or other
matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in, handling, packing,
canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or
other animal or vegetable matter, including, but not by way of limitation, used tin cans and other food
containers; and all putrescible or easily decomposable waste animal or vegetable matter which is
likely to attract flies or rodents; except in all cases any matter included in the definitions of "bulky
waste", "construction debris", "dead animals", "hazardous materials", "rubbish" or "stable matter".
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article which is
designated by the United States environmental protection agency, or appropriate agency of the state
to be "hazardous", as that term is defined by or pursuant to federal or state law.
INSPECTOR: The authorized employee or employees of the city of Blackfoot, or some individual
designated by the city council as having the duty of enforcement of this chapter.
MANDATORY: Every resident, business, entity or owner of a residential unit within the city is required
to use the collection and disposal system established by the city.
OWNER: The person owning the real property where waste is created or accumulated.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation, public agency or any other legal
entity.
PREMISES: Land and all buildings and structures thereon, including, but not limited to, single- or
multi-family dwellings, rooming house, apartment houses, hospitals, nursing and convalescent homes,
hotels, motels, restaurants, drive-in establishments, schools, kindergartens, and other places of
habitation, offices, shops or establishments or places of conducting a business, trade, profession or
occupation.
PROHIBITED WASTE: A. Includes any wastes that have any of the following general characteristics:
1. Extreme temperature;
2. Harmful vapors;
3. The presence of corrosive, flammable, explosive or toxic chemicals;
4. Any materials with physical or other properties which render collection operations hazardous;
or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 312/528
5. Any materials which create a risk to the environment or public health and safety.
B. In addition to wastes with the general characteristics described above, prohibited wastes
include:
1. Liquid wastes, both bulk and contained;
2. Tires;
3. Any material regulated by the state of Idaho or the United States environmental protection
agency (40 CFR 260-268) as hazardous waste;
4. Any equipment or machines containing refrigerants;
5. Infectious wastes generated from business sources, such as hospitals, clinics, medical,
surgical, dental, nursing homes, veterinarian offices, and laboratories. Generators of infectious
waste are required to sterilize, package or otherwise process the infectious waste so that it
may be collected without hazard to collection personnel and the general public; and
6. Dead animal remains in an amount exceeding ten (10) pounds, excluding animal carcasses if
broken down and placed into plastic waste bags and into a lidded, airtight and watertight
container.
PUTRESCIBLE WASTE: Wastes that can decay and stink or become putrid.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Products, including paper, cardboard, metal, glass or other substance
capable of being reprocessed into consumer materials, which have served the purpose for which they
were originally manufactured or produced and have passed through their end usage as consumer
items, and which have been discarded or placed for collection by their owner, whether or not such
products have monetary value.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible waste (except sewage), including garbage and rubbish.
RESIDENT: Every person, including lessees and occupants, in possession, charge, custody or control
of any premises, residential or commercial, where waste is created or accumulated.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT: A dwelling within the corporate limits of the city occupied by a person or group of
persons comprising not more than three (3) families. A residential unit shall be deemed occupied
when either water or domestic light and power services are being supplied thereto. A condominium
dwelling, whether single- or multi-level construction, consisting of three (3) or less continuous or
separate single-family dwelling units, shall be treated as a residential unit, except that each singlefamily
dwelling within any such residential unit may be billed separately as a residential unit. Each
separate rental unit, in the case of a multi-family dwelling, shall be considered as a residential unit and
billed separately.
RUBBISH: All waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants, weeds, leaves,
dead trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 313/528
straw, used and discarded mattresses, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp
and other products such as are used for packaging, or wrapping crockery and glass, ashes, cinders,
floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any and all other waste materials not
included in the definitions of "bulky waste", "construction debris", "dead animals", "garbage",
"hazardous materials" or "stable matter".
SEWAGE: Water carried wastes from residences, commercial or industrial establishments, business
buildings and other premises, containing polluted matter subject to treatment at the sewage treatment
plant.
SOLID WASTE: Any ashes, garbage, refuse or rubbish, or any combination thereof.
STABLE MATTER: All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or about a stable, or
any animal, livestock or poultry enclosure, and resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry or
livestock.
WASTE: Shall include "ashes", "bulky waste", "construction debris", "dead animals", "garbage",
"prohibited waste", "putrescible waste", "recyclable materials", "hazardous materials", "refuse",
"rubbish", "sewage", "solid waste" and "stable matter", as such terms are defined in this section. (Ord.
2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-3: MANDATORY SYSTEM; WASTE COLLECTION ACCUMULATION;
UNLAWFUL PRACTICES; EXCEPTIONS:
In order to maintain the public health, safety and aesthetics of the city, all owners and/or occupants
are required to pay for, and are provided, certain waste collection services. There hereby is
established a system of waste collection, transportation and disposal. It shall be unlawful for any
person to engage in the business of collecting, transporting, hauling or conveying any waste over the
streets or alleys of the city, or to dump or dispose of the same, unless and until such person has a
franchise, license or contract as an authorized representative of the city.
A. All waste accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of as provided by this
chapter, and no person shall collect or convey over any of the streets, alleys or public ways in the
city, or dispose of any waste accumulated in the city, except as provided in this chapter.
B. Every person who is an owner or occupant of premises within the city limits shall use the waste
collection and disposal system herein provided and shall deposit or cause to be disposed of in
accordance with this chapter all waste which is accumulated on such premises; provided, that
nothing herein is to be construed to prohibit any owner from transporting and disposing of waste
accumulated on his own premises, subject to all regulations herein contained. An individual or
entity may be granted a special exception from the mandatory system use by the city council in
extreme circumstances upon application and a showing before the city council that the city, its
licensee or franchisee cannot reasonably accommodate the collection of the individual's or entity's
waste. Upon being granted the exception, the waste collector must comply with the license,
contract and franchise provisions of this chapter. The fact that another waste collector is willing to
collect the waste for a price less than the price set by the city shall not be a factor in determining
whether the city, its licensee or franchisee can reasonably accommodate the collection of the
individual's or entity's waste. All owners or occupants of premises within the city limits will be
charged the minimum collection charge, regardless of whether they actually use the collection
system provided by the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 314/528
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, or to cause, the accumulation in or about any premises
or upon any street, alley or public way of the city adjacent to such premises, owned or occupied by
him, any waste.
D. It shall be unlawful to place, deposit or leave, or permit to remain, anywhere in the city, any waste,
except as provided in this chapter.
E. It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any waste in such a manner that it can be
blown away by the wind or cause littering of public or private premises, streets, alleys and public
ways of the city.
F. It shall be unlawful to burn any waste outside of any building at any time in the city, unless a permit
has been obtained therefor.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of collecting and transporting waste
upon, on and over the streets, alleys and public ways of the city, unless such person has received
a license, contract or franchise therefor.
H. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit into the waste system, dirt or earth debris from
construction or building renovation, rocks, stones, automobile bodies and parts, washing
machines, refrigerators, hot water tanks, stoves, tree trunks and stumps, and other similar
materials, dead animals, furniture, building materials, such as mortar, plaster, scrap lumber, broken
concrete, and brick, waste oils and lubricants from garages, service stations, machine shops,
restaurants and other similar establishments. Such material shall be collected and disposed of by
the building contractor, person, owner, occupant of the premises, or by the person responsible for
same. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-4: LICENSE, CONTRACT OR FRANCHISE:
A. City Authorized To Enter Into Franchise Agreement: The city may enter into a license, contract or
franchise agreement with an individual or entity to collect, transport, convey and dispose waste
upon, on or over the streets, alleys and public ways of the city. The mayor and city council have
the sole authority to select and approve all persons who shall enter into a franchise or license
agreement; contract to perform all services pertaining to sanitary collection and disposal under the
provisions of this chapter; to establish reasonable fees for licenses; and may establish reasonable
rules and regulations governing the conduct and operation of such licensee or contractor. All
franchise holders shall be bound by and comply with the provisions of this chapter wherever
applicable and shall comply with all requirements set forth by the city council and shall observe
and faithfully perform the conditions and provisions of the license and the ordinances and rules
and regulations of the city.
B. Commercial Service: Commercial waste service is provided to residents of the city by the city.
Nevertheless, in some circumstances, the city may not be able to provide the service needed by a
commercial entity. In those situations, upon the approval of the mayor and city council, such
commercial entity may use the services of the city appointed franchisee, licensee or contractor.
Collection of solid waste within the city limits without a valid franchise or license agreement is a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 315/528
violation of this chapter, subject to the penalties contained in section 9-5-14 of this chapter.
Beginning February 1, 2003, all residential customers and commercial entities in the city shall use
the city services or the city duly authorized franchisee or licensee for waste service.
C. Residential Premises Service: Residential premises waste service is provided to residents of the
city by the city.
D. Franchise Required To Collect: Collection of waste within the city limits without a valid franchise or
license agreement is a violation of this chapter, subject to the penalties contained in section 9-5-14
of this chapter. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-5: SANITARY CONTAINERS:
A. Sanitary containers for residential accounts shall be as set forth by the city council.
B. Sanitary containers for commercial accounts shall be as set forth by the city council.
C. It shall be the duty of resident or owner of any premises at all times to keep, or cause to be kept,
containers, as defined above, and to deposit or cause to be deposited therein, all waste, except as
otherwise herein provided.
D. All containers shall be: 1) equipped with close fitting covers; or 2) securely tied; or 3) otherwise
closed to prevent the contents to be blown by the wind or otherwise littered.
E. Waste or recyclable materials shall not be compacted in a container to the extent of obstructing free
and easy removal from the container.
F. Residents and owners shall restrain their animals from spreading waste or recyclable materials left
for collection or from interfering with pick up personnel during collection. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff.
1-5-2010)
9-5-6: PRECOLLECTION PRACTICES:
A. Liquids Drained: All waste, before being placed or deposited in sanitary containers for collection,
shall have drained from it all free liquids and may be wrapped and placed in paper or plastic bags.
B. Trimmings, Clippings: Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar materials shall be cut to a length
not to exceed four feet (4') and securely tied in bundles no more than two feet (2') diameter before
being deposited in the can for collection.
C. Grass Clippings, Leaves: Grass clippings, leaves and garden debris, except sod, dirt and rocks,
may be placed in the collection can.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 316/528
D. Removal Of Containers; Nuisances Prohibited: At other than commercial and alley pick up, all
containers shall be removed from the curb line of streets and public ways within twenty four (24)
hours and unauthorized accumulation of waste on any premises is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and thereby prohibited.
E. Prohibited Wastes:
1. Waste collection service is intended to collect normal commercial, industrial, residential and
multi-family premises wastes. It is a violation of this chapter for any person to deposit or
relinquish for collection or disposal any prohibited wastes identified herein.
2. Customers who are a source of prohibited wastes shall make appropriate arrangements to
collect and dispose of the waste.
F. Taking Of Solid Waste Or Recyclables:
1. All waste placed for collection shall be owned by and be the responsibility of the customer until
the time of collection. At the time of collection, all trash and recyclable material become the
property of the city or franchisee.
2. It is a violation of this chapter for any person to take, examine, uncover, snoop in, separate,
gather, collect or salvage materials deposited in waste containers, except with the express
permission of the generator of the waste.
G. Theft Of Collection Services:
1. It is a violation of this chapter for any person, except for the owner, occupant or invitee, to place
or deposit any materials in or around a waste receptacle provided for the use of a specific
business or premises, or in or around the can or container at a residence without permission
from such owner or occupant.
2. It is a violation of this chapter for any person to place waste at a premises within the city limits
that is not generated at the commercial, residential or multi-family premises.
H. Disposal Of Waste: It is a violation of this chapter for any person to throw, discard or deposit any
waste in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or vacant ground, or in or upon any canal, irrigation
ditch, drainage ditch or other watercourse. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-7: POINTS AND FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION; CURBSIDE OR ALLEY
COLLECTION SERVICE:
A. Placement Of Containers: All containers shall be placed for collection outside of all buildings and
shall be placed in the alley adjoining such premises or other convenient place easily accessible by
the collector. If no alley is conveniently available, such receptacle may be placed on street parking
or sidewalk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 317/528
B. Treatment Of Containers; Spillage: All containers shall be replaced, upright where found.
Containers and lids shall not be placed or thrown on streets, alleys, highways or on adjoining
property. The collector shall not permit receptacles to be thrown from the truck to the pavement or
parkway nor in any other way permit damage to occur by rough or improper handling thereof.
Space, private ground, public streets, alleys or ways about the containers and the collection truck
shall be left free from solid waste spilled during collection. The collector shall be responsible for
removal of such spillage, but shall not be responsible for cleaning up conditions created by the
resident around such containers.
C. Frequency Of Collection: Waste accumulated at residences shall be collected at least once a week.
D. Commercial And Business Places: Waste accumulated at the premises of commercial and
business places shall be collected at least once each week, unless the city provides for alternative
collection on a special exception basis.
E. Greater Frequency Of Collection: If residential or commercial users desire a greater frequency of
collection, such residential or commercial user may pay an additional fee, rate or charge to be
fixed and approved by the city. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-8: RATES, FEES, CHARGES AND DEPOSITS:
A. Authority Of City To Prescribe: The rates, fees or charges for the collection and disposal of waste
and refuse by: 1) owners, tenants, lessees or occupants of premises; or 2) licensed or franchised
collectors, shall at all times be subject to the right of the city to prescribe and regulate the rates,
fees and charges made for services rendered or to be rendered. The city shall bill and collect all
fees and charges.
B. Failure To Pay: Failure to pay an account within ten (10) days may subject the owner, tenant,
lessee or occupant to withdrawal or suspension of service, as well as withdrawal or suspension of
water and sewer service, and such civil remedies provided by law.
C. Deposit After Termination Of Service: In the event that waste or water service has been suspended
or terminated by the city for nonpayment of fees, the city shall, prior to reinstating said service,
require an advance deposit equal to three (3) months projected service charge for said account.
D. Deposit For Containers: The city shall have the authority to authorize its waste contract hauler, if
any, to collect a deposit prior to delivery of temporary box containers.
E. Administration Of Funds: The proceeds from the collection of fees and charges herein provided
shall be placed in a special fund to be known as the "solid waste collection account", and all
expenses of the city in the operation of the sanitary collection system shall be paid out of such fund
and any surplus remaining therein at the end of each fiscal year may be transferred by the city
council to the general fund. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-9: WASTE VEHICLES; INSPECTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 318/528
The contractor, if any, will furnish a sufficient number of personnel, trucks and equipment to collect
and dispose of waste collected in the city. Said equipment shall be maintained and operated in a clean
and sanitary condition at the expense of the contractor. The contractor shall furnish vehicles especially
designed for the collection and hauling of waste and waste products. All waste vehicles shall be
closed and watertight, front, rear or side loading, commonly known as packers, for collecting solid
waste. The equipment shall be clean, uniformly painted and marked and identified, subject to review
and approval by the city. All vehicles will be licensed, lighted and safety inspected for highway
operations. No roadside littering from packer vehicles or from loading practices will be allowed. (Ord.
2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-10: COLLECTION DAYS AND HOURS:
The days for collection shall be set by the city council. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-11: SPECIAL COLLECTIONS:
The contractor shall provide for the special collection from commercial and residential units, bulky
waste, construction debris, stable matter and any other refuse as agreed between the city council and
the contractor. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-12: SEPARATION AND RECYCLING:
The city reserves the right to, and may at its option, require the separation of waste, require the
deposit thereof in separate containers, and prescribe the method of disposal thereof. The city also
reserves the right to issue further regulations for the placement and disposal of recyclable materials.
Any contractor shall cooperate at all times with efforts to promote recycling of consumer products in
the separation, transportation and deposit of identified recyclable materials. Any extra work caused by
said handling of recyclable materials over and above the contract price, will be the subject of prior
separate contractual negotiations between the city and the contractor. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-
2010)
9-5-13: ANNEXATIONS:
In the event that the city annexes additional areas during the term of this contract, the city's right to
collect waste or recyclable material within the city shall extend to any part of the newly annexed area.
Service to begin ninety (90) days after annexation has received city council approval. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-
2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-14: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind, including
any owner, occupant, lessee or tenant of premises, violating any of the provisions of this chapter, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 319/528
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 2089,
1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
Title 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE AND BUILDING DEPARTMENT
10-1-1: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ADOPTED; BUILDING DEPARTMENT
ESTABLISHED:
The administrative code and the building department for the city hereby are adopted by the city, for the
administration, organizational and enforcement rules and regulations for the technical codes which
regulate site preparation and construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair, use and occupancy
of buildings, structures and buildings service equipment within the city. One copy of the administrative
code is on file and is open for inspection to the public, being marked and designated as the
administrative code, current edition as adopted by the state, published by the International Conference
Of Building Officials. (2003 Code § 4-01-01; amd. 2012 Code)
10-1-2: TERMS DEFINED:
A. Whenever "the governing body" or "local jurisdiction" is referred to in this chapter, or adopted
codes, it shall be deemed to be referring to the city of Blackfoot, Bingham County, a political
subdivision of the state of Idaho.
B. Whenever the term "administrative authority", "authorized official", "responsible official", "building
official", "chief inspector", "code enforcement officer" or other similar designation is used herein or
in any of the technical codes, it shall be construed to mean the building official designated by the
appointing authority of this jurisdiction. (2003 Code §§ 4-01-03, 4-01-04)
10-1-3: FUTURE CODES ADOPTED:
All subsequent editions and/or supplements to the administrative code, as adopted by the state
legislature, hereby automatically are adopted by the city as they may become available. (2003 Code
§ 4-01-06; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 2
BUILDING CODE
10-2-1: BUILDING AND RESIDENTIAL CODES ADOPTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 320/528
Certain documents, one copy of which is on file and open for inspection to the public, being marked
and designated as the building code, current edition as adopted by the state, published by the
International Conference Of Building Officials, but excepting therefrom the requirements for automatic
sprinkler systems in three-unit and four-unit group R buildings, and adopting the residential code,
current edition as adopted by the state, be and the same are hereby adopted as the code of the city
for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition,
conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and structures
within the jurisdiction of the city, and providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such codes,
published by the International Conference Of Building Officials, and the secondary publications
referenced above, all of which are on file in the city, are referred to, adopted and made a part hereof
as if fully set forth in this chapter. (2003 Code § 4-02-01; amd. 2012 Code)
10-2-2: TERMS DEFINED:
A. Whenever "the governing body" or "local jurisdiction" is referred to in this chapter, or adopted
codes, it shall be deemed to be referring to the city of Blackfoot, Bingham County, a political
subdivision of the state of Idaho.
B. Whenever the term "authorized official", or "building official" is referred to in the codes adopted by
this chapter, such reference and designation shall be deemed to refer to and describe the "senior
building official" of the city of Blackfoot, Bingham County, a political subdivision of the state of
Idaho. (2003 Code §§ 4-02-05, 4-02-06)
10-2-3: INSTALLATION OF MANUFACTURED HOMES:
Manufactured homes, as defined by state law and inspected by the department of housing and urban
development (HUD), shall not be subject to the enforcement provisions of the aforesaid building code,
but shall be regulated and inspected as prescribed in Idaho Code title 44, chapter 22. The owner, or
an agent of the owner, must apply for and receive, an installation permit prior to placing any
manufactured home on their property. No structural modifications may be made to any manufactured
home or manufacturer's installation instructions, unless a written site specific structural analysis from a
state certified engineer or architect has been approved, verifying the modification's compatibility with
the manufactured home. All additions or alterations to any manufactured home must comply with all
building code requirements. The building official or appointed representative hereby is authorized to
permit, inspect and collect fees, as established by the governing body, for manufactured homes not
bearing a HUD certification label. (2003 Code § 4-02-02)
10-2-4: FUTURE CODES ADOPTED:
All subsequent editions and/or supplements to the building and residential codes as adopted by the
state legislature, hereby automatically are adopted by the city as they may become available. (2003
Code § 4-02-08; amd. 2012 Code)
10-2-5: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 321/528
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. (2003 Code § 4-02-03; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 3
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
10-3-1: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED:
That a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and
designated as the international property maintenance code of the city, current edition as adopted by
the state, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of
such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
property maintenance code on file in the office of the city clerk hereby are referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in section 10-3-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2071, 6-19-2007; amd. 2012 Code)
10-3-2: REVISIONS:
The following sections hereby are revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: "City of Blackfoot" for [NAME OF JURISDICTION]
Section 103.1 hereby is deleted and replaced with the following:
Section 1.03.1 Authority and Inspections:
1.03.1.1 The building official, his designated representative, code enforcement officer, police
officer, or any authorized representative thereof upon visual identification, or upon receipt of a
complaint from any person, is authorized and directed to make inspections of property to
determine compliance with this chapter.
1.03.1.2 Unscreened exterior areas may be inspected at any time from a public right of way with
or without the involvement of the owner or occupant in accordance with legal requirements
governing administrative inspections of private property.
1.03.1.3 Screened exterior areas shall be inspected only during the normal business hours of
the city unless otherwise arranged, and only upon invitation or with the concurrence of the owner
or occupant or when authorized/ordered by a court.
1.03.1.4 Except in cases of alleged imminent hazards, if the occupant is not the owner of the
premises or dwelling unit to be inspected, the building official, his designated representative,
code enforcement officer, police officer, or any authorized representative thereof shall provide
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 322/528
notice in writing or by telephone to the owner or designated agent as to the time and place of
inspection. The owner or designated agent may be present for the inspection. The convenience
of the owner or designated agent shall not require the rescheduling of the inspection.
Sections 1.03.2, 1.03.3 and 1.03.5 hereby are deleted.
Section 104.2 hereby is deleted.
Section 106.3.1 hereby is added as follows:
If the mayor determines that action by the city is required to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare in an area affected by a violation of this chapter, the mayor may direct that employees of
the city, or the city's contractors or agents, go upon the premises in question and remove, abate,
or destroy the problem. The city shall be entitled to recover its expense by civil action filed in a
court of competent jurisdiction, together with costs and a reasonable attorney fees. The expense
may also be certified to the city clerk and transmitted to the county treasurer, and be collected by
special assessment upon the property to the extent provided by law pursuant to Idaho Code
sections 50-334 and 50-1008. If the certificate is recorded at the office of the county recorder, it
shall become a lien against the property to the extent provided by law.
Section 106.6 hereby is added as follows:
Additional Violations And Penalties
1.06.6.1 Any owner, occupant, lessor, lessee, manager, or other person having lawful control
over a structure or parcel of land who causes, allows, facilitates, aids or abets any violation of
any provision of this chapter or who fails to perform any act or duty required by this chapter or
who allows a lessee or a tenant to violate this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each
day any violation of any provision of this chapter or the failure to perform any act or duty
required by this chapter exists shall constitute a separate violation.
1.06.6.2 The owner of record, as recorded in the records of Bingham County, of the property
upon which a violation of this chapter exists shall be presumed to be the person having lawful
control over a structure or parcel of land. If more than one person shall be recorded as the
owner of the property, said persons shall be jointly and severally presumed to be persons
having lawful control over a structure or parcel of land. This presumption shall not prevent
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter against any person specified elsewhere in this
chapter.
1.06.6.3 It shall not be a defense for an owner of record to plead that any act or omission
made punishable by this chapter was at the time the violation occurred within the control of a
lessee or tenant pursuant to a lease or rental agreement.
1.06.6.4 Prosecution of an offense, under this section, shall not preclude the city from seeking
a civil remedy for failure to comply with this chapter.
Section 111 Amend section 111 by replacing "board of appeals" with "city council" throughout section,
and replace "board" with "city council" throughout section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 323/528
Section 111.2 hereby is deleted.
Section 202 Amend definition of garbage to also include useless waste or material, trash, rubbish,
refuse or litter.
Section 302.4 Insert: six inches (6") for grass and twelve inches (12") for weeds and other plant
growth.
Section 302.8.1 hereby is added as follows:
Inoperative, Unauthorized, And Unregistered Vehicles And Materials
Section 302.8.1.1 Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for removal of certain nuisances
created by vehicles and other materials when stored improperly on public streets or private property
and to distinguish between the lawful use of public streets for parking of motor vehicles and the public
nuisance created by unlawful storage or parking of prohibited items.
Section 3.02.8.1.2 Definitions: For the purposes of this chapter:
A. Inoperative Vehicle: Any vehicle which, in its current state, whether due to broken, defective, or
missing parts, including missing or flat tires, missing doors, missing or badly damaged
windshields, or broken or defective parts which are essential for movement, is not capable of
being used as a regular means of transportation.
B. Unauthorized: Anything other than a lawfully registered motor vehicle and its lawfully connected
trailer, including, but not limited to, the following: any snowmobile, any boat, any trailer which is
not connected by means of a lawful hitch to an operating, lawfully registered motor vehicle, any
camper shell or camper not mounted on a vehicle, any storage containers, excluding city
authorized garbage containers when located in conformance with city regulations, any vehicle
reported stolen and not yet recovered, and any recreational vehicle which remains parked on a
street longer than authorized in this code.
C. Unregistered Vehicle: Any vehicle which is not lawfully and currently registered as provided in
Idaho Code title 49, chapter 4; or any vehicle which does not bear current annual Idaho license
plates or decals; or any vehicle which does not bear current license plates issued by another
state and is not lawfully and currently registered in that state.
Section 3.02.8.1.3 Use Of City Streets Authorized For Parking Registered, Operative Motor Vehicles;
Other Uses Prohibited And Declared Public Nuisances:
A. The parking, both short term and long term of lawfully registered, operative motor vehicles is
allowed at curb side areas of the streets of the city of Blackfoot; provided, that the motor vehicles
are not parked in violation of pavement or curb markings or regulatory signs or traffic devices;
and provided, that they are parked in conformance with parking method regulations set out
elsewhere in this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 324/528
B. The use of the streets as a storage location for unregistered or inoperative motor vehicles,
unauthorized items such as camper shells, boats, unhitched trailers, storage containers, or other
materials is prohibited and the owner(s) may be issued a misdemeanor citation for violating the
prohibition. The continued presence of such unlawfully stored items is inimical to the well being
of the citizens and is hereby declared a public nuisance. All such items shall be subject to
removal as provided hereinafter, the costs of which, including storage, shall be borne by the
owner(s).
Section 3.02.8.1.4 Removal From Public Right Of Way:
The police department is authorized to cause the immediate removal of any unregistered or
unauthorized vehicle, any unauthorized materials, or any vehicle reported as stolen and not yet
recovered found parked or left on any street or right of way. The department is also authorized to
cause to be removed any vehicle parked on the right of way which is found to be inoperative,
pursuant to notification and removal procedures set forth in Idaho Code title 49, chapter 18;
provided, however, that upon notification to the police department that a motor vehicle has
become disabled while being operated, such inoperative vehicle may be left parked against the
curb area of a public right of way for a period not to exceed forty eight (48) hours for effecting
repairs or arranging for removal.
Section 3.02.8.1.5 Use Of Private Property For Storage Of Unregistered Or Inoperative Vehicles Or
Vehicle Parts Prohibited And Declared A Public Nuisance:
The long term presence on private property outside the confines of enclosed buildings, of
inoperative, wrecked, discarded, partially dismantled, junked, unused, or unregistered vehicles
or vehicle parts contributes to blight and deterioration of neighborhoods and is detrimental to
public health, safety, and welfare due to factors such as broken glass, standing water,
accumulation of rusted parts, potential environmental damage, and the potential for breeding of
vermin, and is hereby deemed a public nuisance. No person in charge or control of any property
within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any such
vehicle to remain in the open on such property longer than seventy two (72) hours. Persons
violating this prohibition may be issued a misdemeanor citation and the city may pursue other
legal remedies for removal of the vehicles. This prohibition shall not apply to a vehicle on the
premises of a lawfully operated auto salvage business, auto repair business, towing and storage
business, auto sales business, or governmentally operated auto storage area, when necessary
to the operation of such business enterprise, nor to vehicles for which a repair or restoration
permit has been issued as provided hereinafter.
Section 3.02.8.1.6 Temporary Exceptions For Repair And Restoration Permits:
The code enforcement staff are hereby authorized to issue permits for either restoration work on
an inoperative vintage or classic car or repair of one inoperative vehicle and a salvage vehicle
and such vehicle parts as may be necessary for repair under the conditions established in this
section. Code enforcement staff is authorized to deny such permits to an owner if the property
on which the work will be done is not in compliance with property maintenance regulations set
out in this ordinance. Code enforcement staff is also authorized to revoke any permit if the owner
violates the terms of the permit or property maintenance provisions in this ordinance and does
not correct the violations within the time prescribed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 325/528
A. Repair Permit: The code enforcement staff may issue a thirty (30) day permit to allow the
owner of a vehicle to repair that vehicle on his residential premises by salvaging
parts/equipment from another vehicle owned by him, without storing and/or working on the
vehicles in an enclosed building. There shall be no cost for the permit. Members of the code
enforcement staff are authorized to issue one 30-day extension if requested by the
permittee in order to complete the repair, provided permittee is in compliance with the terms
of the permit and the property maintenance provisions in this ordinance. If no enclosed
building is available, storage and work on the vehicles should be accomplished within the
confines of a carport or an area screened from public view. When not in an enclosed
building and not undergoing actual repair work, both vehicles must be under a car cover
which has been specifically made to fit the contours of and cover the entire body of the
vehicle; blankets, tarpaulins, or other such makeshift coverings are not allowed. Vehicle
parts, equipment, and tools must be neatly stacked and covered when work is not taking
place. At the expiration of the permit or its extension period, the salvage vehicle must be
removed from the premises or the code enforcement staff may cause a misdemeanor
citation to be issued and may also pursue other legal remedies to effect the removal.
Nothing herein shall be construed to allow any person to perform such work in order to sell
the repaired vehicle to another party.
B. Restoration Permit: The code enforcement staff may issue a one year permit to allow the
owner of a vehicle to undertake a project to restore a vehicle as either a "classic" car (a
vehicle at least 30 years old) or an "Idaho old timer" (a vehicle manufactured prior to
January 1, 1943) to its original condition without storing the vehicle and working on it within
an enclosed building. If possible, work must be performed within the confines of a carport or
within a screened area. If not kept in an enclosed building, the vehicle must be covered with
a car cover as described in subsection A of this section whenever work is not taking place.
Members of the code enforcement staff are authorized to issue one 180-day extension if
requested by the permittee in order to complete the repair, provided permittee is in
compliance with the terms of the permit and the property maintenance provisions in this
chapter. At the expiration of the permit or its extension period, if the vehicle is not fully
restored to working condition, the owner must either store the vehicle in a fully enclosed
building or remove the vehicle from the property. Failure to do so may result in issuance of a
misdemeanor citation and the city may pursue other legal remedies to effect the removal.
Section 304.14 Insert: June 1 to September 30.
Section 602.3 Insert: October 1 to May 30.
Section 602.4 hereby is deleted.
Chapter 9 hereby is added as follows:
Chapter 9
Conflict Of Ordinances
Section 901 In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of the city existing
on the effective date hereof, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 326/528
promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall control.
Section 902 It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair
or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically
repealed by this chapter, or with private restrictions placed upon property by covenant deed
or other private agreement.
Section 903. In cases where two (2) or more provisions of this chapter disagree, the most
stringent or restrictive shall control.
(Ord. 2071, 6-19-2007)
Chapter 4
MECHANICAL CODE
10-4-1: MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
Certain documents, one copy of which is on file in the city office and open for inspection to the public,
being marked and designated as the international mechanical code, including appendix chapter A of
the current edition as adopted by the state, published by the International Conference Of Building
Officials, be and is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating the design, construction,
quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators or other
miscellaneous heat producing appliances in the city; providing for the issuance of permits and the
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of
such international mechanical code, published by the International Conference Of Building Officials,
on file in the office of city hall, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if set out in
this chapter. (2003 Code § 4-05-01; amd. 2012 Code)
10-4-2: TERMS DEFINED:
A. Whenever "the governing body" or "local jurisdiction" is referred to in this chapter, or adopted
codes, it shall be deemed to be referring to the city of Blackfoot, Bingham County, a political
subdivision of the state of Idaho.
B. Whenever the term "authorized official", or "building official" is referred to in the codes adopted by
this chapter, such reference and designation shall deem to refer to and describe the "senior
building official" of the city of Blackfoot, Bingham County, a political subdivision of the state of
Idaho. (2003 Code §§ 4-05-04, 4-05-05)
10-4-3: FUTURE CODES ADOPTED:
All subsequent editions and/or supplements to the international mechanical code as adopted by the
state legislature, hereby automatically are adopted by the city as they may become available. (2003
Code § 4-05-07)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 327/528
10-4-4: PENALTY:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. (2003 Code § 4-05-02; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 5
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
10-5-1: FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
The international fire code, current edition as adopted and amended by the state or the state fire
marshal, is adopted as the official fire code for the city. In addition thereto, all subsequent editions
and/or supplements to the international fire code as adopted by the state fire marshal be, and the
same hereby are, automatically adopted by the city as they may become available. (2003 Code § 3-
03-04; amd. 2012 Code)
10-5-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The fire prevention code shall be enforced by all officers of the police force and the fire department of
the city. (2003 Code § 3-03-04)
10-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted, or who shall fail to comply
with such provisions, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall
build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 3-03-04; amd. 2012 Code)
Title 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be cited as the CITY OF BLACKFOOT ZONING ORDINANCE, and shall also be known
as title 11 of this code. (2003 Code § 11-01-01.1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 328/528
11-1-2: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the people of
the city as follows:
A. To protect property rights and enhance property values.
B. To ensure that adequate public facilities and services are provided to the public at a reasonable
cost.
C. To ensure that the economy of the state and localities is protected and enhanced.
D. To ensure that the important environmental features of the state and localities are protected.
E. To encourage the protection of prime agricultural, forestry and mining lands for production of food,
fiber and minerals.
F. To encourage urban and urban type development within incorporated cities.
G. To avoid undue concentration of populations and overcrowding of land.
H. To ensure that the development of land is commensurate with the physical characteristics of the
land.
I. To protect life and property in areas subject to natural hazards and disasters.
J. To protect fish, wildlife and recreation resources.
K. To avoid undue water and air pollution. (2003 Code § 11-01-01.2)
11-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, each of the terms defined shall have the meaning given in this section, unless a
different meaning is clearly required by the context. All words used in the present tense shall include
the future; words used in the singular number shall include the plural number and the plural the
singular, unless the natural construction of the sentence indicates otherwise; the word "building" shall
include the word "structure"; and the word "shall" is mandatory, not directory.
ACCESS: The place, means or way by which pedestrians or vehicles shall have safe, adequate and
usable ingress and egress to a property, use or parking space.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 329/528
ACCESS AISLE: An accessible pedestrian space between elements, such as parking spaces, seating
and desks that provides clearances appropriate for use of the elements by physically disabled people.
ACCESSIBLE: Describes a site, building, facility, or a portion thereof, that can be approached, entered
and used by physically disabled people.
ACCESSIBLE ROUTE: A continuous, unobstructed path connecting all accessible elements and
spaces in a building or facility. Exterior accessible routes may include parking access aisles, curb
ramps, walks, ramps and lifts.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: See definition of Building, Accessory.
ACCESSORY USE: A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the premises that does
not alter the essential characteristic of the use considered as a whole and as related to other uses
permitted in the same district.
ACCESSWAY: An unobstructed way of specified width containing a drive or roadway that provides
vehicular access within a mobile home park and connects to a public street.
ADMINISTRATION, PLANNING: See definition of Director, Planning.
ADULT BOOKSTORE: Any premises in which the dissemination, sale or rental of books, magazines,
newspapers, movie films, videotapes, devices, slides or other photographic or written reproduction
showing specified sexual activities: a) human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; and
b) explicit acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy is conducted as a principal use
of the premises, or as an adjunct to some other business activity, but which constitutes the primary or
a major attraction to the premises. This definition does not apply to the availability for sale of any
material displayed in such a way that only the name of the material appears to the public and does not
include specified sexual activities on either cover of the material that is open to public viewing.
ADULT DAY FACILITY: Any facility where adults regularly receive care, maintenance and supervision,
unaccompanied by a guardian or custodian, regardless of whether the facility provides any instruction.
The use excludes: a) care of operator's legal wards or relatives; b) occasional personal guests; and c)
any facility providing overnight custodial services for lodging and/or boarding.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: Any premises in which motion pictures, slides, videotapes or
similar photographic reproductions showing specified sexual activities: a) human genitals in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal; b) explicit acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy
are shown to an audience that pays a fee or other consideration for the viewing. Such a use is
regarded as the principal use of the premises.
ADULT PERFORMANCES BUSINESS: Any premises in which primary entertainment consists of the
actions or performances of actors, employees or other persons portraying conduct described in the
definition of "adult bookstore", and in which such entertainment is the principal use of the premises or
an adjunct to some other business activity, but which constitutes the primary or a major attraction to
the premises, and wherein fees of any kind are charged, and where such entertainment is conducted
on a regular basis. Such a use is to be regarded as a principal use for the purposes of the regulations
contained in this title.
AGRICULTURE: Tilling of soil, aquaculture, raising crops, livestock, farming, dairying and animal
husbandry, including all uses customarily accessory and incidental thereto; but excluding hogs,
slaughterhouses, fertilizer works, boneyards and commercial feedlots.
AIR RIGHTS: The rights to use the space above a property as a separate negotiable part of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 330/528
property that can be sold or leased independently. The air rights can be utilized in two (2) ways: a) for
a separate development over and above the existing use or structure; or b) as transferable
development rights for development above another property. Air rights projects often involve the
utilization of surplus air space above public or quasi-public structures such as streets, highways,
railroads and railroad yards. The technique of transferring air rights to another property is sometimes
utilized to preserve historic landmarks in densely occupied urban areas. Condemnation or purchase of
air rights is also used to preserve approach safety for designed areas around airports.
AIRPORT: Any area of land or water that is used or intended for use by aircraft and including the
necessary appurtenant structures or facilities located thereon.
ALLEY: A public way providing the secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended
as a traffic thoroughfare.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL: Any change, other than incidental repairs, that would prolong the life
of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams and
girders.
ALTERNATE HEARING PROCEDURE: In the event a hearing request would involve notification of
two hundred (200) or more property owners or residents, notice of such application and hearing
thereon may be given in lieu of notice by mail, in the following manner: by commercial advertisement
published for three (3) consecutive issues in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation
within the city, the first of such publications not to be less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for
hearing on said application, which advertisement shall not be less than three inches by six inches
(3" x 6") in size.
ANNEXATION: The process by which the city's corporate boundary is expanded to incorporate
additional property pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-222.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure that is arranged, designed or
used as a single housekeeping unit, including complete kitchen and sanitary facilities permanently
installed.
APARTMENT, HIGH RISE: A multiple-family building having floors used for human occupancy located
more than seventy five feet (75') above the lower level of fire department vehicle access.
APPEAL: A request for a review of any decision or interpretation of any provision of this title.
AREA OF CITY IMPACT: Idaho Code section 67-6526, the local planning act, requires that cities and
counties adopt a map identifying an area of city impact within the unincorporated area of the county.
The area of city impact shall be defined considering the trade area of the city, geographic factors and
areas that can be reasonably expected to be annexed to the city in the future. The enabling legislation
provides three (3) options of planning and regulating development within the area of the city impact,
including exclusive use of the city plan and ordinances, exclusive uses of the county plan and
ordinances, or application of any mutually agreed upon plan and ordinance.
ATTACHED: Anything physically connected to a building or structure so as to become an integral part
thereof. The term includes components of a structure joined together by a common wall, floor or
ceiling or a fully enclosed hallway.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Premises used primarily for the retail sale and delivery to the
vehicle of motor vehicle fuel and lubrication oils, tires and incidental vehicular accessories, and
providing vehicular lubrication and related services, including minor motor vehicle repairs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 331/528
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any use of premises, excluding fully enclosed buildings, on which
one or more motor vehicles not in operating condition are standing more than thirty (30) days or on
which used motor vehicles, or parts, thereof, are dismantled or stored.
AWNING: A projecting cover extending over a door, window or wall section with supports attached to
the building and used as cover, protection, or as decoration.
BACKYARD COMPOSTING: The activity of decomposing organic matter generated on any area of
land or lot by a homeowner, tenant, occupant or property owner. Backyard composting shall process
materials generated primarily on site. Backyard composting shall be operated in a nuisance free
manner. No commercial purpose may be associated with backyard composting.
BALCONY: A platform enclosed by a parapet or a railing, projecting from an exterior wall of a building
and open to the sky.
BASEMENT: The story or level of a building that is partially or totally below ground level.
BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY: A type of hotel providing overnight accommodations and breakfast
food service. If designed to accommodate twelve (12) or fewer guests, it shall be considered a type of
boarding or rooming house rather than a hotel.
BLOCK: The space along one side of a street between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets, or
between an intersecting street and a right of way, waterway or other similar barrier, whichever is
lesser, excluding alleys.
BOARDING HOUSE: See definition of House, Boarding Or Rooming.
BOOKSTORE, ADULT: See definition of Adult Bookstore.
BUFFER AREAS (ZONES): A parcel of land established to separate incompatible adjacent land uses,
such as a commercial use and a residential use. The area may be only ten feet (10') to twenty five feet
(25') wide, and include walls, fences, screen plantings, or earthen mounds (berms) to insulate the
adjoining properties from noise, traffic or visual intrusions. Some ordinances require commercial and
industrial districts to install a buffer area wherever the property line abuts a residential district. The
term may also be used more broadly to describe any zone that separates two (2) unlike zones, such
as a transitional multiple-family or professional business zone between the central business district
and a single-family zone. (Related term: Transitional Uses.)
BUILDABLE AREA: The space within the setback lines remaining on a lot after the minimum open
space requirements of this title have been complied with.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and entirely
separated on all sides from any other structure by space or by walls in which there are no
communicating doors, windows or openings, that is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or
protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A building that is subordinate to, and the use of which is incidental to, that
of the principal building or use on the same lot; but not including any building containing a "dwelling
unit", as defined in this section.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building enclosed by a permanent roof and by exterior
walls pierced only by windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building located on its own lot and physically separated from other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 332/528
buildings by required yards and/or open space.
BUILDING, EXISTING: Any building erected prior to the effective date hereof, or one for which a legal
building permit has been issued.
BUILDING, GOVERNMENT: A building owned or used by the Federal, State, County or City
government, or any political subdivision, agency or instrumentality thereof.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING: Any building that does not conform to the requirements of this title.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is
situated. Every dwelling in any residential district is a principal building.
BULK: The term used to describe the size and mutual relationships of buildings and other structures
as to size, height, coverage, shape, location of exterior walls in relation to lot lines, to the centerlines
of the streets, to other walls of the same building and to other buildings or structures; and to all open
spaces relating to the building or structure.
BUSINESS: The purchase, sale, exchange or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of
any article, substance or commodity for profit or livelihood, or the ownership or management of office
buildings, offices, recreation or amusement enterprises, or the maintenance and use for offices or
professions and trades rendering services.
BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT: Idaho Code section 50-2601 et seq., authorizes incorporated
cities to create business improvement districts. The purpose of these districts includes the creation
and maintenance of parking facilities, operation of transportation services, general physical
improvements and the general promotion of retail trades and/or public events held within the districts.
The City may levy special assessments on all benefiting businesses located within the district in order
to finance eligible activities.
CANOPY: A permanent rooflike shelter extending from part or all of a building face and constructed of
some durable material such as metal, glass, fabric or plastic.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (CIP): A community plan that matches the costs of future
projects such as water, sewers, roads and schools to anticipated revenues. It is a governmental
timetable for constructing permanent improvements and includes timing of the projects, their costs and
the methods for financing. CIPs are usually prepared for five (5) or six (6) years, updated annually and
coordinated with the comprehensive planning process. (Related terms: Comprehensive Plan,
functional plans.)
CARPORT: A structure open on at least two (2) sides used to house or protect motor vehicles that are
owned or operated by the occupants of the principal building.
CELLAR: A storage room or rooms located under the main floor or floors of a building and which are
partly or totally below ground level.
CHILDCARE FACILITY: A. Any facility where children regularly receive care, maintenance and
supervision, usually unaccompanied by the child's parents, guardian or custodian, and regardless of
whether the facility does or does not provide any instruction. Preschools are classified as childcare
facilities. This use excludes: 1) the care of the operator's children or legal wards; 2) children related by
blood or marriage; 3) occasional personal guests; 4) any home, place or facility providing overnight
custodial services for lodging and/or boarding for the occupants therein; and 5) children aged twelve
(12) years and over. The occupant load of a building, as determined by the Building Department and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 333/528
Fire Department requirements, will include all persons using the facility.
B. There are three (3) types of childcare facilities:
1. Family Childcare Home: A childcare facility for seven (7) or fewer children. They are an
accessory use to residential uses and require a home based business permit.
2. Group Childcare:
a. A childcare facility for eight (8) to twelve (12) children within the operator's residence.
b. A childcare facility for eight (8) to twelve (12) children that is outside the operator's home.
3. Childcare Center:
a. Intermediate childcare center: A childcare facility providing for thirteen (13) to twenty (20)
children.
b. Large childcare center: A childcare facility providing for twenty one (21) or more children.
CITY: The City of Blackfoot, Idaho.
CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City.
CITY ENGINEER: The City Engineer of the City.
CLINIC: A building, other than a "hospital", as defined in this section, used by two (2) or more licensed
physicians for the purpose of receiving and treating patients.
CLUB, FRATERNAL: The social use of a building or of any premises by a nonprofit association, where
such use is restricted to enrolled members and their guests.
COMMERCE: See definition of business.
COMMERCIAL AREA: An area for the purchase, sale, exchange or other transaction involving the
handling or disposition of any article, substance or commodity for profit or livelihood, or the ownership
or management of office buildings, offices, recreation or amusement enterprises or professions and
trades rendering services.
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
COMMON AREA: Land within a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, that
is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development. It
may include complementary structures and improvements.
COMMON DRIVEWAY: A shared access that serves up to four (4) separate single-family residential
parcels, each having public street frontage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 334/528
COMPOST: A humuslike material, produced from composting, that has been stabilized to a degree
that is potentially beneficial to plant growth and that is usable as a soil conditioner, topsoil, growing
medium amendment, or other similar uses to buffer the soil pH, improve soil aggregation and tilth,
reduce erosion, enhance water infiltration and retention, increase soil porosity and aeration, slow the
rate of temperature change in soil, provide food for soil microorganisms, or enhance availability of
micronutrients in soils.
COMPOSTING: See definition of backyard composting.
COMPOSTING FACILITY: A facility where organic matter that is derived primarily from off site is to be
processed by composting and/or is processed for commercial purposes. Activities of a composting
facility may include management, collection, transportation, staging, composting, curing, storage,
marketing or use of compost.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A policy plan for the Blackfoot area known as the Blackfoot
Comprehensive Plan, that has been adopted by the City Council.
CONDEMNATION AND EMINENT DOMAIN: A. Condemnation is the taking of private property by a
government unit for public use when the owner will not relinquish it through sale or other means. The
power to take the property is based on the concept of eminent domain, which is the legal right of a
government to acquire or "take" private property for public use or public purpose upon paying just
compensation to the owner.
B. Condemnation is commonly used to acquire property for highways, street widening, parks and
utility construction. Property has also been condemned under eminent domain powers for private
use in the public interest, such as urban renewal where the public purpose is the removal of
dilapidated structures.
C. The terms "eminent domain" and "condemnation" are often used interchangeably, although
condemnation may also mean the demolition by public authority of an unsafe structure where no
compensation is paid to the owner and the condemned property does not become public land.
(Related terms: Inverse Condemnation, Taking, Police Power.)
CONDITIONAL USE: A use which, because of special requirements or characteristics, may be
allowed in a particular zoning district only after review by the planning and zoning commission and
granting of conditional use approval imposing such conditions as necessary to make the use
compatible with other uses permitted in the same zone or vicinity. Conditional uses are issued for uses
of land and, unless otherwise specified or restricted as a condition, may be transferable from one
owner of the land to another.
CONDITIONAL USE CONCEPT PLAN: A concept conditional use is an approval of a generalized
development plan that does not include the details of proposed development. A detailed conditional
use approval must be obtained for each phase of a concept conditional use.
CONDOMINIUM: Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the
remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real
estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the
unit owners.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 335/528
COVERED PARKING: A carport that provides full overhead protection from the elements with ordinary
roof coverings. Canvas, lath, fiberglass, plastic and vegetation are not ordinary roof coverings and
cannot be used in providing a covered parking space.
DAYCARE CENTER: See definitions of Childcare Facility and Adult Day Facility.
DEDICATION: A. The assignment of private property to a specific public use and its acceptance for
such use by the appropriate governmental agency. Dedications for roads, parks, open space, school
sites and other public uses are increasingly required as a condition for approval of a development.
Where costs are high or a "fee simple" transfer is unnecessary, the owner may, where authorized,
dedicate a portion of the rights through an easement or other form of less than fee transfer. Such
easements may include dedications for scenic, nonaccess, pedestrian, utility, drainage, floodway, air
space and other purposes.
B. Where land dedication is not appropriate, a cash payment (fee in lieu of) may be authorized.
Both are methods to assess the developer with more of the public costs of the new
development. (Related terms: Easement, Conservation Easement, Open Space, Covenant,
Dedication, Development Impact Fees, Subdivision Regulations.)
DEDICATION (FEE IN LIEU OF): As provided in the definition of "dedication", as defined in this
section, this technique involves cash payments as a substitute for dedications that are authorized
under subdivision regulations when requirements for mandatory dedication of land are inappropriate.
The conditions under which such payments will be allowed must be spelled out in the regulations.
(Related terms: Dedication, Subdivision Regulations, Development Impact Fees.)
DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS: A. When a piece of property is purchased, the purchaser also acquires a
number of rights toward the use of that property, such as the right to build a home, a right to develop
commercially, a right to remove gravel or other materials, a right to use water, a right to raise crops.
Which of these rights are purchased with each property depends on the zoning, other applicable
regulations and the terms of the purchase.
B. Acquisition of development rights is a method for controlling urban growth and conserving
natural resources. Essentially, the concept involves buying the future development potential for
land and permits the owner to continue the existing use, usually agriculture, in urbanizing areas.
Hence, a county or city could acquire a fee or any lesser interest necessary (development rights)
to conserve selected open space, timber or agriculture lands. A county or city could also acquire
fee title to such property and convey or lease the property back to its original owner using
covenants or contractual agreements to limit the future use of the property. (Related term:
Transferable Development Rights.)
DIRECTOR, BUILDING: The director of the building department of the city.
DIRECTOR, PLANNING: The director of the city planning and zoning department charged with the
administration of the city planning and zoning documents. The director is directly responsible to the
mayor and city council. This definition includes the planning director's designated representative. This
definition also includes references to the planning administrator, zoning administrator, planning official,
zoning director and other similar titles. The planning director may be the same as the building director.
DISPLAY, OUTDOOR: Placement of items out of doors, i.e., not within a building, for show and sale to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 336/528
the general public. Examples of this use include garden supplies placed in commercial parking lots by
home and garden stores, or other stores, during spring and summer time. This use is distinct from
outdoor storage of items or of junk elsewhere defined and may be temporary in nature.
DISTRICT: A section or part of the incorporated portion of the city for which the use regulations are
uniform, as set forth herein.
DRIVE-UP WINDOW: An establishment, whether it be the primary or an accessory use, other than
automobile service station or parking lot, that is designed to accommodate the motor vehicles of
patrons in such manner as to permit the occupants of such vehicles, while remaining therein, to make
purchases or receive services at a window or service area.
DRIVEWAY: A private access connecting a building such as a house or garage, with a street.
DUPLEX: A detached building containing two (2) dwelling units, each of which include a separate
bathroom and kitchen. The two (2) units must be able to function as dwelling units independently of
each other.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, containing one or more dwelling units. The term "dwelling"
does not include a "mobile home", "recreational vehicle", "motel", "hotel", "guesthouse" or "boarding
house", as defined in this section.
DWELLING, COMBINED RESIDENTIAL: A detached building designed for and occupied by two (2)
families living independently of each other. Combined residential units shall be built in accordance with
the adopted building code.
DWELLING, HIGH RISE: Any structure having floors used for human occupancy located more than
seventy five feet (75') above the lower level of fire department vehicle access.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building, or portion thereof, containing three (3) or more dwelling
units, excluding attached single-family townhouse units located on individual lots.
DWELLING, RESIDENTIAL ACREAGE: A residential area designed for or occupied by a single-family
residence on a small acreage allowing a certain number of livestock.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed for use and occupancy by no more than one
family.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed for, or used as, a residence for not more than one
family, including all necessary household employees of such family, and constituting a separate and
independent housekeeping unit, with a single kitchen permanently installed. A dwelling unit may be
occupied by a family (related by blood or marriage), or by up to five (5) unrelated individuals. The term
does not imply or include such types of occupancy as a lodging or boarding house, club, sorority,
fraternity or hotel.
EASEMENT: A grant of the right to use land for a specific purpose or purposes.
FEEDLOT: A lot or parcel on which livestock are fed intensively in order to fatten for market. This
definition does not include short term holding pens for auction facilities or meatpacking
establishments.
FILLING STATION: Building and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and automobile
accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and where in addition the following services may
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 337/528
be rendered and sale made, and no other:
A. Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors and distributor parts;
B. Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving;
C. Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hose, fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor
mats, seat covers, windshield wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearing, mirrors
and the like;
D. Radiator cleaning and flushing;
E. Washing and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and polishing materials;
F. Greasing and lubrication.
FIRING RANGE: A controlled area of activity, indoors or outdoors, specifically designed for the
discharging of firearms at targets.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross or horizontal areas of the several floors, including the
exterior walls of a building or portion thereof.
FLOOR AREA, NET: That portion of the gross floor area of the building occupied by listed use or uses,
and shall include hallways, storage and packaging space, dressing or rest rooms and laboratory or
work rooms; provided, however, that floor space within the building reserved for parking or loading of
vehicles, and basement space used only for building maintenance and utilities, shall be excluded.
FRONTAGE: A piece of land that fronts on a city street or other designated right of way.
FUNERAL HOME, MORTUARY: A facility in which deceased human bodies are kept and prepared for
burial or cremation.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An enclosed accessory building or an accessory portion of a principal building
designed for shelter or storage of vehicles, owned or operated by the occupants of the principal
building.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof, except a private garage, used or designed to be
used for the storage of motor vehicles. (See definitions of Repair, Major Motor Vehicle and Repair,
Minor Motor Vehicle.)
GRADE: The elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior wall of a building
or structure. If a berm has been created adjacent to the structure, or if the structure is built on top of a
berm, grade will be considered the lowest point of the berm.
GRADE, ESTABLISHED: The curb line grade at the lot lines established by the city engineer, or
otherwise established by law.
GUESTHOUSE: A detached structure, being an accessory to a single-family dwelling with not more
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 338/528
than two (2) bedrooms, having no kitchen facilities and which shall be used or designed for use
primarily by guests or servants for sleeping quarters. A guesthouse shall not be used as a rental
dwelling.
HALFWAY HOUSE: A type of housing for persons convicted of nonviolent crimes who are in the later
stages of serving a sentence and are being transitioned back into free society.
HANDICAPPED HOME: Homes for the mentally or physically handicapped with no more than eight
(8) resident patients and no more than two (2) resident staff, where all state and local licensing and
standards of operation requirements have been met.
HEIGHT, BUILDING: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat
roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip
roof.
HELIPAD, HELIPORT: A level area or pad where helicopters land and take off, either at ground level
or on a rooftop.
HOME, CONVALESCENT: A building housing any facility, however named, whether operated for profit
or not, the purpose of which is to provide skilled nursing care and related medical services for two (2)
or more individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury or deformity, or requiring care because of old
age.
HOME, NURSING: See definition of Home, Convalescent.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any gainful occupation engaged in by an occupant of a dwelling unit, including,
but not limited to, handicrafts, dressmaking, millinery, laundering, preserving, printing and/or graphic
arts or desktop publication, offices, teaching of classes, and other like occupations.
HOME, REST: See definition of Home, Convalescent.
HORTICULTURE: The activity of growing fruits, vegetables, flowers or ornamental plants.
HOSPITAL: An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the
medical or surgical care of patients twenty four (24) hours a day. The term "hospital" does not include
clinic, convalescent or boarding homes, or any institution operating solely for the treatment of mentally
ill persons, drug addicts, liquor addicts or other types of cases necessitating forcible confinement of
patients.
HOSPITAL, LARGE ANIMAL: Any building, or portion thereof, designed or used for the care of the
following animals: cattle, sheep, goats, horses, hogs, large exotic cats or similar animals.
HOSPITAL, SMALL ANIMAL: Any building, or portion thereof, designed or used for the care of the
following animals: dogs, cats, primates, birds, waterfowl, reptiles, rodents and similar animals.
HOTEL: A building containing six (6) or more bedrooms where overnight lodging without individual
cooking facilities is offered to the public for compensation, primarily for the accommodation of
transient guests.
HOUSE, APARTMENT: Any building, or portion thereof, that is designed, built, rented, leased, let or
hired out to be occupied, or that is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families
living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the said building, and shall include
flats and apartments.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 339/528
HOUSE, BOARDING OR ROOMING: A building other than a hotel or restaurant where lodging or
lodging and meals are provided for compensation to six (6) to twelve (12) persons who are not
members of the householder's family.
HOUSING, ELDERLY: Multiple-family housing constructed for occupancy by elderly individuals or
families (households with 1 or more members 65 years of age or older).
INFILL SITE: Any vacant lot or parcel within developed areas of the city, where at least eighty percent
(80%) of the land within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the site has been developed, and where
water, sewer, streets, schools and fire protection have already been developed and are provided.
Annexed areas located on the periphery of the city limits shall not be considered as infill sites.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises or portion thereof, on which more than two (2) dogs or five (5) cats, or a
combination of two (2) dogs and five (5) cats, are maintained, harbored, possessed, bred, or cared for.
This definition shall not apply to a litter of puppies or a litter of kittens under six (6) months of age and
kept and housed with the mother.
KITCHEN: Any room or portion thereof within a building designed and intended to be mainly used for
cooking or preparation of food.
LANDSCAPING: The finishing and adornment of unpaved yard areas with materials and treatment
generally including naturally growing elements such as grass, trees, shrubs, and flowers. This
treatment may also include the use of logs, rocks, fountains, water features and contouring of the
earth.
LOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: An open off street hard surfaced area of land other than a street or
public way, the principal use of which is for the standing, loading and unloading of motor vehicles,
tractors and trailers, to avoid undue interference with public streets and alleys.
LOT: A unit of land constituting a part of a block of a recorded subdivision so recorded for transfer of
ownership.
LOT AREA: The square footage enclosed within the boundary of a lot or parcel. The flagpole or stem
portion of a flag lot shall not be considered part of the lot area. Lot area shall be determined exclusive
of land that is used for public or private streets, highways, alleys, roads and rights of way.
LOT, AUTOMOBILE SALES: Premises on which new or used passenger automobiles, trailers, mobile
homes or trucks in operating condition are displayed in the open for sale or trade, and where no repair
or service work is done.
LOT, CORNER: A lot that is bounded on two (2) or more sides by street lines; where the angle of
intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a lot occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory
buildings.
LOT DEPTH: The distance between front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side
lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTED: A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or
approximately parallel streets. On a double fronted lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT, FLAG: A lot or parcel of land that includes a narrow projection or "flagpole" to the public right of
way. The flagpole, which shall not be considered as part of the lot area, serves as a private or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 340/528
privately shared access to the buildable area of the lot or parcel.
LOT, FRONTAGE: That portion of a lot that abuts a public right of way or other access.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot or reversed corner lot.
LOT LINE: The boundary property line encompassing a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: A. The front lot line for a regular shaped lot is the property boundary that abuts a
public or private street. The front lot line for an undeveloped corner lot is either one of the property
boundaries that abuts a public or private street, as selected by the property owner.
B. The front lot line for a flag lot may be either: 1) the closest line, parallel or most nearly parallel to
the public or private street, at the end of the flagpole; or 2) a line perpendicular or nearly
perpendicular to the public or private street, at the end of the flagpole, depending upon which
orientation provides for the closest matching of like yards of adjoining properties.
LOT LINE, REAR: The boundary line of a lot that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
For the purpose of establishing the rear lot line, the following shall apply:
A. In the case of a lot with a rear boundary formed by a single line that is parallel or nearly parallel
to the front lot line, such rear boundary is the rear lot line.
B. In the case of a lot with a rear boundary formed by two (2) or more lines, the rear lot line shall
be a line at least ten feet (10') in length within the lot, furthest removed from and most parallel to
the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any property line that is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING: A lot of record that does not meet the dimensional requirements of this
title.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot that has been recorded in the records of Bingham County.
LOT OF RECORD, ORIGINAL: A lot or parcel created and of record prior to the effective date of the
original zoning ordinance of the city.
LOT, PARKING: An open, graded and surfaced area, other than a street or public way, to be used for
the storage, for limited periods of time, of operable passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles,
and available to the public, whether for compensation, free or as an accommodation to clients or
customers.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of another lot,
whether across an alley or not.
LOT WIDTH (AVERAGE): A. The distance between the side lot lines, measured in one of the following
manners, whichever is applicable:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 341/528
1. In the case of a regular shaped lot, the width shall be measured along the front lot line; or
2. In the case of an irregular shaped lot, the width shall be the average distance between the
side lot lines, with the average distance to be measured at ten foot (10') intervals for the first
one hundred feet (100') of the lot depth beginning at the front lot line; or
3. In the case of regular shaped flag lot, the width shall be measured at a distance of twenty feet
(20') from the inside end of the flagpole; or
4. In the case of an irregular shaped flag lot, the width shall be the average distance between
the side lot lines, with the average distance to be measured at ten foot (10') intervals for the
first one hundred feet (100') of the lot depth beginning at the front lot line.
B. In addition to the above manners of measurement, in no instance shall the dimension of a lot at
its front setback line be less than the minimum average lot width required for the zoning district
in question.
LOUNGE: See definition of Tavern.
MANUFACTURE: An area for the manufacturing, assembling, fabricating, processing, packing,
repairing or storage uses that have not been declared a nuisance by statute, resolution of the planning
and zoning commission or city council, or any court of competent jurisdiction.
MAPS, ZONING: The map or maps incorporated into this title designating zoning districts.
MOBILE HOME, CLASS A: A manufactured dwelling unit with all the following characteristics:
A. Mass produced in a factory.
B. Designed and constructed for transportation to a site for installation and use when connected to
required utilities.
C. Built on a chassis.
D. Designed for long term residential use by a family, containing kitchen, bath and sleeping
facilities.
E. Multisectional with total square footage minimum equal to one thousand (1,000) square feet.
F. Constructed after June 15, 1976, and certified as meeting the mobile home construction and
safety standards of the U.S. department of housing and urban development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 342/528
G. Has a nonmetallic, wood shake or asphalt shingle roof with a minimum pitch of two to twelve
(2:12) (2 inches of rise to 12 inches of run).
H. Has an eave of a minimum of six inches (6"), or eave and gutter combination with a minimum of
six inches (6") attached to the entire perimeter of the roof.
I. Has horizontal metal lap siding, vinyl siding, simulated wood siding or wood siding.
J. Has a foundation that is similar in appearance and durability to masonry foundation of site built
dwellings and that surrounds the entire perimeter of the structure, completely enclosing the
space between the siding and the finished grade.
K. Is permanently affixed, with running gear and towing hitch removed, and set upon a foundation
base having an anchoring system that is totally concealed under the structure.
L. Meets all standards and regulations contained in section 11-4-15 of this title.
MOBILE HOME, CLASS B: Manufactured building with the following characteristics:
A. Mass produced in a factory.
B. Designed and constructed for transportation to a site for installation and use when connected to
required utilities.
C. Built on a chassis.
D. Designed for long term residential use by a family, containing a kitchen, bath and sleeping
facilities.
E. Does not meet all definitional characteristics described in the definition of Mobile Home, Class
A, subsections E through K.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any area, tract, plot or parcel of land, developed as a planned unit
development and designed primarily for placement of mobile homes located and maintained for
dwelling purposes on a permanent or semipermanent basis.
MODEL HOME: A dwelling temporarily used as a sales office for a residential development under
construction; said home being used for on site sales and not for general real estate business. Also
termed a subdivision sales office.
MORTUARY: See definition of Funeral Home, Mortuary.
MOTEL: A building, or group of buildings, on the same premises, whether detached or attached,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 343/528
containing sleeping or dwelling units independently accessible from the outside, with garage space or
parking space located on the premises and designed for, or occupied by, travelers. The term includes,
but is not limited to, any buildings or building groups designated as auto courts, motor lodges, tourist
courts or by any other title or sign intended to identify them as providing lodging to motorists.
MOTOR VEHICLE JUNKED, ABANDONED: Any automobile, truck or other vehicle that is inoperable
and to which no repair or maintenance is attempted for any period exceeding thirty (30) days.
NET LEASABLE FLOOR AREA (Applying To Parking Ratio): The entire square foot area of floor
space of a building that is enclosed and subject to heating and/or air conditioning, less:
A. Any space used and occupied by central mechanical and/or electrical equipment, elevators,
escalators, conveyors, dumbwaiters, lifts, chutes, trash disposal units, and fuel storage spaces;
and
B. Public rights of way and other similar enclosed spaces open to the public, such as public
washrooms, corridors, stairwells or elevator lobbies.
NUISANCE: Anything that interferes with the use or enjoyment of property, endangers personal health
or safety, or is offensive to the senses may be considered a nuisance. There are many types of
nuisances, and the law can be invoked to determine when, in fact, a nuisance does exist and should
be abated. Nuisance law forms part of the basis for zoning. The separation of uses through zoning
(e.g., industrial from residential areas free from pollution, noise, congestion and other characteristics
of industrial areas) had its origins in nuisance law.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT: The approval to occupy a building that is granted after zoning and building
requirements and conditions of approval, if any, have been met or bonded for.
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE: An open area for passive or active recreation developed, designated and
protected for the benefit and private use of the employees or residents within a planned development
or residential development.
ORGANIC MATTER: Plant materials, including leaves, grass, brush, weeds, tree or shrub trimmings,
garden debris, and vegetative kitchen garbage.
OUTDOOR STORAGE: The storage of equipment, materials, supplies, etc., in an outdoor area as an
accessory to a primary use.
PARCEL: Contiguous land in the ownership of one person or party.
PARK: A public or private area of land, with or without buildings, intended for outdoor active or passive
recreational uses.
PARK, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any area, tract, plot or site of land whereupon two (2) or more
recreational vehicles or travel trailers are placed, located and maintained for temporary living quarters
on a temporary basis.
PARKING COURT: A clustered parking area located off the main roadway and near the building that it
serves. Except for emergency vehicles, parking court design precludes cut through vehicular travel.
PARKING LOT: See definition of Lot, Parking.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 344/528
PARKING SPACE: Usable space within a public or private parking area or a building, that meets the
parking standards of this title, exclusive of access drives, aisles or ramps, for the storage of one
passenger automobile or commercial vehicle.
PATHWAY: Any sidewalk, route, lane, path, corridor, open space or trail designated to move people by
nonmotorized means for transportation or recreation, including micropathways.
PERSON: A natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm,
partnership or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A parcel of land that is planned and developed as a unit under single
ownership or control, containing one or more uses, buildings and common open space or recreational
facilities.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): A. This is a development that is preplanned in its entirety
with the subdivision and zoning controls applied to the project as a whole rather than to individual lots.
Therefore, densities are calculated for the entire development, usually permitting a tradeoff between
clustering of housing and provision of common open space.
B. The PUD is usually characterized by a unified site design and while most commonly used for
residential development, the technique is also frequently applied to other forms of development
such as shopping centers and industrial parks. Occasionally, a PUD may have a mix of uses.
C. The PUD also refers to the process of site plan review, in which public officials have
considerable involvement in determining the nature of the development. This technique includes
aspects of both subdivision and zoning regulations. A PUD is usually administered through a
special permit. (Related terms: Flexible Zoning, Cluster Development, Mixed Use Zoning, Zero
Lot Line.)
PLAT: A map representing a subdivision of a parcel of land into lots, blocks and streets or other
divisions and dedications. A preliminary plat is an approximate drawing of a proposed subdivision. A
final plat is the final drawing for records with the county auditor and containing all requirements set
forth in applicable state and local regulations. Plats are regulated by Idaho Code section 50-1301 et
seq., and local ordinances. (Related terms: Subdivision, Short Plat, Lot Of Record, Site Plan.)
POLICE POWER: The right of government to regulate personal conduct and the use of land in order
to protect the public health, safety and welfare, as provided by the state constitution. The use of police
power by a unit of government must follow "due process" and be "reasonable", but the government
does not have to pay compensation for related losses. In this last respect, it differs from the
government's use of the power of eminent domain that involves taking of property where just
compensation is mandatory. The degree to which such exercise of police power becomes, in effect, a
taking of property, is a question of longstanding and has arisen again lately in connection with the
growth management and environmental controls being imposed by many communities. (Related
terms: Zoning, Condemnation And Eminent Domain, Taking, Inverse Condemnation.)
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or buildings, as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory
use.
QUASI-PUBLIC: Is essentially a public use, although under private ownership or control.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 345/528
QUORUM: A majority of the authorized members of a board or commission.
RECREATION CENTER: A commercial or nonprofit bowling alley, roller rink or similar use designed
for amusement or recreation.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): A portable vehicle or structure used primarily for hobbies, vacations,
extended travel, camping, sports and aquatic use. RVs may be self-propelled, towed or transported by
trailer. RVs may include, but are not limited to, motor homes, converted buses, camping and travel
trailers, light duty trailers and transporters, horse and cattle trailers, boats, rafts and their trailers, and
off street vehicles such as snowmobiles, dune buggies, all-terrain vehicles (4 wheels) and any type of
three (3) or four (4) wheeled sport racing/drag vehicle.
REPAIR: The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose of its
maintenance. The words "repair" or "repairs" shall not apply to any other change in a structure such
as would be required by additions to or remodeling of such structure.
REPAIR, MAJOR MOTOR VEHICLE: General repair, engine, transmission or drive train rebuilding,
repair or major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service,
including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; and overall painting of motor vehicles or
trailers.
REPAIR, MINOR MOTOR VEHICLE: Incidental repairs, replacement of parts and motor service to
motor vehicles, but not including any operation specified under the definition of Repair, Major Motor
Vehicle.
RESTAURANT: Any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house, where meals are
provided for compensation, including, among others, such uses as cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop,
lunchroom, tearoom and dining room.
RIGHT OF WAY: The right to pass over the property of others. It usually refers to the land required for
the traffic lanes, plus shoulders on both sides of highways, railroads, bikeways and hiking trails. In
short, it is the land purchased by or dedicated to the public for traffic purposes. The pathways over
which utilities and drainageways run are usually referred to as easements. (Related terms:
Easements, Dedication.)
SCHOOL: An institution conducting regular academic instruction at elementary, secondary and college
levels.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE COMMERCIAL: A school, regardless whether it is operated for profit, primarily
devoted to instruction, in dance, music, drama, art, languages, martial arts training, etc.
SCHOOL, TRADE OR VOCATIONAL: An institution or facility conducting instruction in the technical or
trade skills, such as business, secretarial training, medical or dental technician training, beauticians,
barbers, electronics, automotive technician training, etc.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE: A building or group of buildings, or portions thereof, that are designed or
used exclusively for storage of excess property of an individual, family or business. Buildings are
divided into individually accessed units. This shall not be deemed to include the day to day operations
of businesses of any kind.
SERVICE DRIVE: A privately owned and maintained drive that provides access to parking lots and
spaces, loading spaces, drive-up windows or other areas that need a provision of access. A service
drive meets the zoning ordinance specifications and is approved by the planning director or the
planning and zoning commission. Types of service drives include: individual private driveways,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 346/528
common driveways, entry drives, drive-through lanes and parking aisles.
SERVICE STATION: Premises where gasoline, motor oils, lubricants and grease for the operation of
motor vehicles are retailed directly to the public on the premises, and including tires, accessories,
services and minor motor vehicle repairs.
SETBACK: The space on a lot or parcel required to be left open and unoccupied by buildings or
structures, either by the requirements of this title, or by delineation on a recorded subdivision map.
SHOPPING CENTER, REGIONAL: A group of commercial establishments, planned, developed,
owned and managed as a unit related in location, size and types of shops to the trade area that the
unit serves. It provides on site parking in definite relationship to the type and size of stores. The major
tenant is one or more full line department stores. Size of the center can range between three hundred
thousand (300,000) square feet to over one million (1,000,000) square feet of gross leasable area.
SIGN: Any display or device consisting of attached or painted letters, symbols or designs, and
including any moving parts, lighting, sound equipment, framework, background material or structural
support, which display or device is intended to communicate business identification, an advertisement,
announcement, direction or other message or attract, distract, hold, direct or focus public attention.
"Sign" shall not include commodities and their attached labels and price tags.
SITE PLAN: A scale drawing showing proposed uses and structures for a parcel of land as required
by the applicable regulations. It includes lot lines, lot area, streets, parking spaces, private roadways,
walkways, topographic features, reserved open space, buildings and other structures, major
landscape features, and the location of proposed utility easements. A site plan is a more detailed
representation of a proposed development than shown in a plan, and may also include density and
statistical data. (Related terms: Plat Site Plan Review, Planned Unit Development, Flexible Zoning.)
SITE PLAN REVIEW: The process whereby local officials, usually the planning and zoning
commission and staff, review the site plan of a development to assure that it meets the stated
purposes and standards of the zoning and other regulations, provides for necessary public facilities,
such as roads and schools, and protects and preserves desirable features and adjacent properties
through the appropriate location of structures and the use of landscaping. Site plan review is required
in connection with many flexible land use regulation techniques. The process often allows
considerable discretion to be exercised by local officials since it may deal with hard to define aesthetic
and design considerations. (Related terms: Site Plan, Flexible Zoning, Planned Unit Development.)
SPECIAL EXCEPTION OR SPECIAL USE: A special approval granted by the city council for a use
that is not identified as an allowed or conditional use within the zoning district, subject to conditions set
forth in this title.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building or structure for the keeping of one or more horses
or cows, owned and used by the occupant of the premises and not for remuneration, hire or sale.
STABLE, RIDING: A building or structure used or designed for the boarding or care of riding horses.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper
surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building
included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished
floor level directly above a basement or cellar is more than six feet (6') above grade, such basement
or cellar shall be considered a story.
STREET: The public right of way or private property and related improvements that provides vehicular
and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. The term "street" includes also the terms highway,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 347/528
thoroughfare, parkway, thruway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place and other such terms.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street designed to carry through traffic with limited access to abutting
property. Direct lot access is restricted.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street designed to intercept traffic from the local street system and carry it
to the nearest arterial street, while providing limited access to abutting property. Direct lot access is
restricted.
STREET, FRONTAGE: A minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street, that has the
primary purpose of providing access to abutting properties.
STREET, LOCAL: A street designed to provide service to abutting property usually with unrestricted
access.
STREET, PRIVATE: A street approved by the city council in conformance with the subdivision
ordinance, that provides both access and street frontage for individual lots. Private streets are owned
and maintained by private individuals or entities. Governmental entities do not own nor maintain
private streets.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, except fences, that requires permanent location on
the ground or is attached to something having location on the ground.
SUBDIVISION: The result of an act of dividing an original lot, tract or parcel of land into more than two
(2) parts for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development; that shall also include the dedication
of a public street and the addition to, or creation of, a cemetery. However, this definition shall not apply
to any of the following:
A. An adjustment of lot lines as shown on a recorded plat that does not reduce the area, frontage,
width, depth or building setback lines of each building site below the minimum zoning
requirements, and does not change the original number of lots in any block of the recorded plat.
B. An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate of a decedent or a court decree for the
distribution of property.
C. The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnation, as defined and allowed in Idaho
Code.
D. Widening of existing streets to conform to the comprehensive plan.
E. The acquisition of street rights of way by a public agency in conformance with the
comprehensive plan.
F. The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property boundaries that does not result
in the change of the present land usage. (Related terms: Subdivision Regulations, Plat.)
SWIMMING POOL: Any facility intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over
twenty four inches (24") (610 mm) deep. This includes inground, aboveground and onground
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 348/528
swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
TAVERN: A building where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, not
including restaurants where the principal business is serving food.
TEMPORARY: As this term is used in this title with respect to a temporary structure, building or use,
shall mean a period of six (6) months. Such period may be extended by the appropriate official,
commission or governing board for up to one year. Extensions of over one year require city council
approval, after recommendation from the planning and zoning commission.
THEATER: A building used primarily for the presentation of live stage productions, performances or
motion pictures.
THEATER, ADULT: See definition of Adult Motion Picture Theater.
TOWNHOUSE: An attached single-family dwelling unit, located on a platted lot and for which the
individual owner may acquire title to the unit and lot.
TRAILER, TRAVEL: A vehicular portable structure designed as temporary living quarters for travel,
recreational and vacation uses.
TREASURER: The city treasurer of the city.
USE: The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged or intended or for which
it is occupied, maintained or leased.
USE, SEASONAL: Any temporary use where products are sold in connection with a holiday season or
the growing season. Examples of these uses shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
produce stands, fireworks stands, pumpkin lots, and Christmas tree lots.
USE, TEMPORARY: Any activity on a site approved by the director for a limited time of operation.
Such uses include seasonal or holiday sales of products or placement of temporary structures on a lot
incidental to construction occurring on the lot, outdoor display of garden and related supplies, and/or
any other uses which the director may deem as able to function without permanent permits for a short
time as allowed by this code.
UTILITY, PUBLIC: Any person, company or municipal department, duly authorized to furnish to the
public, under public regulations, electricity, gas, steam, telephone, transportation or water.
VARIANCES: A modification of the requirements of this title as to lot size, lot coverage, lot width,
street frontage, setback requirements, parking requirements, loading requirements, or other ordinance
provisions affecting the size or shape of a structure, or the placement of the structure upon lots, or the
size of lots.
WAREHOUSE: A building, or portion thereof, used for the storage of merchandise, stock, vehicles,
furnishings, supplies and other trade or business material.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a principal building or group of buildings, which is
unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level upward, except as otherwise permitted in this title,
and that extends along a lot line and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which the lot is located.
YARD, AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: Any use of premises, excluding fully enclosed buildings, on which
two (2) or more motor vehicles not in operating condition are standing more than thirty (30) days, or on
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 349/528
which used motor vehicles, or parts thereof, are dismantled or stored.
YARD, FRONT: The yard extending across the full width of the lot adjacent to the front street line. For
corner lots, either street may be designated as the front. Once chosen, the front yard designation and
associated rear and side yards may not be changed. Building design shall match respective yard
types.
YARD, JUNK: An outdoor space where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials are stored or
handled, including automobile wrecking yards, and yards for used building materials and places or
yards for storage of salvaged building and structural steel materials and equipment; excluding yards or
establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used cars or machinery in operable conditions,
and the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as a part of a permitted manufacturing
operation on the same premises.
YARD, REAR: The yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear line of the
lot and the nearest line of the principal building.
YARD SALE: The on premises sale of new or used household or related goods from a residential lot.
Also known as a garage sale or rummage sale. The duration of yard sales shall not exceed seventy
two (72) hours. A maximum of two (2) such sales shall be permitted from any one residence within the
same calendar year.
YARD, SIDE: The yard lying between the nearest wall of the principal building, accessory building and
side lot line, and extending from the front yard or the front lot line to the rear yard.
ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT: Single-family dwellings arranged on individual lots as either
detached structures with one or more sidewalls on a side property line or attached sidewalls on a
property line.
ZONE: See definition of district.
ZONING CERTIFICATE: A notation attached to a building permit, occupancy permit or business
license, or issued separately by the City to certify that the building, structure, use or occupancy
specified is in compliance with relevant zoning regulations and approvals. (2003 Code § 11-01-03;
amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2110, 10-2-2012, eff. 10-2-2012; Ord. 2164, 12-5-2017)
11-1-4: PRIOR RIGHTS AND PERMITS:
The enactment of this title shall not terminate or otherwise affect rights, variances and permits
acquired or authorized under the provisions of any section hereby revised or repealed. Where a
building permit and a zoning certificate have been issued for the construction of a building or structure,
and for an authorized use and occupancy thereof, in accordance with the law prior to the effective
date of this revised ordinance, said building or structure may be completed in conformance with the
approved plans and on the basis for which the said building permit and zoning certificate had been
issued, provided construction of said building or structure is commenced within sixty (60) days of the
effective date of the building permit and diligently prosecuted to completion. Detailed conditional use
applications based upon concept plans approved prior to the effective date of this revised ordinance
shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this revised ordinance. Upon showing an undue
hardship, an applicant may be allowed by the planning and zoning commission to process such
detailed conditional use applications under the terms and conditions of the previous ordinance. (2003
Code § 11-01-01.4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 350/528
11-1-5: OTHER LAWS; PRIVATE RESTRICTIONS:
It is not intended by this title to impair or interfere with other regulations of effective state or local law,
or with private restrictions on the use of land improvements and structures. Where this title imposes
greater restrictions than that imposed by other law or by private restrictions, this title shall prevail.
(2003 Code § 11-01-01.5)
11-1-6: ZONING MAPS:
Zoning maps for the city may be obtained through planning and zoning department, or the building
department. (2003 Code § 11-01-02.3)
11-1-7: ENFORCEMENT:
All departments, officials and employees of the city vested with the authority to issue permits shall
conform to the provisions of this title, and shall issue no permit or license for uses, buildings or
purposes in conflict with the provisions of this title. Any such permit or any business license issued in
conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null and void. The director of the building department
shall maintain a zoning enforcement program to promote the abatement of violations of this title and to
provide assistance in the prosecution of such violations. It shall be the duty of the director of the
building department, or his authorized agent, to enforce the provisions of this title pertaining to the
erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration, addition, location or razing of
any building or structure. (2003 Code § 11-01-01.6)
11-1-8: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed,
continued or permitted. Upon conviction of any violation of any of the provisions of this title, such
person shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code §§ 11-01-
02.1, 11-01-02.2; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
11-2-1: BUILDING DEPARTMENT:
A. General Duties: It shall be the duty of the building department to provide for the administration of
this title and the comprehensive plan. The department shall serve as the technical staff on planning
and zoning issues before the city council and the planning and zoning commission. The
department shall assist the public in compliance with zoning requirements, including the
interpretation of this title and with the preparation and submittal of zoning applications.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 351/528
B. Specific Duties And Responsibilities: The specific duties and responsibilities of the department shall
be as follows:
1. Provide and maintain a continuing program of public information on zoning matters and provide
planning and zoning assistance to the public as requested.
2. Review the standards for those allowed uses that must meet specific standards prior to approval
and provide notice to the applicant and adjacent property owners, as herein specified.
3. Accept, evaluate and submit a written report, including findings of fact and recommended
conclusions of law, to the appropriate authority for all commission and council level applications.
4. Review building permit applications for zoning compliance.
5. Provide public notice of all public hearings held for the review of planning and zoning
applications.
6. Maintain records and files of all zoning applications and of the hearings and actions thereon.
7. Maintain a vigorous zoning enforcement program to decrease violations of this title.
8. Prepare an annual annexation program for submittal to the planning and zoning commission and
the city council.
9. Initiate revisions and amendments of this title and the comprehensive plan.
10. Prepare special studies and plans as appropriate.
11. Make interpretations of the provisions of this title and the comprehensive plan.
12. Coordinate zoning and development applications with the appropriate city departments and
agencies.
13. Determine the classification of all uses not specifically identified in this title. (2003 Code § 11-
02-01)
11-2-2: BUILDING DIRECTOR:
A. Authority Of Decisions: The building director shall be responsible for all decisions and actions of the
building department. The decisions of the building director shall be final unless an appeal is made
as herein provided.
B. Determination Of Use: Whenever there is doubt as to the classification of a use not specifically
mentioned in this title, the determination shall be made by the building director. Such determination
shall be based upon a detailed description of the proposed use and such other information as may
be required. The building director shall make such investigations as are necessary to compare the
nature and characteristics of the proposed use with those of listed uses in the various districts, and
shall determine that the use is, in all essentials, pertinent to the objectives of this title, of the same
character as a use listed as allowed or as a conditional use permitted in one of such specified
district or districts. No use added by such administrative determination shall permit in any district a
use that is a conditional use in such districts or in any less restricted district, nor shall same permit
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 352/528
a use that is an allowed use in a less restrictive district. The determination of the building director
shall be final, unless an appeal is made as herein provided. (2003 Code § 11-02-02)
C. Enforcement Assistance: It shall be the duty of the director of the building department, or an
authorized representative, to help enforce the provisions of this title, including the following:
1. Assist in the enforcement of this title, including making effective response to citizen inquiries,
comments and complaints, and aid in the prosecution of violators;
2. Conduct inspection of buildings and structures in relation to:
a. Location on the property with respect to property lines, and taking appropriate enforcement or
remedial action;
b. Identifying or assisting in the identification of illegal uses;
c. Helping ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of this title and with any applicable
conditions of approval from a conditional use approval.
3. Maintain permanent records of all inspections and determinations made involving the
inspections of buildings, structures and the use of lands to promote continuous compliance with
the terms of this title. (2003 Code § 11-02-03)
11-2-3: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
A. Members; Appointment: The planning and zoning commission shall consist of a total of seven (7)
members, to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council.
B. Chairperson: The planning and zoning commission shall appoint one of its members as chairperson
of the commission, who shall hold office as chairperson for such term as the commission shall so
designate, and the commission may elect a co-chairperson, who shall act as chairperson in the
absence of the chairperson of the commission. (2003 Code § 11-02-04)
C. Duties, Jurisdiction And Authority: The duties, jurisdiction and authority of the planning and zoning
commission are: (2003 Code § 11-02-04; amd. 2012 Code)
1. To prepare and recommend a comprehensive plan for the future development of the city and
review the provisions of said plan from time to time, and make a report of its findings and
recommendations to the city council;
2. To receive and act upon applications for actions authorized and specified herein;
3. To hold public hearings on applications for annexation, plan changes, special exceptions,
conditional uses, sign exceptions and proposed zoning reclassifications; provided that this
obligation may be delegated to a hearing examiner, in the manner hereinafter prescribed;
4. Following public hearings, to approve, deny or modify conditional use applications, and to
submit to the city council as required hereby, a report and recommendation on each
reclassification, comprehensive plan change, special exception or annexation application;
5. To review and take action on variance applications and appeals of administrative decisions;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 353/528
6. On its own initiative, to petition the city council requesting an amendment of this title or the
comprehensive plan; provided, that it shall first have held public hearings thereon in the manner
prescribed;
7. To initiate, from time to time, a review of the provisions of this title, and to make a report of its
findings and recommendations to the city council.
D. Procedures:
1. Compensation; Meetings; Quorum: The members of the planning and zoning commission shall
serve and act without compensation, except that the city council shall allow their actual and
necessary expenses and the city shall provide the necessary and suitable equipment and
supplies to enable the commission to properly transact and perform its business. A majority of
the members of the commission shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. The commission shall hold meetings each month for at least nine (9) months of the
year, and at such other times as may be called by the chairperson or by the mayor.
2. Meeting Attendance: The members of the commission are expected to attend scheduled
meetings. Members may be excused from attendance due to personal illness, family emergency
or out of town business trips. Commission members whose attendance at scheduled meetings
fall below sixty percent (60%) without cause within any given year may be removed from the
commission by the mayor, with the approval of the city council. (2003 Code § 11-02-04)
3. Deadline For New Applications: The cutoff date for new applications shall be four o'clock (4:00)
P.M. on the last Monday of the month before the next month's regularly scheduled meeting.
(2003 Code § 11-02-04; amd. 2012 Code)
4. Divisions Of Commission And Conduct Of Proceedings: In addition to its existing jurisdiction and
authority, and subject to all provisions of this code, the commission is authorized by its order to
divide the members thereof into as many divisions (each to consist of not less than 2 members)
as it may deem necessary, and that may be changed from time to time. Any division of the
commission shall have authority to hear and report to the full commission any of the
commission's work, business or functions prescribed by ordinance and assigned or referred to a
division of the commission in the manner and in the time as required by pertinent provisions of
this code.
5. Reconsideration: Reconsideration may be entertained on any action taken by the commission
after a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the commission membership, provided such action is
taken prior to action by the city council.
6. Conflict Of Interest Prohibited: A member of the commission shall not participate in any
proceeding or action when the member or his employer, business partner, business associate, or
any person related to him by affinity or consanguinity within the second degree has an economic
interest in the procedure or action. Any actual or potential interest in any proceeding shall be
disclosed at or before any meeting at which the action is being heard or considered.
7. Cases Heard By Hearing Examiner: In cases where a public hearing has been conducted by a
hearing examiner, the proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law, as well as the proposed
order, shall be filed in the building department, which shall forward it to the planning and zoning
commission for a final ruling on the matter. The commission's review shall be limited to the
record created by the hearing examiner and may be placed on the consent agenda unless a
request to review the hearing examiner's decision is filed pursuant to the provisions of
subsection 11-2-6C of this chapter. In such case, review shall be de novo. (2003 Code § 11-02-
04)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 354/528
11-2-4: CITY COUNCIL:
The city council shall be the final legislative authority on all zoning and land use decisions within the
city. The building department staff and all commissions and committees function at the direction of the
city council. Planning and zoning duties and authority of the city council are as follows:
A. Confirm Appointments: The city council must confirm the mayor's appointments to the
memberships of the planning and zoning commission and the position of hearing examiner.
B. Decide Applications: After receiving a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission,
the city council must decide the following applications: amendments to the comprehensive plan,
amendments to this title, annexations, rezones, special exceptions and subdivision plats.
C. Appeals: The city council shall hear and decide appeals of decisions of the planning and zoning
commission. (2003 Code § 11-02-05)
11-2-5: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A. Occupancy Certificate: Before occupying or using the property included in the application, the
applicant must obtain an occupancy or use certificate from the building department. Such
department shall inspect the site to verify that the work has been completed in accordance with the
specifications set forth by the commission, committees or staff in the approval of the application.
B. Temporary Certificate: Should there be substantial performance of the conditions specified in the
approved application, the building department may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for
one hundred eighty (180) days, contingent upon the applicant posting a performance bond or other
acceptable surety in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the cost of required
improvements. After the above mentioned one hundred eighty (180) days have passed, the site
shall again be inspected, and if compliance has not been achieved, the building department shall
recommend revocation of the certificate of occupancy or use and forfeiture of the bond or surety to
the city.
C. Hearing: Upon such recommendation, the commission shall set the recommendation for public
hearing, with fifteen (15) days' prior written notice to the applicant/holder. The purpose of the
hearing is to determine if revocation and forfeiture are justified. At such hearing, the
applicant/holder shall be granted the opportunity to show cause why the recommendation of the
building department should not be followed. After receipt of all information, the commission shall
affirm, deny or modify the recommendation of the building department and mail written notice of
their decision to the applicant/holder. The decision of the planning and zoning commission may be
appealed to the city council in accordance with the requirements of section 11-3-7 of this title.
(2003 Code § 11-02-06)
11-2-6: HEARING EXAMINER:
A. Appointment; Duties:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 355/528
1. This section authorizes the planning and zoning commission to use the services of a hearing
examiner pursuant to the authority granted in the local planning act, specifically Idaho Code
section 67-6520.
2. It shall be the duty of the examiner to review information provided by staff and other available
sources and to hear public testimony on matters referred to the examiner. At the conclusion of
each hearing, the examiner shall render a decision or recommendation, as appropriate, and
provide findings of fact and conclusions of law, and a final order.
3. Persons filling the position of hearing examiner shall be experienced in the field of planning and
zoning, and shall have legal training and/or experience. The hearing examiner shall be
appointed, and may be dismissed, and compensation shall be determined, by the mayor with the
consent of the city council.
4. The hearing examiner may conduct hearings on the following matters:
a. Variances;
b. Special exceptions;
c. Floodplain review;
d. Certain conditional use permits, including planned developments of less than two (2) acres,
agricultural uses, childcare facilities, drive-through facilities, lot reduction in R-2 zones, parking
reductions, and nonconforming uses;
e. Subdivision plats pursuant to title 12 of this code; and
f. Such other matters as the commission may deem appropriate, including, but not limited to,
sign applications.
5. The director of the building department will assign matters to a hearing examiner or to the
commission. Generally, applications of a routine nature that do not require important policy
decisions may be heard by a hearing examiner.
B. Procedure Before Hearing Examiner:
1. A hearing examiner shall prepare and conduct public hearings as required by the terms of this
title, according to a schedule determined and approved by the director of the building
department. The timing of all hearings and the public notice provided for such hearings shall be
in conformity with this title and with the local planning act. In addition, notice shall be provided to
the registered neighborhood groups in which the property is located.
2. All applications shall be filed with the building department and that department shall schedule
hearings before the examiner where appropriate, and provide notice as required by this title and
the local planning act. Upon receipt of an application, the building department staff shall
investigate and analyze such application, and shall forward all such information to the hearing
examiner. A copy of the staff report shall be available for public review at least five (5) working
days prior to the hearing.
3. The hearing examiner shall review all information supplied by the department prior to the
hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with subsection 11-3-6D of this title and
applicable state law. Reasonable time limits may be established at the outset of the hearing, and
both applicant and other members of the public must be given an opportunity to be heard. All
hearings shall be recorded.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 356/528
4. At the completion of each hearing, the hearing examiner shall produce a report that includes a
summary of such testimony, findings of fact and conclusions of law, and a final order. Such
report shall be filed at the building department. It shall be available to the applicant and the
public no more than ten (10) working days after the close of each hearing.
C. Appeal Of Hearing Examiner's Order:
1. An appeal of the hearing examiner's order must be filed with the building department within
fourteen (14) days after the order is filed.
2. The basis for appeal must be stated in the petition.
3. The procedure for appeals of hearing examiner's orders is set forth in section 11-3-7 of this title.
(2003 Code § 11-02-07)
11-2-7: ADOPTION OF IMPACT AREA MAP:
There hereby is adopted as the official map identifying an area of city impact within the unincorporated
area of Bingham County, Idaho, that certain map, as amended from time to time, by reference made a
part hereof as though set forth herein at length. The area identified on said map as being within the
impact area shall henceforth be deemed to be the impact area of the city, as contemplated by Idaho
Code section 67-6526. (2003 Code § 2-03-08)
Chapter 3
GENERAL PROCEDURES
11-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to define the general procedures for obtaining zoning approval from the
city, the various levels of zoning review and the requirements for public notice and conduct of
hearings. (2003 Code § 11-03-01)
11-3-2: APPLICATIONS; BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Form Of Application: Every person desiring to erect or construct a building or other structure and
every person seeking zoning approval, as herein defined, shall submit an application to the
building director on a prescribed form, accompanied by the appropriate filing fee as approved by
the city council. Application forms shall be accompanied by supporting information as defined by
the application form and as required by the building director.
B. Building Permit Required: A building permit is required for the erection, construction or alteration of
any structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 357/528
C. Variances, Conditional Uses, Etc.: All applications for variance, conditional use, annexation, rezone
and special exception submitted for review by the planning and zoning commission shall include
documentation of the following:
A preapplication conference with the building department staff and invited referral agencies must
have been held not more than six (6) months, nor less than one week prior to the submittal of the
application. (2003 Code § 11-03-02)
11-3-3: FEES:
The building director shall maintain a current list of fees for all building permits and zoning
applications. The fees for building permits and zoning applications may be revised only by the city
council. Current fee schedules may be obtained from the building department. (2003 Code § 11-03-
03)
11-3-4: DETERMINATION OF LEVEL OF REVIEW:
The staff of the building department shall advise the public on the preparation of applications. The
building director shall decide the appropriate review procedure for each application filed consistent
with the requirements of this title. The decision of the building director may be appealed to the
planning and zoning commission. (2003 Code § 11-03-04)
11-3-5: LEVELS OF ZONING REVIEW:
A. Level Specified: Three (3) levels of zoning review are hereby established: administrative level,
commission level and city council level. All applications submitted to the building department shall
be subject to one or more of these reviews:
1. Administrative Level: There is hereby established a category of uses that are considered to be
allowed uses but for which final approval may be withheld until certain standards and/or criteria
are complied with. The building director is authorized to review the required approval standards
and/or criteria for this category of allowed uses and issue final approval or withhold final
approval. The actions of the building director on administrative applications may be appealed to
the appropriate authority as hereinafter set forth.
2. Commission Level: This level of review requires action by the planning and zoning commission.
An application and fee are required for commission level review. Commission level decisions
may be appealed to the city council, subject to the procedures set forth in section 11-3-7 of this
chapter.
3. City Council Level: Certain zoning applications require action by the city council. An advertised
public hearing and a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission are required for
certain city council level review. Decisions of the city council can be appealed through the
judicial system.
B. Resubmittal Of Application: No application for conditional use, rezone, annexation or variance
review that has been denied by the commission or city council, shall be resubmitted in either the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 358/528
same or substantially the same form in less than one year from the date of final action thereon.
(2003 Code § 11-03-05)
11-3-6: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
Certain commission and city council level zoning reviews require a public hearing. The date for such
hearing shall be established by the building director based upon published cutoff and hearing dates for
commission level reviews. The hearing shall be held no later than forty four (44) calendar days after
acceptance of such application and shall include all necessary documents pertinent thereto. Upon the
determination of the building director, when an application is unusually complex and requires
additional review, the date for the public hearing may be fixed no later than sixty six (66) calendar
days after receipt of such application. Deferrals due to lack of commission quorum or a request by the
applicant shall extend the time during which the hearing must be held. Council hearing dates shall be
established by the city council at a council meeting after the commission files its recommendation with
the city clerk.
A. Notice And Publication Of Hearing; Criteria:
1. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place and a summary of the
proposal shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. A notice shall
also be made available to other newspapers, radio and television stations servicing the city for
use as a public service announcement. For conditional use applications, rezone applications and
site specific appeals, additional notice shall be provided by mail to property owners or
purchasers of record within the land being considered; within three hundred feet (300') of the
external boundaries of the land being considered; and any additional area that may be impacted
by the proposed change as determined by the building director. Notice is deemed sufficient if
mailed to the owners of record. Only one notice need be sent to each household if the owners of
record are husband and wife. Notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises not less than one week prior to the hearing. Failure of the city to provide actual notice
to each person so entitled shall not render any proceeding hereunder invalid; provided, that the
city substantially complies with the notice and hearing requirements of this chapter.
2. The criteria used by the building director for determining if additional areas may also be
impacted by the proposed change shall be as follows:
a. The application could result in significant adverse traffic, environmental, aesthetic, noise,
pollution or population density impacts occurring outside the minimum three hundred feet
(300') notice area.
b. The public interest would be better served by expanding the area to be notified. (2003 Code
§ 11-03-06)
B. Alternate Forms Of Notice: When posted or mailed notice is required to two hundred (200) or more
property owners, purchasers of record or residents, alternate forms of notice may be provided as
follows: In lieu of mailed notices, three (3) additional newspaper notices as described above and
required notice size as specified in Idaho Code sections 67-6509 and 67-6512(c); and in lieu of
posted notice on each premises, the general area may be posted with notice. (2003 Code § 11-03-
06; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 359/528
C. Material Changes In Proposal: Following the commission hearing, if the commission makes a
material change in the proposal, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the
commission forwards the proposal with its recommendation to the city council. For purposes of this
subsection, a "material change" shall mean any modification of the proposal which, in the opinion
of the commission, is of such importance that the public interest will be better served by additional
notice and public hearing. At any public hearing, the commission may order the hearing to be
continued by publicly announcing the time and place of continuance and no further notice thereof
shall be required. Failure of the city to provide actual notice to each person so entitled shall not
render any proceeding hereunder invalid; provided, that the city substantially complies with the
notice and hearing requirements of this section.
D. Conduct Of Hearings: The city council, the planning and zoning commission, the hearing examiner,
or any other board or commission that conducts public hearings under this title shall conduct said
hearings in substantial conformity with the following standards. At all such hearings:
1. A sign in roster shall be kept at the entrance to the hearing room for all persons who wish to
testify at the hearing on a particular application or issue. (2003 Code § 11-03-06)
2. The chair of the meeting shall conduct the hearing. In order to accommodate all participants, the
chair may determine the time allotted to each speaker. (2003 Code § 11-03-06; amd. 2012
Code)
3. A transcribable record shall be taken and maintained.
4. The chair shall call upon the staff to make a preliminary presentation of facts.
5. Following the close of the presentation of facts by staff, the chair shall invite the applicant (or in
the case of an appeal, the appellant) to make a presentation of evidence to the council,
commission or committee. In situations when the council, commission or committee is acting as
an appeals body and if the appellant is not an applicant for an approval or permit, then the chair
shall call upon the applicant to present evidence to the council, commission or committee. The
applicant or appellant may, in the discretion of the chair, be allowed up to thirty (30) minutes for
the presentation of evidence unless an extension of time is granted by the council, commission
or committee.
6. Every document referred to by any person during testimony (including charts, maps,
photographic evidence or any other evidence) shall be offered into the record. Every exhibit
offered shall be marked and entered into the record of the proceeding. Such exhibits shall be
maintained in the building department during the appeal period.
7. After the staff presentation and testimony by the applicant (or in the case of an appeal, the
appellant) the chair shall open the hearing for public testimony and shall invite the public to
address the council, commission or committee in the order of names found on the sign in roster.
If in the opinion of the chair the number of persons testifying is so large as to unduly delay the
process of the hearing, the chair may limit public testimony to three (3) minutes for each member
of the public. The public hearing may be continued upon motion to a date certain that shall be
announced to the public there assembled.
8. During appeal hearings before council or the commission, testimony shall be limited to those
issues that were set forth in the written appeal. The council or commission may ask questions or
request information regarding aspects of the project that were not included in the written appeal
if they desire.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 360/528
9. All persons testifying before the council, commission or committee, except staff, shall state, for
the record, their full name and address.
10. Members of the council, commission or committee may question any person who testified at
any time or may, upon unanimous consent of the members present, recall a person for further
testimony.
11. Before the close of the public testimony, the chair shall ask if any persons attending the hearing
who did not sign the roster wish to be heard and any such person shall be given the opportunity
to testify.
12. At the close of public testimony the chair shall solicit comments from staff for additional facts or
clarifications as a result of the testimony given. After comments from staff, the applicant shall be
given an opportunity to address final comments to the council, commission or committee. If the
council, commission or committee is hearing an appeal by someone other than the applicant, the
appellant shall be given an opportunity to make final statements to the council, commission or
committee. The chair may determine the time allowed for final comments subject to the right of
the council, commission or committee to grant such additional time it deems necessary.
13. After all testimony, the chair shall declare the public hearing closed and shall bring the matter
back before the council, commission or committee for discussion and action. The discussion and
decision may be deferred until another date certain that shall be then announced to the public
there assembled.
E. Consent Agenda:
1. Routine, noncontested applications may be placed on a consent agenda by the commission in
accordance with the procedures set forth herein. Only applications that meet the following
criteria shall be considered for the consent agenda:
a. There has not been any written or verbal opposition to the application.
b. The building staff and the applicant are in agreement on the findings and conclusions and
recommended conditions of approval.
c. The application complies with the city comprehensive plan and this title as proposed, or as it
will be modified by conditions of approval.
2. Based upon a recommendation from the building staff, the chair of the commission, at the
beginning of the public hearing, shall identify all items proposed for the consent agenda.
3. The chair shall propose the following questions:
a. Does the commission have any questions on the application (provide agenda number and
applicant's name)?
b. Is there anyone present who has adverse testimony related to the application (provide agenda
number, applicant's name, and location of site)?
c. Is the applicant or a representative of the applicant present?
d. Is the applicant in agreement with the staff recommendation, findings and conclusions, and
conditions of approval?
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 361/528
4. If there is any opposition from any party regarding an application, that item shall not be placed
on the consent agenda. Once the consent agenda is established, the commission may approve
all items on the consent agenda with one motion.
F. Deferral Procedure:
1. Applications that have been placed on the planning and zoning commission public hearing
agenda shall only be deferred by the commission. A request for deferral may be initiated by a
member of the commission, the applicant, the building staff or the public. All deferral requests
shall be in writing. Scheduled agenda items shall only be deferred by the commission within the
public hearing.
2. An application shall be considered as on the agenda upon the mailing of radius notices to
impacted property owners and residents. Prior to the placement of an application on the public
hearing agenda, the applicant may submit a request for rescheduling to the building staff. The
building director shall determine the appropriate hearing date for such requests.
3. Requests for deferral that are submitted prior to or at the start of the public hearing must be
ruled upon by the commission after a review of the situation. The following guidelines should be
applied to such requests for deferral:
a. If the applicant and the building staff are in agreement on the deferral including the requested
length of deferral and there is no public opposition, the commission may consider the request
to be routine. Such requests should be deferred to a date specific when possible to avoid
readvertising.
b. Requests for deferral of contested applications must be acted upon by the commission after
consideration of the basis for the request and input from those present to testify. The chair
shall request input from the applicant, staff and concerned public on the requested deferral.
Any member of the public who cannot or will not return for a deferral hearing shall be provided
an opportunity to testify.
4. The commission may deny the request for deferral, grant a deferral to a date specific or defer
the application indefinitely. In considering an indefinite deferral, the commission should consider
the following:
a. Have previous deferrals been requested?
b. Are additional studies, redesign or other development alternatives being considered for which
the time to complete cannot be accurately estimated?
c. The number of public present to testify and their input on a date specific deferral.
5. The applicant shall pay an additional fee to cover the cost of readvertising, for applications that
are deferred indefinitely by the commission, unless the commission or staff initiates the request
for deferral. Such fee shall be determined by the building director to cover the actual cost of
readvertising and mailing radius notices. (2003 Code § 11-03-06)
11-3-7: APPEALS:
Any administrative or commission level decision may be appealed to the appropriate commission,
committee or council in accordance with the procedures established herein. All such appeals must be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 362/528
written, accompanied by the appropriate fee and submitted to the building director prior to the
deadlines set forth herein. If the appeal deadline falls on a weekend or holiday, the appeal period is
automatically extended to the next workday. Each appeal must clearly state the name, address and
phone number of the person or organization appealing and the specific issues, items or conditions that
are being appealed.
A. Administrative Decision Appeals: Any action of the building director on a specific administrative
level application or on the general interpretation of this title may be appealed as follows:
1. Interpretation Of This Title: Decisions of the building director may be appealed to the planning
and zoning commission by any person or by any official, department, board or bureau of the city
aggrieved by such decision. Such appeals shall be made within ten (10) days from the date of
such decision. Upon receipt of the appeal, the building director shall schedule the appeal before
the commission at the next public hearing following the cutoff date prior to which the appeal is
filed.
2. Other Administrative Level Applications: Actions of the building director on administrative level
applications may be appealed to the planning and zoning commission by the applicant or any
aggrieved person within ten (10) calendar days following the decision. Upon acceptance of the
appeal, the building director shall establish a hearing date before the commission and shall
notify the appealing party, the applicant and all property owners within three hundred feet (300')
of the property. The commission, in reviewing the building director's decision, may sustain, deny,
amend or modify the decision by imposing additional or different conditions and limitations.
B. Planning And Zoning Commission Appeals:
1. Procedure: Any decision of the planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the city
council by the applicant, any aggrieved person or the building director; provided, that such
aggrieved person filed a written or oral protest with the commission at or before the public
hearing, or personally appeared and voiced a protest at the hearing, except appeals based on
lack of notice. The appealing party shall file a written notice of appeal stating the grounds for the
appeal with the building director before five o'clock (5:00) P.M. of the tenth calendar day after the
decision or determination of the commission has been made. The building director shall
ascertain that the procedural requirements have been met, notify the city clerk, and forward all
pertinent informational material to the city council for review. An appeal may not be withdrawn
without the approval of the city council. The city council may sustain, deny, amend or modify the
appeal.
2. Stay Of Proceedings: The filing of an appeal of a commission level decision stays further
approvals (subdivision, building permit, etc.) on the project, provided the appeal is received at
least twenty four (24) hours prior to any public hearing regarding the project.
C. Hearing Examiner Appeals: The procedure for review of the hearing examiner's report is set forth in
subsection 11-2-6C of this title. (2003 Code § 11-03-07)
Chapter 4
USE DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS
11-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS; OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 363/528
A. Official Zoning Map:
1. The city is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the official zoning map that,
together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be
part of this title.
2. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city
clerk, and bearing the seal of the city. If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
Idaho Code section 67-6501, the local land use planning act, changes are made in district
boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered
on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council,
with an entry on the official zoning map as follows:
On (date), by official action of the city council, the following (change) changes were made in
the official zoning map (brief description of nature of change);
which entry shall be signed by the zoning administrator or mayor and attested by the city clerk.
3. No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or matter shown thereon,
except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change of
whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
4. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map that may from time to
time be made or published, the official zoning map that shall be located in the office of the city
clerk, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas,
buildings and other structures in the city.
B. Replacement Of Official Zoning Map:
1. In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to
interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may by
resolution adopt a new official zoning map that shall supersede the prior official zoning map.
2. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official
zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning
map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by
the signature of the zoning administrator or mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bearing the
seal of the city under the following words:
Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map
or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records
pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
(2003 Code § 11-04-01)
11-4-2: RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zone map, the
following rules shall apply:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 364/528
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall
be construed to follow such centerlines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following
such lot lines. No boundary of a use district can divide a platted line.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city
limits.
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main
tracks.
E. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in
the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or
other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
F. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections A through E of
this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map
shall be determined by the scale of the map.
G. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the
official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections A through E of this
section, the city council shall interpret the district boundaries. (2003 Code § 11-04-02)
11-4-3: APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
The regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply
uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided:
A. No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building, structure, or part
thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered
except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
B. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
1. To exceed the height;
2. To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
3. To occupy a greater percentage of lot area. A ten percent (10%) variance of this percentage
may be granted by the zoning administrator when evidence of undue hardship is presented;
4. To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or open spaces. Front yard
setback may average the setbacks of existing houses on each side, unless otherwise prohibited
by this chapter;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 365/528
5. On property that has not been legally platted.
C. No part of a yard, or other open space, or off street parking or loading space required about or in
connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this chapter, shall be included as
part of a yard, open space, or off street parking or loading space similarly required for any other
building.
D. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be reduced in dimension or area
below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date
hereof shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter.
E. All territory that may hereafter be annexed to the city shall be zoned by the city council with
appropriate recommendations by the planning and zoning commission at the time of annexation.
(2003 Code § 11-04-03)
11-4-4: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
A. Adopted: District regulations shall be set forth in the schedule of district regulations, hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter, and in section 11-4-8 of this
chapter. Land or premises shall be used, unless otherwise provided in this chapter, only in
conformity with the regulations herein set forth for the zones or use districts in which such land or
premises is located. No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered or used, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, except in conformity with the regulations herein set forth for the
zone or use district in which such building or structure is located.
B. Intent: The following zoning districts are hereby established. For the interpretation of this chapter,
the zoning districts have been formulated to realize the general purpose as set forth in this chapter
and to conform with the comprehensive plan and its stated goals and objectives. In addition, the
specific purposes of each zoning district shall be as stated. No residence or commercial building
shall be erected or moved onto any lot, tract or parcel of land in any use district or zone adopted
under the provisions of this chapter unless said lot, tract or parcel of land has been legally platted
and a building permit is issued in accordance with the Building Code.
C. Interpretation:
1. The interpretation and application of the provisions of this title shall be by the Zoning
Administrator/Building Director. An appeal of an interpretation of such official shall be submitted
to the Planning and Zoning Commission, who, unless otherwise provided, is authorized to
interpret this title, and such interpretation shall be considered final. Uses are permitted within the
various zones as described in this chapter and as otherwise provided herein.
2. It is recognized that all possible uses and variations of uses that might arise cannot reasonably
be listed or categorized. Mixed uses/sites, or any use not specifically mentioned or about which
there is any question, shall be administratively classified by comparison with other uses
identified in the zones described in this Code. If the proposed use resembles identified uses in
terms of intensity and character, and is consistent with the purposes of this title and the
individual zone classification, it shall be considered as a permitted/nonpermitted use within a
general zone classification, subject to the regulations for the use it most nearly resembles. If a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 366/528
use does not resemble other identified allowable uses within a zone, it may be permitted as
determined by the hearing body in public hearing as an amendment to this title. (2003 Code
§ 11-04-04)
11-4-5: RESIDENCE USE DISTRICTS:
The official schedule of district regulations is divided into the following use groups: Residence,
Combined Residence, Mobile Home Residence, Multi-Family Residence, Larger Multi-Family
Residence, Residential Acreage, Agriculture, Residential Ranchette, Neighborhood Commercial,
Community Commercial, Service Commercial, Light Industrial and Heavy Industrial. (Ord. 2178, 3-5-
2019)
A. Residence (R1): The purpose in establishing the Residence Zone is to promote and maintain
single-family residential neighborhoods, with conditions favorable to family living, and to encourage
the development of low density areas of land that are best suited for residential purposes to
prevent overcrowding of the land. The zone shall also include residence for the handicap or elderly
up to eight (8) persons as referenced by Idaho Code section 67-6531.
B. Combined Residence (R2): The purpose in establishing the Combined Residence Zone is to
provide low to medium density land use for one- and two-family residential development.
C. Mobile Home Residence (R2T): The purpose in establishing the Mobile Home Residence Zone is
to provide areas of land to promote residential development for mobile homes and mobile home
courts.
D. Multi-Family Residence (R3): The purpose in establishing the Multi-Family Residence Zone is to
provide for medium density land use and to encourage more compact residential development.
E. Larger Multi-Family Residence (R3A): The purpose in establishing the Larger Multi-Family
Residence Zone is to provide areas of land for high density residential development, also in which
small professional offices and certain other type of semicommercial uses may be located.
F. Residential Acreage (RA): The purpose in establishing the Residential Acreage Zone is to preserve
areas of land where small acreage including domestic farm animals may be kept within the City
limits and the impact area.
G. Agriculture (A): The purpose in establishing the Agriculture Zone is to set aside land to properly
guide growth of the fringe areas of the community deemed to be important for preservation of rural
standards. (2003 Code § 11-04-05)
H. Residential Ranchette (R1-R): The purpose of establishing the Residential Ranchette Zone is to
promote and maintain a single-family residential neighborhood that protects animal rights as part of
allowed uses. The purpose is to preserve areas of land where small acreage including domestic
farm animals may be kept within the City limits and the impact area. The zone also includes
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 367/528
residential uses for handicapped and elderly persons up to eight (8) as referenced by Idaho Code
section 67-6531. (Ord. 2178, 3-5-2019)
11-4-6: OFFICIAL SCHEDULE OF USE DISTRICTS:
Read across the chart until a "P", "C" or "N" appears in the desired use district.
A. "P" designates the use is permitted in the zone upon issuance of a permit by the Zoning
Administrator.
B. "C" designates the use is allowed upon issuance of a conditional use permit. A conditional use
permit requires a public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. "N" designates the use is not allowed.
D. Uses not specified in the "Official Schedule of Use Districts" table of this section are prohibited
unless determined by the Zoning Administrator/Building Director, in accordance with subsection
11-2-2B of this title, to be similar in nature to those specified. The Zoning Administrator/Building
Director shall interpret the appropriate district for land uses not specifically mentioned by
determining the district in which similar uses are permitted. When several combined land uses
exist, or are proposed, the most intensive land use shall be considered as the primary activity. Any
interpretation of the use districts by the Administrator may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
E. The Zoning Administrator and the Planning and Zoning Commission will be responsible for the
interpretation of industrial usage.
F. The official schedule and references are for convenience only and do not eliminate compliance with
performance standards or all other provisions of this chapter.
OFFICIAL SCHEDULE OF USE DISTRICTS
Commercial:
Bakeries C C C C C N N
P P P P P
Boarding/rooming house N N N C C N N
P P C N N
Branch bank N N N N N N N
P P P C C
Uses
R1
R2
R2T
R3
R3A
RA
A
C1
C2
C3
M1
M2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 368/528
Cemetery N N N N C C C
N N N N N
Churches P P P P P P C
C C C N N
Clinic (human treatment) N N N N C C C
P P P C C
Convenience stores (may
have gasoline sales)
N N N N C N N
P P P P P
Daycare C C C C C C C
C C C N N
Delicatessens N N N C C N N
C P P C C
Financial institutions N N N N N N N
P P P C C
Funeral
home/mortuary/crematorium
N N N N N N N
C C C C C
Gift shop N N N P C N N
P P P C C
Government offices C C C C C C N
P P P C C
Kennel N N N N N C C
C C C C C
Medical and dental offices N N N C C N N
P P P C C
Office building N N N N C N N
P P P C C
Parking lot C C C C C C C
P P P P P
Personal service shops
including, but not limited to:
auto service station, dry
cleaning, food catering, no
livestock auction, small repair
shop
C C C C C C C
C P P C C
Pharmacy N N N C C N N
P P P C C
Professional offices N N N C C N N
P P P C C
Uses
R1
R2
R2T
R3
R3A
RA
A
C1
C2
C3
M1
M2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 369/528
Public utility building C C C C C C C
P P P P P
Radio and TV broadcasting N N N N N N N
P P P P P
Recreation and lodging
facilities including, but not
limited to, the following:
bowling alleys, billiard and
pool rooms, dance halls,
hotels, indoor amusement
facilities, motels, taverns and
theaters
N N N N N N N
N P P P C
Retail stores, lumberyards,
plant nurseries and
restaurants
N N N N N N N
P P P C N
Temporary building P P P P P P P
P P P P P
Utilities C C C C C C C
P P P P P
Veterinary clinic N N N C C N P
P P P C C
Residential:
Halfway house N N N C P N N
P P C N N
Home for handicapped guests
P P P P P C C
C N N N N
Home occupation C C C C C C C
C C C C C
Mobile home park N N P N N C C
C N N N N
Mobile home subdivision N N P N N C C
C N N N N
Mobile homes N N P N N N N
N N N N N
Multi-family dwellings and
townhouses
N N N P P N N
C C C P N
Parks P P P P P P P
P P P P P
Uses
R1
R2
R2T
R3
R3A
RA
A
C1
C2
C3
M1
M2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 370/528
Planned unit development C C C C C C C
C C C N N
Playground P P P P P P P
C C C N N
Private nursing home up to 8
guests
N N N P P C C
P C C N N
Private swimming pool P P P P P P P
C C C N N
Residence court over 8 units N N N C P N N
C C C C C
Rest or convalescent home C C C C P N N
P P C N N
Schools C C C C C C C
C C C N N
Single-family dwelling P P P P P P P
C C C N N
Tiny houses N C C C N C N
C C N N N
Two-family dwelling or
townhouse
N P C P P N N
C C C N N
Heavy industrial:
Airport N N N N N C P
C C C C C
Asphalt plant, bulk plant
flammable liquid, bulk storage
flammable liquid, commercial
excavating, concrete batch
plant, grain and seed elevator,
rock crushing
N N N N N N N
N N N C P
Uses
R1
R2
R2T
R3
R3A
RA
A
C1
C2
C3
M1
M2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 371/528
Assembly plant, coal, sand,
gravel yard, contracting
equipment, distribution facility,
fabricating plant A, food
processing, industrial laundry,
manufacturing plant A,
maintenance operation
equipment, packing plant A,
processing plant A, repair
plant A, storage plant A,
storage facility, wholesale
operation
N N N N N N N
N C C P P
Assembly plant B, auto
wrecking yard, biohazardous
facility, bulk storage/corrosive
material, fabricating plant B,
garbage incineration,
manufacturing plant B,
packing plant B, processing
plant B, repair plant B,
stockyard
N N N N N N N
N N N N P
Other industrial:
Salvage yard N N N N N N N
N N N C C
Sewage treatment plant N N N N N C N
N N N C P
Service commercial:
Including, but not limited to,
the following: bottling and
distribution, contractor shop,
freight terminal, heavy
building material sales, heavy
machinery sales, roofing
shop, salvage goods housed,
sheet metal, sign painting
shop, storage warehouse
(heavy duty)
N N N N N N N
N C P P P
(Ord. 2174, 2-5-2019)
11-4-7: RESIDENCE DISTRICTS SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS:
A. R1 District Regulations:
Uses
R1
R2
R2T
R3
R3A
RA
A
C1
C2
C3
M1
M2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 372/528
1. Homes for the mentally and/or physically handicapped, as provided in Idaho Code section 67-
6531, shall be permitted.
2. Setback requirements for primary structures are:
a. Front yard: Thirty feet (30');
b. Side yard: Five feet (5');
c. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
3. Setback requirements for primary structures on a corner lot are:
a. Front yard: Thirty feet (30');
b. Side yard: Five feet (5'). The side yard that is on the intersecting street must have a twenty
foot (20') setback;
c. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
4. Height of primary structures is limited to forty feet (40').
5. Area requirements are eight thousand (8,000) square feet for a corner lot and seven thousand
(7,000) square feet for an inside lot.
6. The minimum lot width at the building line is seventy five feet (75').
7. The total area that may be covered by buildings is forty percent (40%) of the lot. (Ord. 2101, 2-7-
2012, eff. 2-7-2012)
8. An accessory use is a structure that is subordinate to and incidental to the principal building on
the same lot, but does not include any building containing a dwelling unit. Accessory units shall
not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height. Accessory units shall not encroach in the front or side
yards. Accessory units that are regulated by the adopted Building Code shall have a minimum of
five feet (5') rear setback. Accessory units permitted are as follows:
a. Private garages and/or carports. When a garage or carport is attached to the primary
residence, it must meet all the setback requirements for the primary structure.
b. Greenhouses for private use only.
c. Private swimming pools.
d. Pergolas, arbors, decks, patios, storage buildings.
e. Gardens for private use.
f. Television satellite dishes. (Ord. 2111, 10-2-2012, eff. 10-2-2012)
9. Two (2) off street spaces and additional parking as required in the parking regulations, section
11-4-14 of this chapter.
10. For signs, see home occupation regulations, subsection 11-4-8P of this chapter. (Ord. 2101, 2-
7-2012, eff. 2-7-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 373/528
B. R2 District Regulations: All regulations that apply to the R1 Zone also apply to the R2 Zone, except
as follows:
1. Area requirements are seven thousand (7,000) square feet for a corner lot and six thousand
(6,000) square feet for an inside lot. A minimum lot area for each dwelling unit above that
required for a two-family dwelling shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet of land for each
additional unit.
2. Parking is two (2) additional off street spaces for each additional unit and additional parking as
required in the parking regulations.
3. The minimum lot width is sixty feet (60').
C. R2T District Regulations: All regulations that apply to the R2 Zone also apply to the R2T Zone,
except as follows:
1. Setback requirements for primary structures are:
a. Front yard: Twenty feet (20');
b. Side yard: Ten feet (10');
c. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
2. Setback requirements for a primary structure on a corner lot are:
a. Front yard: Twenty feet (20');
b. Side yard: Ten feet (10'). The side yard that is on the intersecting street must have a twenty
foot (20') side yard;
c. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
3. Area requirements are six thousand (6,000) square feet for a corner lot and five thousand
(5,000) square feet for an inside lot.
4. The minimum lot width is fifty feet (50').
5. The total area that may be covered by buildings is forty five percent (45%).
6. The height of the primary structure is no more than forty feet (40').
7. Parking for each mobile home is two (2) additional off street spaces for each mobile home and
additional parking as required in the parking regulations.
D. R3 District Regulations: All regulations that apply to the R2 Zone also apply in the R3 Zone, except
as follows:
1. Setback requirements for primary structures are:
a. Front yard: Twenty feet (20');
b. Side yard: Five feet (5');
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 374/528
c. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
2. Setback requirements for primary structures on a corner lot are:
a. Front yard: Twenty feet (20');
b. Side yard: Five feet (5'). The side yard that is on the intersecting street must have a twenty
foot (20') side yard;
c. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
3. Area requirements are seven thousand (7,000) square feet for a corner lot and six thousand
(6,000) square feet for an inside lot. A minimum lot area for each dwelling unit above that
required for a two-family dwelling shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet of land area for
each additional unit.
4. Minimum lot width is fifty feet (50').
5. Total area coverage by buildings is forty five percent (45%).
6. The height of primary structures is no more than sixty feet (60').
7. Parking is two (2) off street spaces for each unit and additional parking as required in the
parking regulations.
E. R3A District Regulations: All the regulations that apply to the R3 Zone apply in the R3A Zone,
except as follows:
1. Setback requirements for primary structures are:
a. Front yard: Twenty feet (20');
b. Side yard: Five feet (5');
c. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
2. The allowable coverage by buildings is fifty percent (50%) of lot.
3. Two (2) off street spaces for each unit and additional parking as required in the parking
regulations.
F. RA District Regulations: All of the regulations that apply in the R1 Zone apply in the RA Zone,
except that all homes in an RA Zone must have a minimum lot size of eight thousand (8,000)
square feet.
G. A District Regulations: All of the regulations that apply in the R1 Zone apply in the A Zone, except
as follows:
1. Setback requirements for primary structures are:
a. Front yard: Thirty feet (30');
b. Side yard: Ten feet (10');
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 375/528
c. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
2. Area requirement is one-half (1/2) acre. (2003 Code § 11-04-07; amd. 2012 Code)
H. R1-R District Regulations:
1. Homes for the mentally and physically handicapped, as provided in Idaho Code section 67-
6531, shall be permitted.
2. Setback requirements for primary structures are:
a. Front yard: Thirty feet (30');
b. Side yard: Five feet (5');
c. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
3. Setback requirements for primary structures on a corner lot are:
a. Front yard: Thirty feet (30');
b. Side yard: Five feet (5'). The side yard on the intersecting street must have a twenty foot (20')
setback;
c. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
4. The height of structures is limited to fifty feet (50').
5. Minimum area requirement of one acre.
6. The minimum lot width at the building line is seventy five feet (75').
7. The total area that may be covered by buildings is forty percent (40%) of the lot.
8. Two (2) off-street spaces and additional parking as required in the parking regulations, section
11-4-14 of this chapter.
9. For signs, see home occupation regulations, subsection 11-4-8P of this chapter.
10. No farm animals are permitted within the City and impact area limits, except in the R1-R
Zoning District. The keeping of farm animals in the City limits must adhere to the following
limitations:
a. An accumulative total of four (4) cows and horses will be allowed per acre. This accumulative
total of animals applies to year-round hosted animals and does not apply where
seasonal/rotational grazing of pasture areas support an increased density on the property until
the available feed is fully utilized. After feed is used, the increased density of animals shall be
removed to comply with the accumulative levels listed above.
b. An accumulative total of eight (8) sheep, goats and pigs will be allowed per acre.
c. An accumulative total of one hundred (100) penned rabbits and chickens will be allowed per
acre.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 376/528
d. Area requirements specified are exclusive of land used for other livestock or other uses such
as buildings, lawns, gardens, etc.
e. Area requirements for animals not listed shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator
based upon the area requirements of the closest related animal. (Ord. 2178, 3-5-2019)
11-4-8: SPECIAL SUPPLEMENTARY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS REGULATIONS:
A. Visibility At Intersections: No structures shall be allowed within the triangle formed by measuring
thirty feet (30') along each lot line, beginning at their intersection, and closing such triangle with a
straight line, provided:
1. Trees are allowed within such triangle if all branches are trimmed from the curb level to at least
seven feet (7') above the curb level.
2. Shrubs, hedges and flowers are allowed within such triangle, not to exceed three feet (3') above
the curb level. (2003 Code § 11-04-08)
3. Fences, walls and all other sight obscuring structures are allowed within such triangle not to
exceed three feet (3') above curb level. A permit must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator
for all structures under this subsection. A fee in such amount as established by resolution of the
City Council per permit shall be charged. (2003 Code § 11-04-08; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Visibility At Alleys And Driveways: No fences, walls, hedges or any other sight obstructing objects
shall be allowed within the triangle formed by measuring fifteen feet (15') along the alley or
driveway and along the lot line from the intersection of said lines, and closing such triangle with a
straight line; except for trees as provided in subsection A1 of this section; shrubs, hedges and
flowers as provided in subsection A2 of this section; and structures as provided in subsection A3 of
this section.
C. Front Yard: No building or structure shall be erected closer than is allowed by the use district, from
the right-of-way line of the street. Exception: When more than fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a
street have existing buildings with a front setback of not more than twenty feet (20'), any new
structures will only need to meet the twenty foot (20') setback. In no case shall a front yard of more
than thirty feet (30') be required.
D. Side Yard: No building or part of a building, including eaves, shall be erected closer than five feet
(5') to any side property line; except corner lots shall maintain a twenty foot (20') side yard adjacent
to the street that intersects the street upon which the building fronts. (2003 Code § 11-04-08)
E. Accessory Uses: An accessory use is a building that is subordinate to, and incidental to, the
principal building on the same lot, but does not include any building containing a dwelling unit. An
accessory use is an activity or structure incidental or secondary to the principal use on the same
lot. Accessory uses shall be permitted as follows:
1. R1 Zone:
a. Height is twenty five feet (25'). (See subsection 11-4-7A8 of this chapter.) (Ord. 2111, 10-2-
2012, eff. 10-2-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 377/528
b. No accessory building or group of accessory buildings in any Residential Zone shall cover
more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard.
2. R2 Zone: Same as R1 Zone.
3. R2T Zone: Same as R1 Zone.
4. R3 Zone:
a. Height is forty feet (40').
b. No accessory building or group of accessory buildings in any residential zone shall cover
more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard.
5. R3A zone: Same as the R3 zone.
6. RA zone: Same as the R3 zone.
7. A zone: Height is forty feet (40').
F. Structures To Have Access: Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to
a public street or with access to an appropriate private street, and all structures shall be located on
lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off street
parking.
G. Erection Of More Than One Principal Structure On Lot: More than one permitted structure may be
erected on a single lot in any district as long as the yard and other requirements of this chapter are
met for each structure as though it were an individual lot.
H. Boat Docks And Boat Landing Facilities: These facilities shall be permitted along the shores of the
Snake River Jensen Grove Lake, and other bodies of water located within the city, and the
Blackfoot impact area, when approved by the city council. Plans and specifications shall be
required for review to ensure the safety of the public and the users of the facilities. (2003 Code
§ 11-04-08)
I. Manufactured Homes: For the purposes of this chapter, a new or used manufactured home, when
placed permanently on a foundation approved by the building official, is considered a single-family
dwelling and is a permitted use in residential zones. Manufactured homes must meet all of the
same regulations of the adopted building code as required for conventionally built homes. (2003
Code § 11-04-08; amd. 2012 Code)
J. Yard Space For One Building Only: No required yard or other open space around an existing
building or that is hereafter provided around any building, for the purpose of complying with
provisions of this chapter, shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other
building, nor shall any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot be considered as
providing the yard or open space whereon a building is to be created or established.
K. Sale Or Lease Of Required Yard: No space needed to meet the width, yard, coverage, parking or
other requirements of this chapter for a lot or building may be sold or leased apart from such lot or
building, unless other space so complying is provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 378/528
L. Sale Of Lots Below Minimum Space Required: No parcel or land that has less than the minimum
width and area requirements for the zone in which it is located may be cut off from a larger part of
land for the purpose (whether immediate or future) of building or development as a lot.
M. Storage Of Junk And Debris Not Permitted In Residential Zones: No yard or other open space
surrounding an existing building in any residential zone, or that is hereafter provided around any
building in any residential zone, shall be used for storage of junk, debris, or obsolete vehicles; and
no land shall be used for such purposes, except as specifically permitted. Junk is defined by Idaho
Code section 40-111 and is determined to be a public nuisance, as defined by Idaho Code section
18-5901. (2003 Code § 11-04-08)
N. Mobile Homes Placed In City: A mobile home unit placed in a mobile home subdivision shall not be
less than twelve feet (12') in width and shall contain not less than seven hundred (700) square feet
of floor space. There shall be no minimum restrictions on the width or size of a mobile home unit
placed in a mobile home park. A skirt constructed of noncombustible material shall be placed
around all mobile homes in the city. Such skirting shall not provide a harborage for rodents or
create a fire hazard. (2003 Code § 11-04-08; amd. 2012 Code)
O. Off Street Parking Requirements: Off street parking must be usable space within a public or private
parking area or building, that is not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet, exclusive of
access drives, aisles and ramps, for the storage of one passenger automobile or commercial
vehicle. This space may not be on any public street and must comply with the federal Americans
with disabilities act (ADA). Each use district zone has an off street parking requirement. Additional
off street parking may be required. See the additional off street parking and loading requirements
in section 11-4-14 of this chapter.
P. Signs For Home Occupation: Signs for home occupation shall be limited to ten (10) square feet in
area, shall be unlighted, nonrevolving, nonanimated and nonflashing. Home occupation signs will
be allowed in all use zones. All signs shall be maintained in good condition.
Q. Farm Animals In City And Impact Area: No farm animals are permitted within the city limits, except
in the RA and A districts. The keeping of farm animals in the city limits (the privilege being
grandfathered at the time of the original zoning ordinance), in a designated RA or A zone, or in the
impact area, must adhere to the following limitations:
1. An accumulative total of two (2) cows and/or horses will be allowed per acre;
2. An accumulative total of eight (8) sheep, goats and/or pigs will be allowed per acre (pigs are
allowed only within the impact area);
3. An accumulative total of one hundred (100) penned rabbits and/or chickens will be allowed per
acre;
4. Area requirements specified are exclusive of land used for other livestock or other uses such as
buildings, lawns, gardens, etc.;
5. Nondomesticated animals or animals that are not commonly or traditionally domesticated such
as deer, elk, moose, antelope, snakes (other than small snakes no more than 3 feet long kept in
a cage or aquarium within a house and limited to no more than 2), lions, tigers, bears, wolves,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 379/528
wolf hybrids, coyotes, bobcats, cougars and the like are not permitted within the city. Any such
animals located within the city at the time of passage of this chapter shall have grandfather
rights, but shall not increase the number above the number of such animals in existence at the
time of passage of this chapter. Any such animals that pose danger to people or other animals
shall be removed upon notice to do so from the zoning administrator.
6. Area requirements for animals not listed shall be determined by the zoning administrator based
upon the area requirements of the closest related animal.
7. Additional farm animals may be allowed by a conditional use permit.
8. Any farm animal use that is grandfathered in and not maintained for over a six (6) month period
shall be terminated. (2003 Code § 11-04-08)
9. Notwithstanding any restrictions contained in this code to the contrary, the keeping of not more
than six (6) domestic hen chickens is permitted within the rear yard of any single-family dwelling
or duplex, provided that the following requirements are observed:
a. Eggs produced by such hens shall not be sold for pecuniary gain or profit.
b. Such hens shall not be slaughtered on the premises or raised or sold for slaughter or for
pecuniary gain or profit.
c. The hens must be contained in the rear yard by suitable fence, chicken coop, or both. The
fence and/or chicken coop must be constructed and maintained in such a manner that they
prevent the chickens from leaving the rear yard. The fence and/or chicken coop must be set
back at least five feet (5') from the property line on all sides. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the fence may be placed on the property line adjacent to an alleyway at the rear of the
property.
d. The chickens must be maintained in such a manner that they do not become a "nuisance" as
that term is defined in this code.
e. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "rear yard" means a residential yard lying
between the rear lot line and the nearest foundation line of the main building and extending
across the full width of the lot. In the case of a corner lot where the building fronts on a side
street, the rear yard may be established from the rear of the house to the side property line.
(Ord. 2114, 2-5-2013, eff. 2-5-2013)
R. Frontage And Access: For the purpose of ensuring orderly development and to provide adequate
access for firefighting equipment and other services to all buildings, no residence or commercial
building shall be erected or moved onto any lot, tract or parcel of land in any use district or zone
adopted under the provisions of this chapter, unless said lot, tract or parcel of land has thirty feet
(30') of frontage on a public right of way and has reasonably efficient access thereto to vehicular
traffic and has been legally platted; and provided further, that a building permit may be issued for
construction of a residence on a private easement where, in the opinion of the planning and zoning
commission, the following conditions have reasonably been met:
1. Minimum easement width of twenty feet (20').
2. Maximum easement length of four hundred feet (400').
3. Minimum turnaround radius of sixty two feet (62'), or equivalent "T" style turnaround.
4. Maximum grade of ten percent (10%).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 380/528
5. The easement must serve land that otherwise would have no access to a public road. (2003
Code § 11-04-08)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2180 - PROZONE. Go to new
ordinance.
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2181 - COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS. Go to new ordinance.
11-4-9: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
A. Neighborhood Commercial:
1. Neighborhood commercial C1: The purpose in establishing the neighborhood commercial zone
is to provide a district in which business, professional and government offices can be
established, also in which cultural facilities and certain other uses of a semicommercial nature
can meet the needs of the neighborhood. (2003 Code § 11-04-09)
2. Neighborhood commercial C1-R: The purpose in establishing the neighborhood commercial
zone is to provide a district in which business, professional and government offices can be
established, also in which cultural facilities and certain other uses of a semicommercial nature
can meet the needs of the neighborhood. Allowed in the district will be residential apartments,
except in the story abutting street level. Original residential structures within these zones used
for commercial purposes would be allowed to return to residential use if the structure has not
been materially modified from its exterior residential design, without the requirement of obtaining
a conditional use permit to return to its original use. (Ord. 2082, 8-6-2008, eff. 8-6-2008)
B. Community Commercial:
1. Community Commercial C2: The purpose in establishing the community commercial zone is to
provide a district in which the primary use of land is for business purposes and promotes the
development of retail shopping stores and service establishments. (2003 Code § 11-04-09)
2. Community Commercial C2-R: The purpose in establishing the community commercial zone is
to provide a district in which the primary use of land is for business purposes and promotes the
development of retail shopping stores and service establishments. Allowed in the district will be
residential apartments, except in the story abutting street level. Original residential structures
within these zones used for commercial purposes would be allowed to return to residential use if
the structure has not been materially modified from its exterior residential design, without the
requirement of obtaining a conditional use permit to return to its original use. (Ord. 2082, 8-6-
2008, eff. 8-6-2008)
C. Service Commercial C3: The purpose in establishing the service commercial zone is to provide
areas of land where activities of a service nature are more intensive in character than other
commercial zones, in which business could provide service to both the community and industry.
D. Light Industrial M1: The purpose in establishing the light industrial zone is to provide for and
encourage industries such that the appearance of buildings and treatment of land will not be
detrimental or obtrusive to surrounding commercial or residential uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 381/528
E. Heavy Industrial M2: The purpose in establishing the heavy industrial zone is to provide for suitable
areas in which heavy industrial uses may locate and be substantially free from residential or retail
commercial activities. (2003 Code § 11-04-09)
11-4-10: REGULATION OF USE DISTRICTS:
District regulations shall be as set forth in section 11-4-6, "Official Schedule Of Use Districts", of this
chapter. (Ord. 2113, 2-5-2013, eff. 2-5-2013)
11-4-11: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2113, 2-5-2013, eff. 2-5-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2181 - COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS. Go to new ordinance.
11-4-12: SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS:
A. C1 district regulations:
1. No front yard or side yard shall be required, except when a building or group of buildings abuts
upon a residential district. A yard of not less than ten feet (10') in width, or a sight obstructing
fence shall be provided on the side of the lot abutting the residential district.
2. There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than fifteen feet (15'), or a sight obstructing
fence when abutting upon a residential zone. The rear yard may be used for off street parking
and loading. If there exists an alleyway behind said property, no rear yard is required.
3. There is no minimum lot width or minimum area requirements.
4. Residential usage in commercial areas shall follow the area requirements as set forth in the R3
residential zone regulations.
5. Height limit is not more than sixty feet (60').
6. Off street parking is delineated in section 11-4-14 of this chapter.
7. Signs are controlled by the international sign code. No animated signs that are deemed to have
a deteriorating influence upon surrounding properties may be used. Questions should be
directed to the zoning administrator, the planning and zoning commission or the city council.
B. C2 district regulations: All regulations that apply in the C1 zone also apply in the C2 zone.
C. C3 district regulations: All regulations that apply in the C1 zone (except height regulations) also
apply in the C3 zone.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 382/528
D. M1 district regulations: All regulations that apply in the C3 zone also apply in the M1 zone.
E. M2 district regulations: All regulations that apply in the C3 zone also apply in the M2 zone. (2003
Code § 11-04-12; amd. 2012 Code)
11-4-13: SPECIAL SUPPLEMENTARY COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USE
REGULATIONS:
The special supplementary use regulations listed in section 11-4-8 of this chapter that apply to
commercial and industrial use districts are:
A. Visibility At Intersections: No structures shall be allowed within the triangle formed by measuring
thirty feet (30') along each lot line, beginning at their intersection, and closing such triangle with a
straight line, provided:
1. Trees are allowed within each triangle if all branches are trimmed from the curb level to at least
seven feet (7') above the curb level.
2. Shrubs, hedges and flowers and allowed within such triangle, not to exceed three feet (3') above
the curb level.
3. Fences, walls and all other sight obscuring structures not to exceed three feet (3') above curb
level are allowed within such triangle. A permit must be obtained from the zoning administrator
for all structures under this subsection. A fee in such amount as established by resolution of the
city council per permit shall be charged.
B. Visibility At Alleys And Driveways: No fences, walls, hedges or any other sight obstructing objects
shall be allowed within the triangle formed by measuring fifteen feet (15') along the alley or
driveway and along the lot line from the intersection of said lines, and closing such triangle with a
straight line; except for trees as provided in subsection A1 of this section; shrubs, hedges and
flowers as provided in subsection A2 of this section; and structures as provided in subsection A3 of
this section.
C. Accessory Uses: A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the premises that does
not alter the essential characteristic of the use considered as a whole and as related to other uses
permitted in the same district.
D. Structures To Have Access: Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to
a public street or with access to an appropriate private street, and all structures shall be located on
lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off street
parking.
E. Boat Docks And Boat Landing Facilities: These facilities shall be permitted along the shores of the
Snake River Jensen Grove Lake, and other bodies of water located within the city, and the impact
area when approved by the city council. Plans and specifications shall be required for review to
ensure the safety of the public and the users of the facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 383/528
F. Yard Space For One Building Only: No required yard or other open space around an existing
building, or that is hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying with
provisions of this chapter, shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other
building, nor shall any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot be considered as
providing the yard or open space whereon a building is to be created or established.
G. Sale Or Lease Of Required Yard: No space needed to meet the width, yard, coverage, parking or
other requirements of this chapter for a lot or building may be sold or leased apart from such lot or
building, unless other space so complying is provided.
H. Sale Of Lots Below Minimum Space Required: No parcel or land that has less than the minimum
width and area requirements for the zone in which it is located may be cut off from a larger part of
land for the purpose (whether immediate or future) of building or development as a lot.
I. Off Street Parking Requirements: Off street parking must be usable space within a public or private
parking area or building, that is not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet, nine feet by
twenty feet (9' x 20'), exclusive of access drives, aisles and ramps, for the storage of one
passenger automobile or commercial vehicle. This space may not be on any public street and must
comply with the federal Americans with disabilities act (ADA). Each use district zone has an off
street parking requirement. Additional off street parking may be required. See the additional off
street parking and loading requirements in section 11-4-14 of this chapter. (2003 Code § 11-04-13;
amd. 2012 Code)
11-4-14: ADDITIONAL OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Expansions: When the use of any building, structure or premises is expanded through the addition
of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement that would have
required additional off street parking or loading facilities if such use were originally planned when
initial approval was sought or granted, additional parking and loading facilities shall be required
consistent with the current regulations now in effect for the expanded use.
B. New Uses: Whenever the existing use of a building or structure is changed to a new use, parking or
loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use.
C. Access For Commercial, Industrial Uses: Access to parking spaces as required herein for
commercial and industrial uses shall be not less than twelve feet (12') wide and not more than forty
feet (40') wide at the curb line.
D. Existing Buildings Not Considered Nonconforming: No lawfully existing building shall be deemed to
be a nonconforming building solely because of the lack of any such required spaces; provided, that
space being used for off street parking or loading in connection with any such building at the time
of the effective date hereof shall not be further reduced in area or capacity.
E. Fractional Numbers: When the calculation of the required number of spaces called for herein
results in a fractional number, fractions equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) shall be adjusted to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 384/528
the next higher whole number of spaces.
F. Uses Not Specified: Parking space requirements for a use not specifically mentioned shall be the
same as for a use specified that has similar traffic generating characteristics.
G. Mixed Uses: Except as required for dwellings and motels, off street parking facilities for several
buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided collectively; provided, that the
total number of spaces so located together shall not be less than the sum of the separate
requirements for each of the buildings or uses.
H. Surfacing: Every open off street parking area having more than four (4) parking spaces shall be
hard surfaced, including access driveways.
I. Lighting And Screening: Lighting used to illuminate off street parking areas shall be directed away
from residential properties, and such parking areas shall be effectively screened on any side
adjoining property in a residential zone by a wall, fence or hedge to a height of six feet (6'), except
for the front yard setback area of the adjoining residential property, in which case the maximum
height shall be three feet (3').
J. Location For Dwellings: Required parking spaces for dwellings shall be upon the same premises as
the dwelling.
K. Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces: The minimum number of parking spaces as hereinafter set
forth shall be provided for all uses allowed and conditional uses permitted in any zone; provided,
that a greater number of spaces may be required in any case where a conditional use permit is
involved:
1. For each guest bedroom in a hotel, motel, club, lodging house, fraternity or sorority house: One
parking space; plus one parking space for each three (3) beds in a dormitory.
2. For each four (4) beds in a convalescent, nursing or rest home, sanatorium or home for the care
of children or the aged: One parking space; plus one parking space for each doctor assigned full
time to the staff; plus two (2) parking spaces for each three (3) other employees.
3. For a hospital: One parking space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of net floor area;
plus one parking space for each four (4) regular employees.
4. For a church, auditorium, theater, sports arena or mortuary: One parking space for each five (5)
seats in the principal assembly room or area. (2003 Code § 11-04-14)
5. For floor space used by the public or by members in a social hall, dance hall, nightclub, pool
hall, restaurant or other similar enterprise or establishment: One parking space for every five (5)
people. (Building occupancy to be identified by the adopted building code.) (2003 Code § 11-04-
14; amd. 2012 Code)
6. For a bowling alley: Four (4) parking spaces for each lane.
7. Business offices, not otherwise specified: One parking space for each two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of net floor space.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 385/528
8. Medical or dental office or clinic: One parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet
of net floor area.
9. Retail stores, banks and shops other than as specified below: One parking space for each two
hundred (200) square feet of net floor area in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet. For
drive-in banks: Three (3) additional parking spaces for each teller window.
10. Retail sales establishments handling only durable goods or bulky merchandise such as
machinery, furniture or vehicles, personal service and repair shops, wholesale stores: One
parking space for each six hundred (600) square feet of net floor area in excess of two thousand
(2,000) square feet.
11. For manufacturing establishments: One parking space for each employee, based on the
greatest number of employees at any one time.
12. For every building hereafter erected containing more than fifteen thousand (15,000) square
feet in area and that is designed to be occupied by any use requiring regular receipt or dispatch
of merchandise by truck, there shall be provided and maintained, with adequate design to
provide safe and efficient means of access and maneuvering, one loading space not less than
thirty feet (30') in length and ten feet (10') in width, exclusive of access platforms and
maneuvering areas.
13. Any use of an existing building in the central business district, defined as "that part of the city
centrally located where traditionally most of its commercial activities have been concentrated,
such as financial service, retail, government, entertainment and offices with the traditional street
pattern", does not have to meet the parking requirements for said existing buildings if a variance
is obtained from the planning and zoning commission. A regular variance hearing as outlined in
Idaho Code section 67-6509 is not required and the petitioner is not required to attend the
planning and zoning commission meeting. The zoning administrator will present the request to
the commission for a vote.
L. Parking, Storage Or Use Of Major Recreational Equipment: For the purpose of these regulations,
"major recreational equipment" is defined as including boats and trailers, travel trailers, pickup
campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent
trailers and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting such recreational equipment,
whether occupied by such equipment or not. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping
or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or any location not approved
for such use.
M. Parking And Storage Of Certain Vehicles: See title 10, chapter 3 of this code.
N. Frontage And Access: For the purpose of ensuring orderly development and to provide adequate
access for firefighting equipment and other services to all buildings, no residence or commercial
building shall be erected or moved onto any lot, tract or parcel of land in any use district or zone
adopted under the provisions of this chapter unless said lot, tract or parcel of land has thirty feet
(30') of frontage on a public right of way and has reasonably efficient access thereto to vehicular
traffic and has been legally platted; and provided further that a building permit may be issued for
construction of a residence on a private easement where, in the opinion of the planning and zoning
commission, the following conditions have reasonably been met:
1. Minimum easement width of twenty feet (20').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 386/528
2. Maximum easement length of four hundred feet (400').
3. Minimum turnaround radius of sixty two feet (62'), or equivalent "T" style turnaround.
4. Maximum grade of ten percent (10%).
5. The easement must serve land that otherwise would have no access to a public road. (2003
Code § 11-04-14)
11-4-15: MANUFACTURED HOME REGULATIONS:
Manufactured homes (any home meeting the "mobile home, class A" definition as established in
section 11-1-3 of this title) may be placed in any residential zone in the city, as long as the home
meets the following regulations: (2003 Code § 11-04-15)
A. Standards: Manufactured homes must comply with the national manufactured home construction
and safety standards act (40 USC 5401) and the building code as currently adopted by the city
council.
B. Gear Removed: Manufactured homes must have all hitches, wheels and running gear removed.
C. Permanent Foundation Required: Manufactured homes must be attached to a permanent
foundation in accordance with HUD standards and the current building code adopted by the city.
(2003 Code § 11-04-15; amd. 2012 Code)
D. Licensed Installer: Manufactured homes must be set up by an installer who is licensed and bonded
with the state.
E. Utility Connection: Manufactured homes must be permanently connected to city utilities.
F. Taxation: Manufactured homes must be taxed as real property.
G. Design Standards: The following design standards will be required for any manufactured home to
be considered for placement in a residential zone:
1. The manufactured home shall be multisectional and enclose a space of not less than one
thousand (1,000) square feet.
2. The exterior covering must extend to a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation.
3. The manufactured home shall have an attached garage constructed of like materials. The
planning and zoning commission may authorize the substitution of a detached garage in lieu of
an attached garage where such is consistent with the predominant construction of immediately
surrounding dwellings. (2003 Code § 11-04-15)
11-4-16: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 387/528
A. General: Home occupations shall be permitted in all zones, provided the home occupation clearly
and obviously is subordinate to the main use or dwelling unit for residential purposes. Home
occupations shall be conducted wholly within the primary structure on the premises.
B. Conditions: The following conditions shall apply to home occupations:
1. The home occupation shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the floor area of the primary
structure.
2. Other than those related by blood, marriage or adoption, no more than one person may be
employed in the home occupation.
3. Inventory and supplies shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the area permitted to be
used as a home occupation.
4. There shall be no exterior display or storage of goods on said premises.
5. The use may not materially change the character of the dwelling or adversely affect the uses
permitted in a residential zone.
6. Home occupations that involve beauty shops, barbershops, or other occupations that require
city, state or federal licenses to operate, shall require a conditional use permit.
7. Sales and services to patrons shall be arranged by appointment and scheduled so that not more
than one patron vehicle is on the premises at the same time.
8. Two (2) additional parking spaces shall be provided on the premises, except only one need be
provided if the home occupation does not have an employee.
9. Prior to conducting a home occupation, an application shall be made to the building inspector.
The applicant shall be granted a permit if the applicant complies with this and other pertinent city
ordinances and regulations. The applicant may appeal a denial of a permit directly to the
planning and zoning commission.
C. Conditional Use Permit: If an applicant for a home occupation permit wishes to deviate from the
requirements listed above, such applicant must apply to the planning and zoning commission for a
conditional use permit. (2003 Code § 11-04-16)
D. Application Fee: All applicants for a home occupation permit must pay an application fee in such
amount as established by resolution of the city council at the time they apply for the permit. (2003
Code § 11-04-16; amd. 2012 Code)
11-4-17: WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS:
A. Purpose And Intent: In order to balance the need for clean, renewable energy resources and the
necessity to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community, the city finds these
regulations are necessary to ensure that wind energy conversion systems are appropriately
designed and safely sited and installed. This section establishes the regulations and criteria which
allow compatible accessory uses to be located within the various land use districts. Unless
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 388/528
otherwise provided, all accessory uses are subject to the same regulations as the sponsoring
primary use.
B. Definitions:
RESIDENTIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind
turbine, tower and associated control or conversion electronics, which is intended to primarily
reduce on site consumption of utility power. A system is considered a residential wind energy
system only if it supplies electrical power solely for on site use, except that when a parcel on which
the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess
electrical power generated and not presently needed for on site use may be used by the utility
company.
TOWER: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion system that elevates the wind
turbine generator and attached blades above the ground.
C. Regulations: Residential wind energy systems shall be a permitted use in all zoning classifications
where structures of any sort are allowed, subject to certain requirements as set forth below:
1. Tower Height: For property sizes less than one acre, the tower height shall be limited to sixty
feet (60'). For property sizes of one acre or more, there is no limitation on tower height, except
as imposed by FAA regulations.
2. Clearance Of Blade: No portion of the residential wind energy system shall extend within twenty
feet (20') of the ground.
3. Setback: No part of the wind system structure, including guywire anchors, may extend closer
than ten feet (10') to the property boundaries of the installation site; provided, that it also
complies with any applicable fire setback requirements.
4. Automatic Over Speed Controls: All wind energy conversion systems shall be equipped with
manual (electronic or mechanical) and automatic over speed controls to limit the blade rotation
speed to within the design limits of the residential wind energy system.
5. Sound: Residential wind energy systems shall not exceed sixty (60) dBA, as measured at the
closest neighboring inhabited dwelling. The level, however, may be exceeded during short term
events, such as utility outages and/or severe windstorms.
6. Approved Wind Turbines: Residential wind turbines must be approved under an emerging
technology program, such as the California Energy Commission, IEC or any other small wind
certification program recognized by the American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) or the U.S.
department of energy. Noncertified residential wind turbines must submit a description of the
safety features of the turbine prepared by a registered mechanical engineer.
7. Compliance With International Building Code: Building permit applications for residential wind
systems shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the
tower, base and footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the
international building code and certified by a licensed professional engineer shall also be
submitted. This analysis may be supplied by the manufacturer. Wet stamps shall not be
required.
8. Compliance With FAA Regulations: Residential wind energy systems must comply with
applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary approvals for installations close to airports.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 389/528
9. Compliance With National Electric Code: Building permit applications for residential wind energy
systems shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail
to allow for a determination that the manner of the installation conforms to the national electrical
code. This information may be supplied by the manufacturer.
10. Utility Notification: No residential wind energy system shall be installed until evidence has been
given that the utility company has been informed of the customer's intent to install an
interconnected customer owned generator. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement.
11. Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size for a tower shall be forty thousand (40,000) square
feet.
12. Placement On Lot: The tower must be placed in the lot so that in the event that the tower falls
in any direction, it cannot encroach on adjoining property. (Ord. 2084, 5-5-2009, eff. 5-5-2009)
Chapter 5
MOBILE HOME AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
11-5-1: PURPOSE:
The regulations of this chapter establish minimum standards and requirements for the construction or
expansion of mobile home and/or travel trailer parks for the city. These regulations are intended to
provide a stable, healthful environment for those residents choosing to reside in such parks, while
protecting adjacent land uses. (2003 Code § 11-05-01)
11-5-2: PROVISIONS GOVERNING PARKS; CONFLICTS:
Mobile home and/or travel trailer parks that are desired or that are required shall be developed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Whenever there is a conflict between the provisions of
this chapter and other ordinances of the city, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Subjects not
covered by this chapter shall be governed by the respective provisions found in other land use
ordinances of the city. (2003 Code § 11-05-02)
11-5-3: MOBILE HOME PARKS:
The development of a mobile home park shall conform to the standards and requirements of this
section. (2003 Code § 11-05-03)
11-5-3-1: LOCATION IN MOBILE HOME PARK REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to maintain a mobile home or travel trailer for residential purposes outside a mobile
home park or in a mobile home subdivision (R2T) zone. Such prohibition shall apply regardless of
whether the parking site shall be on private or public premises, streets, alleys or highways. Mobile
homes used for residential quarters for watchmen or caretakers and located on the premises of an
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 390/528
industrial establishment in any industrial zone may be permitted by a conditional use permit. (2003
Code § 11-05-04)
11-5-3-2: PARKING AND STORAGE OF UNOCCUPIED MOBILE HOMES:
Parking of unoccupied mobile homes is prohibited on public premises, streets, alleys or highways, at
all times, except for emergency purposes. (2003 Code § 11-05-04)
11-5-3-3: APPROVAL OF PLANS AND DOCUMENTS NECESSARY:
Any person wishing to construct a mobile home park shall obtain from the zoning administrator
information pertaining to the city's plan of land use, streets, public facilities, zoning and subdivision
ordinances, and other requirements affecting the land within the development. Before any permit can
be issued for any construction connected with a mobile home park, the preliminary plans, required
documents pertaining to the development and the final plan shall have been approved as hereinafter
set forth. (2003 Code § 11-05-04)
11-5-3-4: PRELIMINARY PLAN AND DOCUMENTS:
The preliminary plan and documents shall be prepared and submitted as follows:
A. Plan Requirements: Six (6) copies of the preliminary plan must be submitted to the zoning
administrator at least two (2) weeks prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission at
which the plan will be considered. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than
one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), or as recommended by the zoning administrator, and
shall show the following information:
1. The topography represented by contours shown at no greater intervals than two feet (2') when
required by the zoning administrator.
2. The proposed street and mobile home park layout.
3. Proposed reservations for parks, playgrounds and open spaces.
4. Size and character of recreation buildings and other structures associated with land and facilities
to be used by the mobile home occupants.
5. Layout of a typical trailer space.
6. Tabulations showing the following:
a. Area of land within the mobile home park.
b. Number of mobile homes permitted.
c. Number of mobile home spaces provided for in the mobile home park.
d. Percent of area to be devoted to parks and playgrounds.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 391/528
e. Number of off street parking spaces.
7. Proposed location of off street parking spaces.
8. Generalized landscape planting plan.
9. Location of existing and proposed utility lines and easements, water and sewer lines, fire
hydrants, storm drains and facilities, curbs and other improvements.
10. Draft of proposed documents including the following:
a. Management policies, covenants and restrictions.
b. Maintenance agreement.
11. Typical street cross sections.
12. Any other data that the planning and zoning commission may require.
B. Standards And Requirements: The development of a mobile home park shall conform to the
standards and requirements listed below:
1. The area shall be in one ownership and shall remain in one ownership and shall not be
subdivided.
2. The final development plan must be prepared by an engineer or architect licensed to practice in
the state.
3. The initial site size for a mobile home park shall provide space for a minimum of five (5) mobile
homes and such additional area as may be necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
4. The mobile homes may be clustered; provided, that the gross density of mobile home units
within the development does not exceed seven (7) units per acre.
5. The land area not contained in individual lots, roads or automobile parking spaces shall be set
aside and developed as parks, playground and service areas for the common use and
enjoyment of the occupants of the mobile home park within two (2) years from the date of
approval of the mobile home park.
6. No less than five hundred (500) square feet per mobile home in the mobile home park shall be
set aside for parks and playground. The land covered by vehicular roadways, sidewalks, off
street parking and landscaped area surrounding mobile home spaces that are pertinent to each
mobile home, and the area devoted to service facilities, shall not qualify as part of the area
required for parks and playgrounds. Designated open space shall be located as near the central
part of the development as good design shall permit.
7. No mobile home or add on shall be closer than ten feet (10') to a property or lot line. A rear yard
of twenty five feet (25') will be required, except that a minimum rear yard of fifteen feet (15') will
be accepted if one of the required side yards is a minimum of twenty five feet (25'). All mobile
homes and additions shall be set back at least fifteen feet (15') from all interior, private mobile
home park roadways.
8. All off street parking spaces and driveways shall be hard surfaced within one year from the date
of approval of the mobile home park.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 392/528
9. A strip of land at least twenty feet (20') wide surrounding the mobile home park shall be left
unoccupied by mobile homes and shall be planted and maintained in lawn, shrubs and trees
designed to afford privacy to the development.
10. All storage and solid waste receptacles outside of the confines of a mobile home must be
housed in a closed structure compatible in design and construction to the mobile home and to
any service buildings within the mobile home park. All patios, garages, carports and other
additions must also be compatible in design and construction with the mobile home and with the
service buildings as approved by the zoning administrator.
11. Roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic as follows:
a. For one-way and two-way with parking, fifty feet (50') in width.
b. For entrance street, a minimum of sixty feet (60') in width or forty eight feet (48') curb to curb.
(2003 Code § 11-05-05)
c. All streets shall be bordered by curb, gutter and sidewalk, and shall be hard surfaced, or
constructed as specified by the planning and zoning commission. (2003 Code § 11-05-05;
amd. 2012 Code)
12. There shall be no more than two (2) entrances from the mobile home park into any one street,
which entrances shall be no closer than one hundred feet (100') to each other, nor closer than
seventy feet (70') to the corner of an intersection. All mobile home parks shall have at least two
(2) entrances and more may be required depending on the size of the development.
13. Access shall be provided to each mobile home space by means of an accessway reserved for
maneuvering mobile homes into position and shall be kept free from trees and other immovable
obstructions. Paving the accessway shall not be required. Use of planks, steel mats or other
means during placement of a mobile home shall be allowed so long as the same are removed
immediately after placement of the mobile home.
14. Off street parking shall be provided at the rate of one parking space per mobile home space
within the mobile home park. In no case shall the parking space be located greater than one
hundred feet (100') away from the mobile home space it is designed to serve.
15. In addition to meeting the above requirements and conforming to the other laws of the city, all
mobile home parks shall also conform to the requirements of the state health department. In the
event of any conflict between said regulations and this chapter, the most restrictive provision
shall govern.
16. Mobile home parks may include a launderette for the convenience of the occupants of the park,
but not for the general public.
17. All mobile homes shall be located at least thirty feet (30') back from any public street and the
resulting yard must be landscaped, except for driveways.
18. An aggregate area of at least one hundred (100) square feet for each mobile home space
contained within the mobile home park shall be provided for the storage of the renters' boats,
trailers, campers and other items that cannot be stored in the mobile homes. Said storage space
shall be enclosed with a sight obscuring fence of no less than six feet (6') nor more than eight
feet (8') in height.
19. The site of any mobile home park shall be graded and/or filled and maintained so as to prevent
the accumulation of storm or waste water of any kind. A mobile home park shall not be permitted
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 393/528
where there is inadequate drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided and maintained for
patios, mobile home stands, buildings, sidewalks, streets and other improvements.
20. Signs as may be required by the zoning administrator shall be placed in all mobile home parks
indicating the direction of travel and the areas where no automobile parking will be permitted.
(2003 Code § 11-05-05)
21. All streets, water, sanitary sewer and drain systems shall meet city standards and shall meet
the approval of the public works department. (2003 Code § 11-05-05; amd. 2012 Code)
22. Any mobile home park that has been legally established and that was in use at the time of the
effective date hereof shall be deemed to be nonconforming use. Such nonconforming use may
be continued notwithstanding the fact that it may not comply with the provisions of this chapter;
provided, that such nonconforming use does not constitute a hazard to health or a nuisance.
Such nonconforming use shall not be extended, changed or enlarged, except in compliance with
this chapter. If any mobile home or mobile home park was illegally established at the effective
date hereof, the enactment of this chapter shall not be deemed to render such use legal unless
such use is expressly authorized by the terms of this chapter.
23. Only mobile homes shall be allowed to occupy a mobile home space in a mobile home park.
24. Operation of a mobile home park shall not be hazardous or detrimental to existing
neighborhood uses.
25. Destruction, loss or damage of natural, scenic or historical features of major importance to the
city will not be allowed.
C. Documents: Documents shall also be submitted with the preliminary plan consisting of the
following:
1. A declaration of management policies, covenants and restrictions setting forth the
responsibilities and duties of the renters or occupants and owner within the mobile home park.
2. An agreement between the mobile home developers and the city stating among other things:
a. The developer will construct the project in accordance with the approved plans.
b. In the event of failure or neglect on the part of the owners, successors or assigns to maintain
the common areas, landscaping and other improvements in good condition, the city may
perform the necessary work and for the purposes may enter in or upon the land and do said
work and charge the cost thereof, including reasonable attorney fees, against the owners or
their successors or assigns.
D. Review And Approvals:
1. The planning and zoning commission shall review the plan and proposed documents to
determine compliance with all portions of the city land use plan and this title. In considering said
plan, the planning and zoning commission, among other things, shall make sure that such
developments shall constitute a residential environment of sustained desirability and stability and
that it will not adversely affect amenities in the surrounding area. The planning and zoning
commission may require changes to be made in the plan or documents. They may also require
additional yards or buffers or other improvements to be installed along with greater amounts of
landscaping or parking spaces. Said changes may be imposed as conditions of approval that are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 394/528
necessary to ensure that the development will mix harmoniously with adjoining or nearby uses,
and to ensure that the stated quality of the maintenance will be carried out.
2. An application for approval of a mobile home park shall be granted or denied only after a public
hearing by the planning and zoning commission. Notice of the hearing shall be given to a
newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to said hearing.
3. If approved by the planning and zoning commission, the application with the commission's
recommendations shall be submitted to the city council for its approval. An application denied by
the planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the city council. Said appeal must be
made in writing within ten (10) days after the denial is made by the planning and zoning
commission. Approval of the preliminary plan shall be valid for a period of one year. (2003 Code
§ 11-05-05)
11-5-3-5: FINAL SITE PLAN:
A. Upon approval of the preliminary plan and documents by the city council, the developer shall
submit to the planning commission a final site plan of either the entire mobile home park or the first
stage of such development that is to be constructed, and final copies of the required documents.
Such plan shall be drawn to scale and provide, in detail, the information required under section 11-
5-3-4 of this chapter, the preliminary plans and documents. This shall include detailed and
complete plans of the alignment, location and grades of all streets and utilities.
B. Copies of the final approved documents shall also be filed in the office of the zoning administrator
and until the guarantee of performance required below in this chapter has been properly posted.
(2003 Code § 11-05-06)
11-5-3-6: STAGE CONSTRUCTION PERMITTED:
Development may be carried out in progressive stages in which event each stage shall be so planned
that the requirements and intent of this chapter shall be fully complied with at the completion of each
stage. No final plan for the initial stage shall provide for less than five (5) mobile home spaces and
such additional as may be necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. (2003 Code § 11-05-
07)
11-5-3-7: GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE:
A. Ability To Perform:
1. Prior to issuing a building permit for the construction of the mobile home park, the developer
must submit evidence satisfactory to the council that the developer has the financial means and
the ability to complete the stage of construction for which he has applied for a building permit.
2. Such evidence shall consist of the contractor's bid or the engineer's or architect's estimate of the
amount required to complete the development, together with the resources of the developer
committed to such expenditure, or the proof of the loan commitment sufficient to construct and
complete such development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 395/528
B. Possession And Occupancy: No possession or occupancy of the mobile home park shall be
allowed until the improvements as planned for each stage shall be fully constructed. However, if
the developer desires to have any occupancy of a portion of the partially developed staged
construction, then the developer shall post bond as security for the completion of all improvements,
including, but not limited to, landscaping, road improvements, pedestrianways, curb, gutters, road
surfacing, water and sewer lines, and common facilities as shown on the final site plan. Upon the
posting of bond satisfactory in form and amount to the city council for the completion of such
improvement, occupancy may be granted upon a partially constructed mobile home park.
C. Estimates: All estimates of completion and costs shall be submitted to the city engineer for his
approval.
D. Duration Of Bond: The duration of any bonds or other assurance of completion of improvements in
a development of mobile home parks shall be for a minimum of two (2) years from the date of
approval of the development by the city council. An extension of time may be granted by the city
council upon application of the developer, provided such an application is submitted at least sixty
(60) days prior to the expiration of the bond, and provided the issuer of the bond is willing to extend
the time of the assurance.
E. Default: In the event the developer defaults or fails or neglects to satisfactorily install the required
improvements within the time limitation, the city council may declare the bond or other assurances
forfeited and the city may install or cause to be installed, the required improvements using the
proceeds from the bonds or other assurance to defray the expense thereof.
F. Release Of Security: The developer shall be responsible for the quality of all materials and
workmanship. All street, utility and park work shall be continuously inspected by the city, and the
city engineer shall make a final inspection of the improvements and shall submit a report to the city
council. If the improvements do not meet the standards and the plans, the engineer shall so report
and the developer shall be obliged to correct the improvements and complete the installation to
meet all such plans to be approved by the city engineer. Upon the city engineer's approval of the
installation or improvements, the bond or other assurance shall be released and exonerated.
G. Continuing Obligation:
1. Any failure on the part of the developer or his assigns to maintain the mobile home park or any
portion thereof in accordance with the approved management policies, covenants, conditions,
restrictions and agreements shall be deemed a public nuisance endangering the health, safety
and general welfare of the public and a detriment to the surrounding area.
2. All maintenance of private drives, including, but not limited to, utilities, drainage, streets and
snow removal shall be the responsibility of the owner.
H. Removal, Abatement: In addition to any other remedy provided by law for the abatement or
removal of such public nuisance, the city may remove or abate the nuisance and charge the cost
thereof, including reasonable attorney fees, to the owner. (2003 Code § 11-05-08)
11-5-3-8: DEVELOPMENT OF PARKS AND PLAY AREAS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 396/528
The parks and play areas shall be protected against building development by conveying to the city an
open space easement over such open areas, restricting the area against any future building or use,
except as is consistent with that of providing landscaped open space for the aesthetic and recreational
satisfaction of the residents. Buildings or uses for noncommercial, recreational or cultural purposes,
compatible with the open space objectives, may be permitted only with the express approval of the
city council, following approval of building, site and operational plans by the planning and zoning
commission. The granting of such open space easement shall not absolve the developer from the
responsibility of developing and maintaining the parks and play areas. (2003 Code § 11-05-09)
11-5-4: TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS:
11-5-4-1: APPROVAL OF PLANS AND DOCUMENTS NECESSARY:
Any person wishing to construct a travel trailer park shall obtain from the zoning administrator
information pertaining to the city plan of land use, streets, public facilities and other requirements
affecting the land within the development. Before a permit can be issued for any construction
connected with a travel trailer park, the preliminary plans, required documents pertaining to the
development and the final plan shall have been approved as hereinafter set forth. (2003 Code § 11-
05-10)
11-5-4-2: PRELIMINARY PLAN AND DOCUMENTS:
The preliminary plan and documents shall be prepared and submitted as follows:
A. Plan Requirements: Six (6) copies of the preliminary plan must be submitted to the zoning
administrator at least two (2) weeks prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission at
which the plan will be considered. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than
one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), or as recommended by the zoning administrator, and
shall show the following information:
1. Proposed road and trailer space layout.
2. Proposed reservation for parks, playgrounds and other open space.
3. Proposed location for service facilities.
4. A generalized landscape plan.
5. Location of existing and proposed utility lines and easements, water and sewer lines, fire
hydrants, storm drains and facilities, curbs and other improvements.
6. Any other data that the planning and zoning commission may require.
B. Standards And Requirements:
1. Each travel trailer park shall be held in one ownership and shall contain at least two (2) acres of
land.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 397/528
2. All travel trailer parks shall abut upon a collector or arterial street, as set forth in the major street
plan of the city.
3. All travel trailers shall be set back at least thirty feet (30') from any public street, and fifteen feet
(15') from an interior private roadway.
4. The roadway system shall provide convenient circulation through the travel trailer park and
provide access to each travel trailer space. No travel trailer space will be permitted direct access
to a public street, road or highway, other than by means of the travel trailer park roadway
system. All entrances and exits from the travel trailer park shall be forward motion only. No exit
or entrance from a travel trailer park shall be through a residential zone and no entrance or exit
shall be located closer than seventy feet (70') to the intersection of two (2) streets.
5. All one-way and two-way roadways shall have curb to curb width of at least thirty seven feet
(37') and all roadways shall be hard surfaced.
6. All areas within the park that are not hard surfaced shall be landscaped and maintained with
lawns, trees and shrubs designed to provide privacy and noise containment and shall be
equipped with adequate sprinkling or watering devices as approved by the zoning administrator.
A landscape screen at least eight feet (8') in width shall be provided adjacent to the exterior
boundaries of the park.
7. Each travel trailer space shall be at least twenty feet (20') in width and at least forty feet (40') in
length.
8. No travel trailer space shall be rented for a period of more than thirty (30) days and no travel
trailer that exceeds eight feet (8') in width shall be placed in a travel trailer park.
9. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all travel trailer spaces shall be served by an approved
water and sewage disposal system. In addition, each travel trailer park shall have a sewage
dump for self-contained travel units.
10. In addition to meeting the above requirements, all travel trailer parks shall conform to the
requirements of the state and city health regulations relating to travel trailer parks.
11. The site of any travel trailer park shall be graded and/or filled and maintained so as to prevent
the accumulation of storm or waste water of any kind. A travel trailer park shall not be permitted
where there is inadequate drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided and maintained for all
patios, travel trailer stands, buildings, streets and other improvements.
12. Signs as may be required by the zoning administrator shall be placed in all travel trailer parks
indicating the direction of travel and the area where no automobile parking will be permitted on
roadways.
13. No permit to construct or enlarge a travel trailer park shall be issued until the plans for the
proposed construction or enlargement have been approved by the zoning administrator and the
city engineer.
14. Both dependent and independent travel trailers shall be allowed to occupy travel trailer spaces
in a travel trailer park.
15. All improvements, including utilities, streets, paved areas and landscaping, must be completed
within two (2) years of the date the plan is approved by the city council.
C. Review And Approvals:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 398/528
1. The planning commission shall review the plan to determine its compliance with any portion of
the city land use plan and this title. In considering approval of the development, the planning and
zoning commission shall, among other things, make sure that such development will mesh
harmoniously with the surrounding area; that it will not produce a volume of traffic beyond the
capacity of the surrounding street system. Requirements for utilities, off street parking, traffic
circulation and other public requirements will be adequately met and the standards and intent of
this section shall be adequately complied with.
2. The planning and zoning commission may require changes to be made in the plan. They may
also require additional yards or buffers or other improvements to be installed along with greater
amounts of landscaping or parking spaces. Said changes may be imposed as conditions of
approval where it is determined by the planning and zoning commission that such changes are
necessary to ensure that the development will mesh harmoniously with adjoining or nearby uses.
3. An application for approval of a travel trailer park shall be granted or denied only after a public
hearing by the planning and zoning commission. Notice of the hearing shall be given in a
newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to said hearing.
4. After consideration of the planning and zoning commission, the application, with the planning
and zoning commission's recommendations, shall be submitted to the city council for its
approval. An application denied by the planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the
city council. Said appeal must be made in writing within ten (10) days after the denial is made by
the planning and zoning commission. Approval of the preliminary plan shall be valid for a period
of one year. (2003 Code § 11-05-11)
11-5-4-3: FINAL SITE PLAN:
A. Upon approval of the preliminary plan by the city council, the developer shall submit to the planning
and zoning commission a final site plan of either the entire travel trailer park or the first stage of
such development that is to be constructed. Such plan shall be drawn to scale and provide in detail
the information required under this chapter.
B. Copies of the final approved documents shall also be filed in the office of the zoning administrator.
No building permit shall be issued for said travel trailer park until final plans have been approved
by the planning and zoning commission and the city council, and the required documents filed in
the office of the zoning administrator, and until the guarantee of performance required stated in
section 11-5-4-5 of this chapter has been properly posted. (2003 Code § 11-05-12)
11-5-4-4: STAGE CONSTRUCTION PERMITTED:
Development may be carried out in progressive stages, in which event, each stage shall be so
planned that the requirements and intent of this chapter shall be fully complied with at the completion
of each stage. No final plan for the initial stage shall cover less than one acre. (2003 Code § 11-05-13)
11-5-4-5: GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE:
A. Ability To Perform: Prior to issuing a building permit for the construction of a travel trailer park, the
developer must submit evidence satisfactory to the city council that the developer has the means
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 399/528
and the ability to complete the stage of construction for which he has applied for a building permit.
Such evidence shall consist of the contractor's bid or the engineer's or architect's estimate of the
amount required to complete the development, together with the resources of the developer
committed to such expenditure, or the proof of the loan commitment sufficient to construct and
complete such development.
B. Possession And Occupancy: No possession or occupancy of the travel trailer park shall be allowed
until the improvements as planned shall be fully constructed; provided, however, that if the
developer desires to have any occupancy of a portion of the partially developed staged
construction, the developer shall post bond as security for the completion of all improvements.
Included in these improvements, but not limited to, landscaping, road improvements,
pedestrianways, curbs, gutters, road surfacing, water, sanitary and storm drain lines and common
facilities as shown in the final site plan. Upon the posting of bond, satisfactory in form and amount,
to the city council for the completion of such improvements, occupancy may be granted upon a
partially constructed and developed travel trailer park.
C. Estimates: All cost estimates for completing the development shall be submitted to the city
engineer for his approval.
D. Duration Of Bond: The duration of any bonds or other assurance of completion of improvements
and development of travel trailer parks shall be for a minimum of two (2) years from the date of the
approval of the development by the city council. An extension of time may be granted by the city
council upon application of the developer, provided such application is submitted at least sixty (60)
days prior to the expiration of the bond and provided the issuer of the bond is willing to extend the
time of assurance.
E. Default: In the event the developer defaults or fails or neglects to satisfactorily install the required
improvements within the time limitation, the city council may declare the bond or other assurance
forfeited and the city may install, or cause to be installed, the required improvements using the
proceeds from the bonds or other assurance to defray the expense thereof.
F. Release Of Security: The developer shall be responsible for the quality of all materials and
workmanship. All street and utility work shall be inspected by the city and upon the completion of
installation of all such improvements, the city engineer shall make a final inspection of the
improvements and shall submit a report to the city council. If the improvements do not meet the
standards and the plans, the engineer shall so report and the developer shall be obliged to correct
the improvements and complete the installation to meet all such plans and the approval of the city
engineer. Upon the city engineer's approval of the installation of improvements, the bond or other
assurance shall be released and exonerated.
G. Continuing Obligation:
1. Any failure on the part of the developer or his assigns to maintain the travel trailer park in
accordance with the approved management policies, covenants, conditions and restrictions and
agreements shall be deemed a public nuisance endangering the health, safety and general
welfare of the public and a detriment to the surrounding area.
2. All maintenance of private drives, including, but not limited to, utilities, drainage, streets and
snow removal, shall be the responsibility of the owner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 400/528
H. Abatement, Removal: In addition to any other remedy provided by law for the abatement or
removal of such public nuisance, the city may remove or abate the nuisance and charge the cost
thereof, including reasonable attorney fees, to the owner. (2003 Code § 11-05-14)
Chapter 6
APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
ARTICLE A. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
11-6A-1: ZONING TITLE AMENDMENTS; RECLASSIFICATION OF LAND:
A. Power To Amend: This title may be amended whenever the city council deems that amendment is
required for the public convenience or necessity, or for the general welfare. Any amendment to this
title shall be enacted pursuant to this section. The amendment of this title or the reclassification of
zoning districts may be initiated by the city council, the planning and zoning commission, or by one
or more property owners or holders of valid options to purchase property. The procedures set forth
in this section shall apply to any measure to change district boundaries, reclassify districts, to
change district regulations, to add, repeal or amend district regulations and to add, repeal or
amend any other provisions of this section or the whole of this title.
B. Application, Fee Required: Every person seeking the reclassification of any land as regulated by
this title shall file an application and fee with the zoning administrator/building director in
accordance with section 11-3-2 of this title.
C. Public Hearing:
1. The planning and zoning commission shall advertise, provide notice and conduct a public
hearing in accordance with section 11-3-6 of this title for each application to amend this title, or
to reclassify a zoning district.
2. Any recommendation of the planning and zoning commission relating to change, modification
and reclassification of zoning districts and land use classifications and the regulations and
standards thereof shall be in writing. The recommendation shall include findings of fact
supporting the purposes and objectives of zoning and otherwise securing public health, safety
and general welfare. The recommendation shall specifically find that such changes,
modifications and reclassifications of zoning districts and land use classifications and the
regulations and the standards thereof:
a. Comply with and conform to the comprehensive plan; and
b. Provide and maintain existing future capabilities of public utilities; and
c. Maintain and preserve compatibility of surrounding zoning and development. (2003 Code
§ 11-06-01)
11-6A-2: AMENDMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 401/528
A. Power To Amend: The planning and zoning commission may recommend amendments to the plan
to the city council not more frequently than every six (6) months to correct errors in the original
plan or to recognize substantial changes in the actual conditions in the area.
B. Public Hearing Required: The planning and zoning commission, prior to recommending the
adoption, amendment or repeal of the plan to the city council, shall conduct at least one public
hearing in accordance with section 11-3-6 of this title.
C. Application Required: Every person seeking an amendment of the comprehensive plan shall file an
application with the zoning administrator/building director in accordance with section 11-3-2 of this
title. (2003 Code § 11-06-02)
11-6A-3: ANNEXATION:
The corporate boundary of the city may be expanded whenever the city council deems it to be for the
public convenience or necessity, or for the general welfare. A request for the annexation of property
into the city may be initiated by the city council, the planning and zoning commission, or by one or
more property owners or holders of valid options to purchase the property. When the annexation
request is initiated by the property owner, the planning and zoning commission may expand or modify
the annexation request.
A. Application Required: Every person seeking annexation into the city shall file, with the zoning
administrator/building director, an application as prescribed in sections 11-3-2 and 11-3-3 of this
title.
B. Public Hearing Required: The planning and zoning commission shall hold at least one public
hearing for each annexation request as prescribed in section 11-3-6 of this title.
C. Recommendation From Commission: The planning and zoning commission shall file its
recommendation on each annexation application with the city clerk in accordance with subsection
D of this section. The commission's recommendation on annexation applications shall be in
accordance with the following policies:
1. The annexation shall incorporate the Blackfoot sewer planning area.
2. Honor negotiated area of impact agreements.
3. Attempt to balance costs of services with anticipated revenues.
4. Promote other goals of population balance, contiguous development and prevention of costs
due to leapfrog development.
D. Action By Commission: At every hearing before the planning and zoning commission, the
commission shall hear all persons interested in the subject matter then pending before it. Not later
than ten (10) days after the conclusion of the proceedings, the planning and zoning commission
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 402/528
shall file with the city clerk a written report of the hearings before and by the commission at each
hearing, and its recommendations to the city council. (2003 Code § 11-06-03)
11-6A-4: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
A. Justification: Conditional uses by definition possess characteristics such as to require review and
appraisal by the planning and zoning commission to determine whether or not the use would cause
any damage, hazard, nuisance or other detriment to persons or property in the vicinity.
B. Application, Fee Required: Every person seeking conditional use approval shall file an application
and fee with the zoning administrator/building director in accordance with sections 11-3-2 and 11-
3-3 of this title.
C. Notice Of Hearing; Publication: The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing
and give notice of hearing for every application for a conditional use as required by section 11-3-6
of this title.
D. Commission Action: Following the hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall approve,
deny or modify the application for a conditional use permit, imposing any conditions needed to
establish the findings of subsection K of this section.
E. Effective Date Of Approval: Approval of any conditional use permit by the planning and zoning
commission shall become final after a lapse of ten (10) calendar days from the date following the
decision; provided, however, that such effective date shall be stayed by the filing of an appeal as
provided in subsection 11-3-7B of this title.
F. Resubmittal Of Denied Application: No application for conditional use permit that has been denied
by the planning and zoning commission or the city council, shall be resubmitted in either the same
or substantially the same form in less than one year from the date of final action thereon.
G. Term Of Permits: The term of a permit shall not exceed eighteen (18) months. Within this period,
the holder of the permit must:
1. Acquire construction permits and commence placement of permanent footings and structures on
or in the ground. The definition of structures in this context shall include sewer lines, water lines,
streets or building foundations; or
2. Commence the use permitted by the permits in accordance with the conditions of approval; or
3. For conceptual conditional use permits, submit an application for detailed conditional use permit;
or
4. For projects that require platting, the plat must be recorded within this period. The planning and
zoning commission may also fix the time or period within which the permit shall be completed,
perfected or bonded. If the conditions of approval shall not be completed or bonded within such
period, said permit shall lapse.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 403/528
H. Extensions:
1. The planning and zoning commission may, upon written request by the holder, grant a one year
time extension to an unexpired conditional use permit. Upon receipt of written request for
extension, the zoning administrator/building director shall determine if a hearing on the request
is required, based on the following considerations:
a. Whether there have been significant amendments to the comprehensive plan or this title that
will apply to the subject conditional use permit; or
b. If significant land use changes have occurred in the project vicinity that would adversely
impact the project or be adversely impacted by the project; or
c. Whether hazardous situations have developed or have been discovered in the project area; or
d. If community facilities and services required for the project remain adequate.
2. A maximum of three (3) 1-year time extensions may be granted to unexpired conditional use
permits.
3. If any of the foregoing considerations are found to exist with regard to the project for which an
extension is sought, a hearing shall be required. If a hearing is required, notice shall be provided
as described in section 11-3-6 of this title and a new application and fee must be submitted in
compliance with current plans and ordinances and in accordance with the application
procedures of this section.
I. Modification And Revocation: Upon application by the holder of a conditional use permit, the
planning and zoning commission may modify the conditions and limitations of the permit in
accordance with the limitations and requirements of subsection M of this section. The planning and
zoning commission may delegate to the zoning administrator/building director authority to consider
minor modifications to conditional use permits. The zoning administrator/building director may refer
any modification request to the planning and zoning commission if in his/her judgment, the change
is significant or could best be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission. The commission
may revoke or modify a conditional use permit, upon notice and hearing, for breach or violation of
any condition or limitation of said permit.
J. Staff Level Modifications: Staff level modifications of conditional use approvals shall include, but are
not limited to, the following considerations:
1. A reduction in density that does not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total units.
2. A relocation of dwelling units or building pads for some practical reason, such as road
alignment, topography, access or solar access or stability in hillside areas.
3. A change in the phasing plan.
4. A modification to the recreation area or open space design, but not elimination or significant
reduction.
5. An increase or decrease in proposed setback as long as ordinance requirements are met.
6. A change in building elevations as reviewed and approved by the staff.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 404/528
K. Conditional Use Modification; Considerations, Conditions:
1. Prior to approving any conditional use modification, the zoning administrator/building director
shall determine that the following are true:
a. The requested modification was not the subject of an appeal during the public hearing
process; or
b. The requested modification will not adversely impact adjacent properties.
2. All staff level conditional use modification approvals shall be in writing and shall be signed by the
zoning administrator/building director, or deputy director. A letter stating the nature of the
modification and findings of fact on which the approval was based shall be provided by mail to
the applicant. A notice, stating the nature of the modification, shall be provided by mail to the
property owners, purchasers of record and residents within a three hundred foot (300') radius of
the external boundaries of the subject property. A copy of that notice and documentation of its
mailing shall be noted and entered into the project files.
L. Modifications Requiring Commission Approval: Commission level approval of conditional use
modifications shall be required for the changes described below:
1. Any increase in density.
2. Density decreases exceeding twenty five percent (25%) of the total approved by the conditional
use.
3. Any change that will impact the neighborhood, such as a change in traffic generation or flow,
impacts to rivers or streams, or increases in soil erosion.
4. The requested change was the subject of an appeal during the public hearing.
5. The requested change would affect some other condition such as a condition regarding
greenbelt, streets, schools, floodplain, etc.
6. A request for greater than twenty percent (20%) increase in building square footage.
7. A request to change the nature of the approved use.
8. A request to change or delete a condition of approval.
M. Criteria And Findings: The planning and zoning commission, following the procedures outlined
below, may approve a conditional use permit when the evidence presented at the hearing is such
as to establish:
1. The location of the proposed use is compatible to other uses in the general neighborhood and
will not place an undue burden on existing transportation and service facilities in the vicinity; and
2. The site is large enough to accommodate the proposed use and all yards, open spaces,
pathways, walls and fences, parking, loading, landscaping and such other features as are
required by this title; and
3. The proposed use, if it complies with all conditions imposed, will not adversely affect other
property of the vicinity; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 405/528
4. The proposed use will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare; and
5. The proposed use is in compliance with and supports the goals and objectives of the
comprehensive plan; and
6. The request can demonstrate adequate public facilities, including roads, drainage, potable
water, sanitary sewer and police and fire protection, exist or will exist to serve the requested use
at the time such facilities are needed; and
7. The request has minimized, to the degree possible, adverse affects on the natural environment.
N. Limitations Of Conditional Uses: It is not the intent of this section to restrict or specify the particular
architectural design proposed or to specify the exterior detail or design, color or materials
proposed by the applicant, except as such detail is of such magnitude as to affect the general
appearance and compatibility of the development with its surroundings. The planning and zoning
commission, in acting upon the application, shall provide that approval of a conditional use permit
shall be contingent upon compliance with specified conditions, including, but not limited to, the
following matters:
1. Conformity to approved plans and specifications;
2. Open spaces, pathways, buffer strips, walls, fences, landscaping and lighting;
3. Volume of traffic generated, requirements for off street parking, service drive design and
construction standards, vehicular movements within the site and points of vehicular ingress and
egress;
4. Performance characteristics, related to noise, vibration and other potentially dangerous or
objectionable elements;
5. Limits on time of day for the conduct of specified activities;
6. The term of a permit, or the period of time for which a permit is issued;
7. Guarantees as to compliance with the terms of the approval;
8. Number, location, color, size, height, lighting and landscaping of outdoor signs and structures;
9. Public improvements, including the installation of streetlights, in accordance with the
requirements of the public works department;
10. Requiring all irrigation or drainage ditches, laterals and canals crossing, intersecting and lying
adjacent or contiguous to lands used for multiple-family dwelling, kindergarten, school, nursery
or mobile home park uses to be covered or fenced with a chainlink or equivalent fence at least
four feet (4') high and securely fastened at its base at all places where either or both banks of
said ditch, lateral or canal touch any of said uses of land, except that the planning and zoning
commission may waive this restriction in whole or in part if it is found that the covering or fencing
will not serve the public interests in an individual case;
11. Private streets must be approved by the city council.
O. Development Standards: The planning and zoning commission may approve as part of a
conditional use a change from required setbacks, off street parking, fence heights, and other
standards particular to the development. Applicants shall specify, in the conditional use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 406/528
applications, standards from which a change is requested. The planning and zoning commission
shall review such request in accordance with section 11-6A-11 of this article. (2003 Code § 11-06-
04)
11-6A-5: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
A. Justification:
1. A planned development is a parcel of land that is planned and developed as a unit under single
ownership or control, containing one or more uses, buildings and common open space or
recreational facilities.
2. The planned development process provides an opportunity for land development that preserves
natural features, allows efficient provision of services, and provides common open spaces or
other amenities not found in traditional lot by lot development. The process also provides for the
consistent application of conditions of approval for the various phases of a planned
development. Every planned development requires a conditional use application, and shall be
subject to all conditional use procedures.
B. Use Exceptions:
1. In the case of planned developments greater than five (5) acres in size in residential,
commercial or industrial districts, the planning and zoning commission may authorize specified
uses not permitted by the use regulations of the district in which the development is located. The
purpose of this provision is to avoid single use projects that generate high levels of traffic and to
promote other uses that are functionally integrated with and provide services to the primary use;
2. Approval shall be based on the following findings:
a. The uses permitted by such exception are strongly related to the primary use and are
intended and designed to provide services or facilities useful and convenient to the primary
use.
b. The uses permitted by such exception are integrated into the larger project through the
following features:
(1) The use exception site shall be located in proximity to and therefore within reasonable
walking distance of all portions of the primary use.
(2) One or more of the main vehicular accesses to the primary site shall also serve as the
main access for the use exception site.
(3) Pedestrian and/or bicycle pathway connections shall be provided from the primary use.
(4) Buildings on the use exception site shall be oriented to facilitate access from the primary
use.
(5) Architecture and building bulk shall reflect or complement the primary use.
(6) Landscaping concepts from the primary use shall be continued onto the use of the
exception site.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 407/528
(7) Signage shall be low profile and consistent with any sign package submitted for the
primary use;
3. The uses permitted by the exception are neighborhood or community serving in nature and in
scale and do not constitute a regional serving use;
4. The uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature or so located as to be
detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood;
5. No more than twenty percent (20%) of the total area of the planned development shall be
devoted to the uses permitted by the exception; and
6. The development is phased so that the construction of the excepted use or uses will be justified
by the construction of all or a proportionate phase of the permitted use.
C. Development Standards: The planning and zoning commission may approve planned unit
developments in accordance with the following standards:
1. Changes May Be Approved: Changes from the development standards of the underlying zone
may be approved.
2. Planned Development Size: The minimum size for a planned development shall be as follows:
a. Planned residential development: No minimum.
b. Planned commercial development: One acre.
c. Planned industrial development: Five (5) acres.
d. Planned office development: Two (2) acres.
3. Residential Density: The number of dwelling units allowed in a planned development shall be
calculated by dividing the gross area, less the area set aside for nonresidential uses (that is,
office, commercial or industrial), by the minimum lot area per dwelling unit required by the zone
in which the site is located.
4. Private Open Space: All residential planned developments on less than one acre shall provide
each dwelling unit with a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of usable private open
space. The planning and zoning commission should evaluate each project on its own merits and
allow variations to the open space standard where it can be shown that the provided space
meets the intent and purpose of this title.
5. Required Setbacks:
a. Attached structures may be permitted in planned developments. The minimum separation
between detached buildings shall be ten feet (10') unless greater separation is required by fire
or building codes.
b. Along the periphery of planned developments, yards shall be provided as required by the
regulations of the district in which the development is located, unless the planning and zoning
commission provides an exception as provided for in this subsection. Where development
already exists at the periphery, the yards shall, where practical, be matched. For example,
side yards should be provided adjacent to side yards, rear yards adjacent to rear yards and
front yards opposite front yards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 408/528
6. Service Drives; Private Streets: Service drive design and construction shall comply with the
requirements of this title. Private street design and construction shall comply with the
requirements of the subdivision ordinance.
7. Residential Infill Planned Developments: Lots within the city that are located within areas
already largely developed (at least 80 percent of the land within 300 feet of the exterior
boundaries of the subject lot) and to which municipal fire, police, sewer, water and school
services are already available may qualify for infill development. In reviewing infill planned
development, the planning and zoning commission may allow exceptions to subsections C1
through C6 of this section as follows:
a. The planning and zoning commission may allow up to a twenty percent (20%) increase in the
density allowed in the zoning district as an infill incentive.
b. The applicant shall submit documentation that the site qualifies as an infill site with the
conditional use application. Verification of infill may be in the form of recent aerial
photographs. In addition, the developer shall provide documentation regarding the availability
of the following services: 1) water; 2) sewer; 3) fire coverage; and 4) public schools.
8. Residential Uses: A variety of housing types or residential uses may be included in planned
developments, including attached units (duplexes, townhomes), detached units (patio homes),
single-family units and multiple-family units (triplexes, 4-plexes, 6-plexes, etc.) regardless of the
zoning classification of the district; provided, that the overall density of the zone is maintained.
This applies only to planned residential developments.
D. Application Procedure:
1. Stages Of Submittal: A conditional use application for a planned development may be submitted
in one or two (2) stages:
a. As a detailed conditional use application; or
b. Any planning and zoning commission level conditional use application may be submitted and
processed as a concept plan. The applicant must specify on the application form that concept
approval is being requested. A concept approval is a statement by the city that a general
development plan, including the general arrangement of uses, density, location of major
streets, open spaces, utilities, etc., is acceptable. A concept review allows the applicant to
obtain approval of a general development plan without incurring the expense of preparing
detailed building plans until after the concept approval. It provides the developer and the city
with guidelines for the design of each phase of a project. Supporting information will be
required for concept applications as specified by the zoning administrator/building director.
2. Phases Require Approval: Each phase of a concept approval requires detailed conditional use
approval through a new application, fee and public hearing. Submittal requirements for detailed
conditional use applications are the same as for standard conditional use applications that are
processed and reviewed in one step.
3. Public Hearing: The concept and detailed conditional use applications are both subject to the
public hearing requirements of section 11-3-6 of this title and the conditional use requirements of
this section and section 11-6A-4 of this article.
4. Concurrent Review Of Other Applications May Be Required: In cases where subdivision platting
is being proposed or would be required, concurrent review of the conditional use and subdivision
plat is required when the zoning administrator/building director determines that regulations of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 409/528
subdivision ordinance, including, but not limited to, private streets, apply to the design of the
proposed development.
E. Staff Review Procedure; Extended Period: The zoning administrator/building director may extend
the review/processing period for large planned development applications to a maximum of sixty six
(66) days from the cutoff date prior to which the application was submitted. This extended review
period is to allow for adequate staff research and analysis, agency review and comment,
coordination with other city departments, and coordination with the applicant. Planned
development applications for which additional review time is required shall be subject to the
following procedures:
1. A summary of the development proposal shall be presented to the city council as an information
item during a scheduled precouncil meeting prior to the submittal of the staff report to the
planning and zoning commission.
2. Recommended conditions of approval submitted to the planning and zoning commission and
made available to the public shall not be altered by staff or any other party prior to the public
hearing. The planning and zoning commission may alter or modify conditions of approval.
F. Developer Benefits: Planned developments are intended to provide certain benefits to the public
and to the developer. The installation of public improvements (streets, water, sewer, streetlights,
etc.) ensure a public benefit. To provide the developer with an incentive to utilize the planned
development process, the following allowances may be incorporated into a planned development
proposal:
1. A variety of housing types may be included in the project, including attached units, detached
units, single-family units and multiple-family units.
2. The minimum lot size of the zoning district may be reduced within the density limits of the
district.
3. Planned developments may use private streets and service drives that are designed and
constructed to the standards of the zoning and subdivision ordinances.
4. Setbacks for buildings within the interior of the project may be less than required in the zoning
district.
5. The conditions of approval applied to a large planned development concept plan shall be
applied consistently to each subsequent phase, unless otherwise agreed to by both the applicant
and the Planning and Zoning Commission.
6. Uses that are not allowed within the zoning district may be allowed as part of the planned
development, subject to the twenty percent (20%) exception requirements of subsection B of this
section.
7. Buildings may be clustered to preserve river areas and other environmentally sensitive areas as
open space. (2003 Code § 11-06-05)
11-6A-6: OTHER CONDITIONAL USE APPROVALS:
There are certain conditional uses that require consideration of additional approval criteria unique to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 410/528
the specific application. In reviewing such applications, the Planning and Zoning Commission must
consider the standards of approval set forth for each conditional use described below in addition to the
general criteria and findings set forth for conditional use permits in subsection 11-6A-4M of this article.
An application and fee are required for each request in accordance with sections 11-3-2 and 11-3-3 of
this title. (Ord. 2164, 12-5-2017)
A. Agriculture: The tilling of soil, aquaculture, raising crops, livestock, farming, dairying and animal
husbandry, including all uses customarily accessory and incidental thereto; but excluding hogs,
slaughterhouses, fertilizer works, boneyards and commercial feedlots. The following standards
shall apply to agricultural uses:
1. Stables may board horses commercially.
2. Lot size requirements for maintaining animals shall be a minimum of one acre of pasture area,
excluding all structures, except for barns and stables, with an overall animal density not to
exceed:
a. Two (2) horses per acre; or
b. Two (2) cows per acre; or (2003 Code § 11-06-06)
c. Four (4) sheep per acre; or (2003 Code § 11-06-06; amd. 2012 Code)
d. An equivalent animal density as approved by the Zoning Administrator/Building Director.
3. Buildings and corrals (not perimeter fencing) housing such animals shall not be less than thirty
feet (30') from all property lines and at least fifty feet (50') from all residential structures, and
must meet all requirements of the appropriate health authority.
4. Provide a viable method for frequent (twice monthly) disposal of manure that will prevent
obnoxious odors and the accumulation of flies from intruding onto adjacent properties. (2003
Code § 11-06-06)
B. Childcare And Adult Daycare Requirements:
1. Classifications:
a. Family childcare (1 through 7 children, inclusive of own children):
(1) Permitted in R1, R2, R2T, R3, R3A, RA and C1 Zones. May also be permitted in A, C2 and
C3 Zones with an approved conditional use permit.
(2) Building, Health and Safety, and Fire Code requirements must be met.
(3) Home based business permit is required.
b. Group childcare (8 through 12 children, inclusive of own children):
(1) Permitted in R1, R2, R2T, R3, R3A, RA and C1 Zones. May also be permitted in A, C2 and
C3 Zones with an approved conditional use permit.
(2) Building, Health and Safety, and Fire Code requirements must be met.
(3) Conditional use permit is required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 411/528
c. Childcare center (13 or more children):
(1) Permitted in R2, R2T, R3, R3A, RA and Commercial Zones. May also be permitted in A,
M1 and M2 Zones with an approved conditional use permit.
(2) Building, Health and Safety, and Fire Code requirements must be met.
(3) Conditional use permit is required.
2. Building Requirements: Childcare facilities in an inhabited home must comply with applicable
Building Codes and Fire Codes. Childcare facilities in an inhabited home must obtain a childcare
permit. A group childcare facility for eight (8) to twelve (12) children with no more than five (5)
children under two and one-half (21/2) years of age and which provides care for less than twenty
four (24) hours at a time, must meet the requirements of education occupancies (E) pursuant to
the International Building and Fire Codes as adopted by the City.
3. Exits:
a. The required exits must be located to provide an unobstructed path outside the building to a
public way or area of refuge. Exit doors must be able to be opened from the inside without the
use of a key and without any special knowledge or effort.
b. There must be at least two (2) exits (travel distance between not to exceed 75 feet) located a
distance apart, not less than one-half (1/2) the diagonal dimension of the building or portion
used for childcare.
(1) Exception: In buildings with automatic fire sprinkler systems, the distance may be
increased to one hundred ten feet (110').
c. Required exits shall not be less than thirty two inches (32") of clear exit width and not less
than six feet, eight inches (6'8") in height.
(1) Exception: Sliding patio doors will be accepted as a required second exit in "family and
group childcare facilities" only.
d. Two (2) exits are required from basements and upper floors. The occupancy load is
determined by the ratio of one occupant per thirty five (35) square feet of floor space. Egress
windows or a second exit door are required from sleeping rooms within a childcare facility. An
egress window may not be more than forty four inches (44") off the finished floor to the top of
windowsill and must have a minimum of 5.7 square inches of operational opening. Window
wells must have a minimum of nine (9) square feet of clear opening and not more than forty
four inches (44") in depth.
4. Accessibility: All new childcare facilities will comply with the adopted version of ANSI A117.1 as
referenced in the building codes (ADA Specification Manual).
5. Existing Building Modifications: Existing buildings that are changing use to accommodate a
childcare facility are subject to the same requirements as new construction.
6. Parking: Sufficient and safe parking and unloading zones must be available to accommodate the
proposed childcare facility.
7. General Childcare Requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 412/528
a. Provide a minimum on site outdoor play area of one hundred (100) square feet per child. This
area requirement may be waived or modified if appropriate open space with connecting public
sidewalks or paths are located near the facility and that open space can be used by the
children as a play area; or the program of the facility is such that the size of a group of children
using the play area at any one time conforms to the one hundred (100) square feet per child
criteria. This criteria may also be met by safely transporting students to an approved outdoor
play area.
b. Provide a minimum of thirty five (35) square feet of indoor gross play area per child.
c. Secure and maintain a childcare license from the State (for childcare givers with 8 or more
children).
d. Comply with the regulations where applicable by law or jurisdiction of the City Building and
Fire Department, and the County health inspector.
e. Provide as a minimum, one off street parking space per employee.
f. Provide for an on-site child pick up area if located on a collector or arterial street, designed to
prevent vehicles from backing onto the roadway (backing into an alley is permissible).
g. The lot size shall be adequate for parking, child pick up area, play area, screening and
setbacks.
h. An application fee set by the City Council and amended from time to time by resolution, shall
be paid with the submittal of an application.
8. Standards: The Zoning Administrator/building official may also require the following standards to
protect adjacent properties from adverse impacts or to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the children:
a. Fencing or landscape screening of the facility to protect adjacent properties from activities of
the facility, or to protect the children from adverse activities such as traffic on arterial or
collector streets, at intersections or to screen adjacent properties; or
b. Additional setbacks to play areas from property line to protect adjacent properties or to protect
children from busy streets, irrigation ditches, animal pastures and other similar conflicts; or
c. Any other conditions deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator/building official to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the children, or to protect adjacent property owners from
adverse impacts. (Ord. 2164, 12-5-2017)
9. Adult Daycare Standards: Adult daycare has different use characteristics from other allowed
uses and therefor requires additional standards to be determined by the Zoning
Administrator/building official:
a. There shall be adequate access for physically handicapped patrons of the facility.
b. If located on an arterial or collector street, provide for an on site patron pick up area designed
to prevent vehicles from backing onto street (backing into alley is permissible).
c. The use shall meet the occupancy requirements of the city building and fire departments.
d. All applicable licenses must be obtained from the city or the state.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 413/528
e. An application fee set by the city council and amended from time to time by resolution, shall
be paid with the submittal of an application.
C. Drive-Up Windows: No drive-up window establishment shall be permitted unless the planning and
zoning commission finds that the design and operation of the establishment is substantially in
compliance with the following requirements and conditions that shall be in addition to those
required in section 11-6A-4 of this article:
1. The location of the establishment shall not cause an increase of commercial traffic in nearby
residential neighborhoods, increase general traffic congestion where serious congestion
problems already exist, or cause other significant adverse impacts on public or private property
in the vicinity of the site. The advice of the appropriate transportation authority shall be solicited
for the purpose of evaluating existing and projected levels of service and the effects of projected
turning movements on highway safety; and
2. The internal circulation on the site provides for pedestrians to walk from parking lots to the lobby
entrances without traversing the waiting lanes for the drive-up window; and
3. The waiting lanes be of sufficient length to provide for anticipated average monthly peak
volumes; and
4. The design, signage or operational characteristics of the establishment prevent or discourage
vehicles from waiting for service on public sidewalks or streets; and
5. Drive-in waiting lanes be designed so that curbs, gates or other devices do not prevent a vehicle
from leaving a waiting lane; and
6. All lights and other illuminated materials shall be designed, positioned, shielded, directed and
located to prevent glare from falling on adjoining properties. Screening of lights may be required
as a secondary measure of mitigation. Illumination levels shall not exceed two (2) foot-candles
as measured one foot (1') above the ground at property lines shared with residentially zoned or
used parcels; and
7. The drive-up window service does not constitute the entire establishment. This finding may be
waived upon showing that the public interest would be better served if the drive-up window
service does constitute the entire establishment; and
8. The design, operation and sign characteristics of the project will attempt to minimize air pollution
and wasteful consumption of fuel. Required mitigation measures include, but are not limited to:
a. Prohibiting all parking spaces that are in addition to the minimum number of parking spaces
required by this title; and
b. Retention of existing desirable trees for reasons of species, location, health, age or other
reason as determined and recommended by the city engineer; and
c. Maximum placement of landscaped areas and trees; and
9. Landscaping shall screen drive-up aisles from the public right of way and shall be used to
minimize the visual impact of vehicular lights, reader board signs and directional signs; and
10. Drive-through lanes shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from adjacent residentially zoned or
used property. This buffer shall include both coniferous trees and sound abatement walls; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 414/528
11. Any drive-up window establishment that is within three hundred feet (300') of a residential use
or zone, as measured along the shortest distance between the nearest residential property line
and any part of the drive-up portion of the land use, shall not be permitted to utilize outdoor order
speakers; use of a handheld phone or an order window shall be required; and
12. In accordance with section 11-6A-4 of this article, the planning and zoning commission has the
authority to limit the hours of operation, and may impose such restrictions on drive-up window
establishments.
D. Adult Bookstore, Adult Motion Picture Theater, Adult Performance Business Or Adult Entertainment
Establishment:
1. Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of
the citizens and visitors of the city, to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of
employees and patrons of adult businesses and adult establishments, and to protect children
from being inadvertently exposed to adult material.
2. Conditions: In order to approve a conditional use permit for such uses, the planning and zoning
commission must determine that the following conditions are met:
a. Such business shall not be located within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of a school,
preschool, daycare facility, public park, playground or other institution, either public or private,
where children under the age of eighteen (18) frequent or are taught, instructed or trained.
Distance shall be measured in a straight line from the property line of the school or park to the
property line of the proposed adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, or adult
performance business; and
b. Such business shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of a church. Distance shall
be measured as in subsection D2a of this section; and
c. Such business shall not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any other adult
bookstore, adult motion picture theater or adult performance business. Distance shall be
measured as in subsection D2a of this section; and
d. Such business shall not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any store, bar, tavern
or business that sells, vends, serves, dispenses or distributes any alcoholic beverages,
including, but not limited to, beer, wine and liquor; and
e. Such business shall not be located on a lot or parcel that is adjacent or contiguous to
residential zones, even if separated by an alley. This condition may be waived; provided, that
sixty six and two-thirds percent (662/3%) of the residentially zoned property owners and
residents within five hundred feet (500') of the proposed use sign a petition approving such a
business; and
f. Distance standards shall apply regardless of the political jurisdiction in which schools, parks or
churches, or other adult businesses, are located; and
g. The sign package and exterior building design must be submitted with the conditional use
application for review by the planning and zoning commission. Advertisements, displays or
other promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public
from the exterior of the building; and
h. Lobby and entrance areas should be designed so as to minimize obstruction of sidewalks
during operating hours and shall be oriented and consistent with other commercial activities in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 415/528
the area; and
i. All building openings, entries, windows and the like shall be located, covered or screened in
such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior from any public or semipublic area; and
j. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used for such businesses that can be discerned
by the public outside the building; and
k. The disposal of garbage and trash containing sexually explicit materials must be disposed of
in a manner that prevents minors from having access to the material; and
l. The planning and zoning commission may impose such other conditions and limitations as
may be deemed necessary to carry out the purpose of this subsection and to preserve and
protect the general public health, safety and welfare.
3. Applicability Of Standards: For purposes of this subsection, the above conditions and standards
shall be applicable in the following circumstances:
a. The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business.
b. The conversion of an existing business to any of the adult businesses regulated herein.
c. The addition or expansion of any business to include any of the adult businesses regulated
herein.
d. The relocation of any such business.
4. School Defined: For purposes of this subsection, a "school" shall be considered as an institution
of learning for minors, whether public or private, that offers instruction in those courses of study
required by the state or that is maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of
education. This definition includes a kindergarten, elementary, junior high or senior high school,
or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the state department of education,
but does not include a vocational or professional institution or institution of higher education such
as a community or junior college, college or university.
5. Construction: These provisions shall not be construed as permitting any use or act that is
otherwise prohibited or made punishable by law.
E. Lot Area Reduction In R2 District (Combined Residential): Within the R2 district, the lot area for
each dwelling unit contained in a building or buildings on a "lot of record", as defined in section 11-
1-3 of this title, may be reduced to not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet if authorized by
a conditional use permit and the following conditions and restrictions are met and complied with:
1. All other applicable zoning and use regulations have been met; and
2. The applicant must conclusively prove that the lot cannot feasibly be developed without
reduction in lot area; and
3. The improvements upon the lot would not be out of character with the adjoining and surrounding
improvements; and
4. Sufficient open space and amenities have been provided to create a desirable living unit. (2003
Code § 11-06-06)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 416/528
F. Exceptions To Parking Requirements: Parking space requirements for a particular use as
established by this title, may be reduced upon application for conditional use approval in
accordance with this title. Joint or mixed use of off street parking facilities may be approved by a
conditional use permit submitted in accordance with this title. (2003 Code § 11-06-06; amd. 2012
Code)
G. Conversion Of Nonconforming Use: The conversion of a nonconforming use to any use other than
an allowed use is prohibited, except upon application and issuance of a conditional use permit in
accordance with the provisions of section 11-6A-4 of this article; provided, however, that in addition
to the requirements of section 11-6A-4 of this article, such conditional use permit will not be
granted unless the planning and zoning commission makes all of the following findings of fact:
(2003 Code § 11-06-06; amd. Ord. 2085, 5-5-2009, eff. 5-5-2009)
1. The proposed conversion is compatible with the comprehensive plan, the purposes of this title
and with surrounding land uses; and
2. Such proposed conversion will not place an undue burden on existing transportation and service
facilities in the vicinity of the application; and
3. Such proposed conversion will be in compliance with all requirements and provisions of this
code; and
4. The continuation of a nonconforming use without the benefit of such conversion would likely
result in a deterioration of the neighborhood. (2003 Code § 11-06-06)
H. Restoration Of Nonconforming Use: Any nonconforming building or mobile home destroyed by fire
or other calamity to an extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of the appraised value, where such
destruction was not intentionally caused by the owner or an agent of the owner of such property,
may rebuild or restore such building or mobile home to its former use. Such rebuilding or
restoration shall be substantially the same as the former building. (Ord. 2085, 5-5-2009, eff. 5-5-
2009)
I. Expansion Of Conditional Uses And Legal Nonconforming Uses:
1. Findings Required: Expansions to conditional uses or legal nonconforming uses that exceed
twenty percent (20%) of the existing facility (based on square footage or other dimensional
measure) require conditional use approval by the planning and zoning commission. Approval of
such requests shall be based upon the following findings:
a. The proposed conversion, restoration, enlargement or expansion will not alter the zoning
classification of the nonconforming use; and
b. The proposed conversion, restoration, enlargement or expansion conforms to all existing
requirements of this code; and
c. The proposed conversion, restoration, enlargement or expansion will not place an undue
burden on existing transportation and service facilities in the vicinity; and
d. The proposed enlargement or expansion is not inimical to the best interest of the surrounding
neighborhood.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 417/528
2. Illegal Expansion; Loss Of Status: Any illegal expansion of a nonconforming use will result in the
loss of the legal nonconforming use status of that project.
J. General Height Exceptions: Conditional use approval from the planning and zoning commission is
required to exceed the height limits set forth in this title. The planning and zoning commission's
decision on height exceptions shall be based upon the criteria set forth in section 11-6A-4M of this
article.
K. Public Services; Height Exception: Public service poles, towers or similar installations of a height of
seventy feet (70') or greater must be approved by conditional use permit. The planning and zoning
commission must make the findings required by section 11-6A-4M of this article and the following
additional findings. The pole or tower locations and heights:
1. Do not interfere with airport height restrictions; and
2. Minimize disturbance to views from established residential areas; and
3. Minimize disturbance to or interference with view of city, state, or federally registered historic
structures; and
4. Do not obstruct clear vision triangles or otherwise threaten motorist or pedestrian safety; and
5. Minimize conflict with existing uses; and
6. Are within route corridors already established for use by rail, automobile traffic arterials or
electrical transmission; and
7. Are within route corridors that provide for a satisfactory level of energy efficient transmission of
the product (electrical energy or other signals); or
8. Are the best available alternative placements and heights, even though they do not comply
perfectly with all the above findings.
L. Professional, Administrative And Business Offices In M1 And M2 Districts: Professional,
administrative and business offices are conditional uses in the M1 and M2 districts and are subject
to the following criteria as well as those in section 11-6A-4M of this article:
1. Amenities (that may include, but are not limited to, visual screening, orientation and placement
of buildings, parking and access areas) are provided for the future office to buffer the impact of
any conflicting land uses; and
2. The lot or parcel occupied by such offices abuts a public right of way that separates such lot or
parcel from residential or office zones or uses; or
3. Where the use of the subject property for such offices will not encroach upon or conflict with
existing industrial development or that which may be reasonably expected to develop.
M. Composting Facility: Any composting facility shall submit a site and operational plan with their
application for a conditional use permit. That plan shall demonstrate compliance with the following
requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 418/528
1. Composting piles or windrows shall be constructed that are no larger than can be managed in a
nuisance free manner by the proposed equipment and composting technology;
2. Additional area shall be provided at no less than fifteen percent (15%) of size of the active
composting pile or windrow area for staging, curing and storage;
3. A minimum fifty foot (50') setback shall be maintained from the property boundary or public right
of way to any active processing area of the facility, including any area used for storage, active
composting and curing;
4. A minimum two hundred foot (200') buffer zone between the active composting pile or windrow
and any existing adjacent residentially zoned or occupied property shall be maintained;
5. Compliance with all applicable state or federal laws, regulations or standards pertaining to water
quality, air quality and solid waste management shall be required;
6. No composting facility shall be allowed in a floodplain;
7. Surface slope of one to five percent (5%) grade shall be required for any composting facility;
8. Adequate fencing, barriers or screening shall be required for all composting facilities;
9. Public access shall be limited to those times when an attendant is on duty and during limited
operating hours;
10. Adequate space shall be provided between the piles or windrows to allow access to vehicles,
including firefighting equipment;
11. Noncompostable residues shall be disposed or processed at a permitted solid waste disposal
facility in accordance with local, state and federal laws, regulations and standards;
12. All organic materials received at the composting facility shall be removed from any containers
unless the containers are of a biodegradable type in which case the container shall be opened
before composting;
13. A permanent sign must be posted and maintained at the composting facility showing the nature
of the project, facility name, address and telephone number of operator, operating hours,
materials that may be received by the facility, and the phrase, "No Dumping Of Garbage, Trash
Or Rubbish Allowed". (2003 Code § 11-06-06)
11-6A-7: GENERAL EXCEPTIONS:
The planning and zoning commission may grant the following general exceptions to the requirements
of this title, subject to the procedures, provisions and findings of section 11-6A-4 of this article:
A. When a lot or parcel has one-half (1/2) or less of its area in a district more restrictive than the district
that includes the remainder, the planning and zoning commission may permit the regulation of the
less restrictive district to be applied to the entire lot or parcel. More than one property owner may
combine lots or parcels as a planned development and receive consideration under this
subsection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 419/528
B. Where a lot located in an R1 or R2 district has a lot line that abuts property zoned for multiplefamily,
commercial or industrial uses, the planning and zoning commission may permit, by
conditional use permit pursuant to subsection 11-6A-4M of this article, up to seventy five feet (75')
of adjoining portion of such lot to be used for any use permitted in the multiple-family R3 district.
(2003 Code § 11-06-07)
11-6A-8: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The planning and zoning commission shall review all requests for special exceptions and make
recommendations to the city council.
A. Justification: Finding that there are certain uses that because of their normal nature or design are
not commonly permitted in a given district, but that with special consideration by the applicant to
the standards of the area, impact, design and existing uses, the said use may benefit the
immediate community, the city council may approve, with conditions as outlined below, any use as
requested by an applicant as a conditional use under the special exceptions provision.
B. Intent: It is the intent of this section to promote infilling of built areas of the community with minimal
community impact. In all districts, it is intended to allow uses of equal or lessor impact than those
permitted uses in the district.
C. Procedure For Filing: Any person may apply for a special exception under this section upon
submittal of an application on a form prescribed by the planning and zoning commission and
accompanied by a filing fee as specified herein. All answers to questions as prescribed in the form
shall be used to validate the application by the zoning administrator/building director. The zoning
administrator/building director shall reject any application that does not fully contain the following:
1. Complete detailed description of the proposed use, including, but not limited to, the following:
hours of operation, number of employees, expected number of daily customers, anticipated
number of needed parking spaces, noise to be generated, signs and other impacts, where
applicable; and
2. All applications shall be accompanied by appropriate architectural and site development plans to
scale that shall show building location, landscaping, prominent existing trees, ground treatment,
fences, off street parking and circulation, location and size of adjacent streets, north arrow and
property lines, drawings of the major exterior elevations showing exterior building treatment,
existing grade and proposed new grades; and
3. All applications shall contain a detailed statement explaining how and why the proposed use is
appropriate to the site and neighborhood and why such use will not adversely impact the site
and neighborhood; and
4. All applications shall contain a written statement, justified with submitted drawings, that the
applicant does not require or request a variance in bulk, setback or sign regulations from those
required in the existing zoning district of the proposed location.
D. Action By Planning And Zoning Commission:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 420/528
1. At every special exception hearing before the planning and zoning commission, the commission
shall hear all persons interested in the subject matter then pending before it. Not later than ten
(10) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the commission shall file with the city clerk a
written report of the proceedings before and by the planning and zoning commission at each
hearing and its recommendations to the city council. Any recommendation of the commission
relating to a special exception shall be in writing and must include in its recommendation all of
the following findings of fact, based upon the evidence presented, and supporting the purposes
and objectives of said special exception:
a. This zoning title does not anticipate that such a use could be a desirable use in the zone
under special circumstances; and
b. The use will produce an equal or reduced impact upon the site or neighborhood than would an
allowed use; and
c. The location of the proposed use is compatible to other land uses in the general neighborhood
area and does not place an undue burden on existing transportation and service facilities in
the vicinity; and
d. The site is of sufficient size to accommodate the proposed use and all yards, open spaces,
walls and fences, parking, loading, landscaping and such other features as are required by
this title; and
e. The site is appropriate for such proposed use and that proper zoning for the proposed use is
not available in the general neighborhood; and
f. Natural features and existing trees are appropriately preserved and integrated with the project
and that the finished grading, storm drainage and landscaping are consistent with the
established or contemplated character of the neighborhood; and
g. Access to the property and internal vehicular circulation thereon are safe and convenient for
pedestrians, cyclists, automobiles and service vehicles and are designed such as to have
minimal impact upon the surrounding neighborhood and traffic operations; and
h. The approval, denial or modification of the special exception does not provide precedent for
any other parcel in the city.
2. The planning and zoning commission must list, as part of its report to the city council, those
"special circumstances" that are not anticipated by this title.
3. The planning and zoning commission may make recommendations as to specific conditions for
approval that would allow establishment of the proposed use in a compatible manner with the
neighborhood. Such conditions shall be imposed in accordance with the provisions of subsection
11-6A-4N of this article. (2003 Code § 11-06-08)
11-6A-9: SIGN VARIANCES:
A sign variance is a request to vary from the standard for background area, height, illumination,
number of signs, location, projection and clearance, or any other standard prescribed in the sign code,
if applicable, except that sign variances may not be applied to signs that are prohibited. In accordance
with the public hearing requirements of this title, the planning and zoning commission shall have the
authority to deny, approve, or approve with modifications, a sign variance. All of the following findings
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 421/528
of fact shall be considered and clearly established by the planning and zoning commission when
granting a sign variance in whole or in part:
A. No variance shall be granted unless it can be shown that there are special circumstances
applicable to the property involving the size, shape, topography, location or surroundings that do
not apply generally to other properties in the same zoning district that are not the result of
voluntary actions of the applicant; and
B. The granting of such sign variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege that is inconsistent
with the limitations upon other property in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated;
and
C. Nonconforming signs in the vicinity surrounding the subject site may not be used to set the
standard for or be compared with applications for new signs, and shall not be used as justification
for a hardship or special circumstance; and
D. The sign variance is the minimum necessary to alleviate the identified hardship or exceptional
circumstance; and
E. The approval, denial or modification of any sign variance shall not provide precedent for any other
sign variance in the city; and
F. The granting of the sign variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious
to the properties or improvements in the vicinity. (2003 Code § 11-06-10)
11-6A-10: VARIANCES TO ZONING TITLE:
A. Variance Defined: A "variance" is a modification of the requirements of this title as to lot size, lot
coverage, lot width, street frontage, setback requirements, parking requirements, loading
requirements, or other provisions of this title affecting the size or shape of a structure or the
placement of the structure upon lots, or the size of lots. A variance shall not be considered a right
or special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant upon a showing of undue hardship
because of characteristics of the site, or unique circumstances relating to the intended use, and
that the variance is not in conflict with the public interest.
B. Application Required: Every person desiring a variance from the provisions of this title shall submit
an application upon a form prescribed by the zoning administrator/building director, and pay a fee
in accordance with the current fee schedule.
C. Public Hearing; Notice: Prior to granting a variance, notice and an opportunity to be heard shall be
provided to property owners, purchasers of record and residents within the land being considered
and adjoining the parcel under consideration. All requests for variance shall be heard and decided
by the planning and zoning commission in a public hearing scheduled and advertised in
accordance with section 11-3-6 of this title, except that mailed notice be provided to the applicant
and to each property owner, purchaser of record or resident within the land being considered and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 422/528
adjoining the parcel under consideration (including those properties across a street, alley, canal or
other right of way) advising them of the time and place of the hearing.
D. Action By Commission: The planning and zoning commission must approve, approve conditionally,
deny or modify the variance request. In acting upon such variance, the planning and zoning
commission shall review the findings of staff and shall grant a variance upon finding that the
following are true:
1. The granting of the variance will not be in conflict with the spirit and intent of the comprehensive
general plan for the city, and will not effect a change in zoning;
2. There is either a hardship associated with the property itself or an exceptional circumstance
relating to the intended use of the property that is not generally applicable to property or
permitted uses in the district;
3. The granting of such relief will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or
welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements of other property owners, or the quiet
enjoyment of such property or improvement.
E. Conditions Of Granting Variance: The planning and zoning commission may grant a variance as
part of a conditional use application without requiring a separate application and hearing, as long
as the notice requirements of subsection C of this section are met and the findings in subsection D
of this section are made.
F. Effective Date Of Approval: Approval of any variance by the planning and zoning commission shall
become final after a lapse of ten (10) calendar days from the date of the decision to allow for the
filing of appeals in accordance with subsection 11-3-7B of this title.
G. Waiver Of Appeal Period: The applicant may request a waiver of the ten (10) day appeal period for
an approved variance. Such request must be filed in writing and shall be accompanied by the
signatures of all adjacent property owners indicating they do not object to the waiver request. The
zoning administrator/building director shall review all pertinent information and issue a decision on
the request within two (2) working days from the date upon which the request was filed. The zoning
administrator/building director cannot waive the appeal period for any application to which a written
or verbal protest was submitted.
H. Resubmittal Of Application Upon Denial: No application for a variance that has been denied by the
planning and zoning commission (or by the city council on appeal) shall be resubmitted in either
the same or substantially the same form in less than one year from the date of final action.
I. Term Of Variance: The term of a variance approval shall not exceed eighteen (18) months. Within
this period, the holder of a variance must initiate construction of the project.
J. Extension Of Variance Approval: The holder of a valid variance approval may submit a written
request for a one year extension of the variance approval for consideration by the planning and
zoning commission. A maximum of three (3) such extensions may be granted. (2003 Code § 11-
06-11)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 423/528
K. Appeal Of Variance Decisions: The decision of the planning and zoning commission on variance
requests may be appealed to the city council in accordance with subsection 11-3-7B of this title. A
letter explaining the basis of the appeal and a fee as established in the current fee schedule must
be submitted to the building director within the ten (10) day appeal period. (2003 Code § 11-06-11;
amd. 2012 Code)
11-6A-11: APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS:
A. General Authority: The planning and zoning commission shall hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
zoning administrator/building director in the interpretation or enforcement of this title. In exercising
the above powers, the planning and zoning commission may, in conformity with the provisions of
this title, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as
it considers warranted by the evidence before it and to that end shall have all the powers of the
officer from whom the appeal is taken.
B. Initiation Of Application: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the zoning administrator/building
director may file an appeal. Such appeal shall be made within ten (10) calendar days from such
decision. If the tenth day falls on a weekend or holiday, the appeal may be filed on the next
workday by five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
C. Application And Fee: Every person wanting to appeal an administrative decision shall file a notice
of appeal stating the grounds for the appeal and fee with the zoning administrator/building director
in accordance with current fee schedule.
D. Action By Zoning Administrator/Building Director: The zoning administrator/building director shall
review all appeal applications for compliance with the requirements of this section. Upon
acceptance of application for appeal, the zoning administrator/building director shall transmit to the
planning and zoning commission the record of the subject hearing. The filing of an appeal stays
further action (subdivision, conditional use, etc.), on the request that has been appealed, unless
the zoning administrator/building director determines that a stay would cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order
that may be granted by the planning and zoning commission upon application or notice to the
zoning administrator/building director, and upon notice to the chairperson of the commission or by
a court of record.
E. Hearings; Publication And Notice: The planning and zoning commission shall hear the appeal at the
public hearing following the cutoff date prior to which the appeal was submitted. Notice for the
public hearing shall be as set forth in section 11-3-6 of this title.
F. Action By Commission: The planning and zoning commission shall thereafter, upon due cause
being shown, confirm wholly or partly, modify or reverse the decision from which appeal is made,
and, not later than ten (10) days after the conclusion of such hearing, shall file with the city clerk a
written report stating the action taken at such hearing. (2003 Code § 11-06-12)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 424/528
ARTICLE B. CITY COUNCIL
11-6B-1: GENERAL AUTHORITY:
The city council shall approve, deny or modify any application to amend this title, to change the
boundary of a zoning district, to amend the comprehensive plan, to annex property into the corporate
limits, or to establish a use as a special exception or special use to this title. Prior to taking action on
any such application, the city council shall receive a written recommendation from the planning and
zoning commission. The city council shall allow public comment at the council meeting and may hold a
formal public hearing, but the city council shall not be required to advertise for a public hearing. (2003
Code § 11-08-01)
11-6B-2: ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL:
At its next regular meeting after the planning and zoning commission has filed its recommendations
with the city clerk, the city council shall set the date, time and place of hearing the recommendation of
the planning and zoning commission. Following the hearing, the city council may either approve,
disapprove or modify the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. The city council is
enjoined from granting less restrictive regulations, standards or land use classifications than those
applied for and as publicized prior to the public hearing held by the planning and zoning commission.
(2003 Code § 11-08-02)
11-6B-3: RESUBMITTAL OF APPLICATION UPON DENIAL:
No application that has been denied by the city council or withdrawn by the applicant shall be
resubmitted in either the same or substantially the same form or with reference to substantially the
same premises or the same purpose in less than one year from the date of final action thereon. (2003
Code § 11-08-03)
11-6B-4: CITY COUNCIL ACTION; AMENDMENT AND RECLASSIFICATION:
The city council is prohibited from amending, supplementing, changing, modifying or repealing any
provisions of this title or the comprehensive plan until the substance thereof has first been referred to
and reported upon by the planning and zoning commission.
A. Amendment And Reclassification: The power to amend this title may be amended whenever the
city council deems that amendment is required for the public convenience or necessity, or for the
general welfare. Any amendment shall be enacted pursuant to this section, and for purposes of
this section, includes any measure to change district boundaries, establish or disestablish districts,
to change district regulations, to add, repeal or amend district regulations, and to add, repeal or
amend any other provisions of this section, or the whole of this title.
B. Ordinance Required: In the event the city council shall have approved or modified the
recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the city council shall cause to be
prepared the appropriate ordinance of amendment. However, no ordinance amending the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 425/528
"Blackfoot city zoning ordinance" shall become effective until a public hearing has been held for
which fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in the
official newspaper of the city. (2003 Code § 11-08-04)
11-6B-5: ANNEXATION:
Requests for annexation of property into the city must be heard by the city council after receiving
recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, and must meet one or more of the
requirements as outlined in Idaho Code, as amended. (2003 Code § 11-08-05)
11-6B-6: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT:
The city council, prior to adoption, amendment or repeal of the comprehensive plan, shall conduct at
least one public hearing using the same notice and hearing procedures as the planning and zoning
commission. The city council shall not hold a public hearing, give notice of a proposed hearing, nor
take action upon the plan, amendments or repeal until recommendations have been received from the
planning and zoning commission. Following the hearing of the city council, if the council makes a
material change in the plan, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the city council adopts
the plan. For purposes of this section, a "material change" shall mean any modification of a proposed
comprehensive plan amendment which, in the opinion of the city council, is of such importance that
the public interest will be better served by additional notice and public hearing. (2003 Code § 11-08-
06)
11-6B-7: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
A. Findings: At the hearing before the city council, the city council shall hear all persons interested in
the special exception then pending before it. The city council shall review the findings and
recommendations of the planning and zoning commission. The city council may approve,
disapprove or modify the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission, but in so
doing must make the following findings:
1. The decision to grant or deny the application is based upon the findings of subsection 11-6A-8D
of this chapter.
2. The approval, denial or modification of the special exception does not provide precedent for any
other parcel in the city.
3. In the event the application is denied, the actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
special exception permit.
B. Council May Impose Restrictive Regulations: The city council, in amending or modifying the
recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, may impose more restrictive regulations
or standards.
C. Modification, Extension And Revocation: Upon request of the holder of a special exception, the city
council may modify or extend the term, conditions and limitations of said permit in accordance with
the limitations and requirements of subsection 11-6A-8D of this chapter. The city council may
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 426/528
revoke or modify, upon notice and hearing, a special exception for the breach or violation of any
condition or limitation of said permit.
D. Transferability: Special exceptions shall be nontransferable through assignment, sale or other
means of conveyance without written acknowledgment by the assignee, purchaser or conveyer in
writing of agreement to be bound by conditions that were set forth in the approval of the application
pursuant to this section. Special exceptions shall not be considered as establishing binding
precedent upon the city.
E. Term: A special exception shall become void if not utilized within eighteen (18) months of issuance,
or if the authorized use is abandoned for more than a period of six (6) months. (2003 Code § 11-
08-07)
11-6B-8: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
A. Authority: Pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6511A, development agreements hereby are
authorized.
B. Purpose: The purpose of a development agreement is to provide a vehicle for development in
areas and for uses where, in the opinion of the city council or the planning and zoning commission,
approval of a requested rezone by itself does not satisfy the requirements set forth in this title for
rezone approval; but, that use of a development agreement will assure compliance with the
required rezone findings and conclusions. Development agreements can be used after a
determination has been made that the proposed rezone by itself is not appropriate, unless the use
of a development agreement could allow development to proceed under stricter restrictions than
those imposed generally in the proposed zoning district. Nothing in this section shall be construed
as relieving the property that is subject to development agreement restrictions from further
compliance with all other permit and code requirements applicable because of the zoning
designation of the property. Restrictions imposed upon property as a result of a development
agreement are in addition to all other zoning ordinance requirements.
C. Request Or Requirement For Agreement: After an application for rezone has been received in the
planning department, a request to enter into a development agreement for that parcel may be
submitted by the rezone applicant; or, a development agreement may be required by city council at
council's rezone hearing, or may be required by city council upon recommendation from the
planning and zoning commission following the commission's rezone hearing.
D. Form Of Development Agreement Application: All applications for development agreements shall
be in a form as required by the zoning administrator/building director.
E. Process: Upon receipt of an application for development agreement, the planning director shall
work with the applicant to prepare a development agreement. The development agreement should
address the concerns for the development that have been proposed by the applicant. Such
concerns addressed may include, but shall not be limited to, density, bulk, site design, mitigation of
impacts on the surrounding neighborhood, appearance, provision of utilities or public facilities, and
restrictions on use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 427/528
F. Approval Of Development Agreement: Development agreements may be approved at the sole
discretion of the city council. The city council may, prior to approval, remand the matter to the
planning and zoning commission for consideration and recommendation. In such case, the
planning and zoning commission may recommend approval or denial and may recommend the
addition of conditions, terms, duties or obligations to the development agreement.
G. Agreement To Run With Land: The development agreement, or any modification thereto, and all
conditions, terms, duties or obligations included therein shall run with the land and shall be
considered continuing obligations of the owner, co-owners and each other person acquiring an
interest in the property. An owner, co-owner, each subsequent owner or other person acquiring an
interest in the property that is restricted by a development agreement or modification adopted
pursuant to this section, shall comply with the terms, conditions, obligations and duties contained
in the development agreement or modification.
H. Modification Of Development Agreement: Development agreements may only be modified after
public hearing by the city council. Major modifications as determined by the zoning
administrator/building director require a hearing and recommendation from the planning and
zoning commission prior to the city council hearing.
I. Termination Of Development Agreements:
1. Development agreements may be amended or terminated by the city council, after public
hearing, for failure to comply with the commitments expressed in the development agreement.
2. Upon termination of the development agreement, the city council shall revert the property to the
prior zone or in the case of an initial zone at annexation, to a zone deemed appropriate by the
city council. All uses of the property that are not consistent with the subsequently designated
zone following termination of the development agreement shall cease. The owner of the property
shall apply for a conditional use for the property if the use is conditionally allowed within the
subsequently designated zone.
J. Enforcement Of Development Agreements: Development agreements may be enforced by the city
through any means deemed to be appropriate, including, but not limited to, specific enforcement,
injunctive relief, damages or criminal penalty for violation of this section. The enforcement options
available to the city shall not be considered exclusive. (2003 Code § 11-08-08)
Chapter 7
WIRELESS TOWERS
11-7-1: FINDINGS:
The communications act of 1934, as amended by the telecommunications act of 1996 ("the act"),
grants the federal communications commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over the regulation of the
environmental effects of radio frequency (RF) emissions from telecommunications facilities and the
regulation of radio signal interference among users of the RF spectrum. The regulation of towers and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 428/528
telecommunications facilities will not have the effect of prohibiting any person from providing wireless
telecommunications services in violation of the act. (2003 Code § 11-07-01)
11-7-2: PURPOSES:
A. The general purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement, construction and modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive
wireless telecommunications marketplace in the city.
B. Specifically, the purposes of this chapter are:
1. To regulate the location of wireless telecommunications facilities in the city;
2. To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impact of towers and other
telecommunications facilities;
3. To minimize adverse visual impact of wireless telecommunications facilities through careful
design, siting, landscaping and innovative camouflaging techniques;
4. To promote and encourage shared use/collocation of towers and antenna support structures as
a primary option rather than construction of additional single use wireless telecommunications
facilities;
5. To promote and encourage utilization of technological designs that will either eliminate or reduce
the need for erection of tower structures to support antenna and telecommunications facilities;
6. To avoid potential damage to property caused by wireless telecommunications facilities by
ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained
and removed when no longer used or are determined to be structurally unsound; and
7. To ensure that wireless telecommunications facilities are compatible with surrounding land uses
to the greatest extent reasonably possible. (2003 Code § 11-07-02)
11-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACOUSTICAL ENGINEER: A professional engineer with demonstrated education, accreditation and
experience to perform and certify noise measurements.
ANTENNA: Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television communications
through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, including equipment attached to a
tower or building for the purpose of providing personal wireless services. Antennas include the
following types:
Ancillary Antenna: An antenna that is less than twelve inches (12") in its largest dimension and
that is not directly used to provide personal wireless communication services, e.g., a global
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 429/528
positioning satellite antenna (GPS).
Directional (Panel) Antenna: Receives and transmits signals in a directional pattern typically
encompassing an arc of one hundred twenty degrees (120°).
Omnidirectional (Whip) Antenna: Receives and transmits signals in a three hundred sixty degree
(360°) pattern, and that is up to fifteen feet (15') in height and up to four inches (4") in diameter.
Parabolic (Dish) Antenna: A bowl shaped device that receives and transmits signals in a specific
directional pattern.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any building or structure, other than a tower that can be used
for location of telecommunications facilities.
APPLICANT: Any person who applies for a tower development permit.
APPLICATION: The process by which the owner of a parcel of land within the city submits a request to
develop, construct, build, modify or erect a tower upon such parcel of land. Application includes all
written documentation, verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an
applicant to the city concerning such a request.
BUILDING: Any permanent structure built for the shelter or enclosure of person, animals, chattels or
property of any kind that is permanently affixed to the land and that has one or more floors and a roof.
CARRIER: A company that provides wireless services.
COLLOCATION: The use of a single support system on the ground by more than one carrier (vertical
collocation) and/or several support systems on an existing building or structure by more than one
carrier.
EIA: The Electronic Industries Association.
EQUIPMENT ENCLOSURE: A small enclosed structure, shelter, cabinet, box or vault at the base of
the support system within which are housed batteries and electrical equipment.
FAA: The federal aviation administration.
FCC: The federal communications commission.
FACADE ATTACHED ANTENNA: Any antenna directly attached or affixed to the elevation of a
building, tank, tower, or other structure.
FREESTANDING TOWER: A tower not physically attached to a building or structure. The tower is
attached to the ground by a foundation.
FULLY AUTOMATED WCF: A WCF with no on site personnel required for its daily operation.
GUYWIRE: Diagonal cables utilized to tie towers to the ground or other surfaces.
LATTICE TOWER: A support structure that consists of a network of crossed metal braces, forming a
tower that is usually triangular of square in cross section.
LICENSED CARRIER: A company authorized by the FCC.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 430/528
NONAUTOMATED WCF: A WCF with on site personnel.
NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE: A building or structure not constructed for residential purposes.
OWNER: Any person with fee title or a long term (exceeding 10 years) leasehold to any parcel of land
within the city who desires to develop, or construct, build, modify, or erect a tower upon such parcel of
land.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal
entity, private or public, whether for profit or not for profit.
PHOTOSIMULATION: Computer generated photographs, renderings combining existing subject
adjacent property conditions and improvements with proposed improvements.
PLANNING COVERAGE MAP: A map, maps, or plan on which are marked the service areas of other
WCF sites operated by the applicant. The planning coverage map shall be considered exempt from
disclosure pursuant to Idaho Code section 9-340, or as subsequently amended.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Includes all public streets and utility easements owned by or dedicated to
the city of Blackfoot, or other public entity.
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE: A building utilized exclusively for short or long term residential
purposes.
SERVICE AREA: Contained areas within which a wireless communication facility is able to transmit
clear signals, generally circular in form.
STEALTH DESIGN: Any wireless telecommunications facility that is designed to enhance compatibility
with adjacent land uses, including, but not limited to, architecturally screened roof mounted antennas,
antennas integrated into architectural elements, and towers designed to look other than like a tower,
such as light poles, power poles and trees. The term stealth does not necessarily exclude the use of
uncamouflaged lattice, guyed, or monopole tower designs.
UTILITY POLE: A telephone, electric, or cable television pole located in a street right of way.
TOWER: A self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure constructed from grade supports
telecommunications facilities. The term tower shall not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as
licensed by the FCC.
WATERWAY: A channel, natural or manmade, through which water runs.
WHIP ANTENNA: See definition of Antenna.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: Any facility that transmits and/or receives
electromagnetic signals, including antennas, microwave dishes, parabolic antennas, directional
antennas and other types of equipment for the transmission or reception of such signals, towers or
similar structures supporting the equipment, equipment buildings, shelters, cabinets, parking area, and
other accessory development. However, telecommunications facilities shall not include any satellite
earth station antenna two meters (2 m) in diameter or less that is located in an area zoned industrial or
commercial; or any satellite earth station antenna one meter (1 m) or less in diameter, regardless of
zoning category. (2003 Code § 11-07-03)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 431/528
11-7-4: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. Application Required: No person shall build, erect, use or modify a wireless telecommunications
facility (hereinafter WCF) upon any parcel of land within any zoning district unless: 1) a complete
application to do so has been filed with the building inspection department; and 2) approval in the
form of a WCF permit has been received from the appropriate body, subject to the provisions set
out in this chapter. All WCFs are prohibited from interference with city and public safety
communication systems and/or area television or radio broadcasts. Applications must be
accompanied by the appropriate fee as set by resolution of the city council.
B. Anchor Restrictions: Guywires may only be used to anchor an antenna, antenna array, or support
structure to an existing building to which the antenna, antenna array, or support structure is
attached.
C. Residential Zones: In residential zoning districts, freestanding WCFs, including towers, are
prohibited except on public school property used for school purposes. Freestanding WCFs also are
prohibited within two hundred feet (200') of any residentially zoned parcel, regardless of the
underlying zoning district on which the WCF might be located. WCFs attached to utility poles or
facade attached to nonresidential buildings are allowed by administrative staff permit, subject to
application procedures set out in this chapter and a twenty one (21) day notice and comment
period requirement, and subject to the standards set out in this chapter, including those set out in
section 11-7-18 of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing regarding WCFs placed on public
school property, the tower height in any event may not exceed the distance from the center of the
tower at ground level to the edge of the school property.
D. Nonresidential Zones: In nonresidential zones, tower WCFs are permitted by means of an
approved special WCF permit. Other WCFs are permitted subject to the provisions of this chapter.
E. Special Use Districts: Applications submitted for a WCF permit within a special use district, such as
a nationally recognized historic district or site, must be accompanied by a certificate of
appropriateness from the appropriate review board or commission of the city.
F. Exceptions:
1. The city council may approve a lease agreement or right of way use permit that allows a tower
to be placed on city owned property in any zoning district within the city limits, without special
WCF permit procedures being required, after a public hearing on the matter, if the city council
deems it to be in the best interests of the city.
2. The planning and zoning commission may approve an application for a tower in a residential
zone with a special WCF permit upon a satisfactory showing that applicant's coverage
requirements necessitate location within that zone, and that the WCF can meet or exceed
standards set out in this chapter. "Satisfactory showing" shall include certification from a
qualified engineer as to the coverage requirements and insufficiency of other zoning districts to
provide the same, and that a tower facility, rather than another WCF support system, is
necessary. The applicant shall be responsible for all costs for professional services to provide
information deemed necessary by the planning and zoning commission in order to reach its
decision. Appeal from the decision may be made to the city council, provided the request is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 432/528
submitted, in writing, to the city clerk within ten (10) days following the issuance of the decision.
(2003 Code § 11-07-04)
11-7-5: SITING AND FACILITY PRIORITIES:
Based on potential aesthetic impact and subject to other restrictions set out in this chapter, the order
of preference for approval of facility type is as follows: roof attached, facade attached, utility pole
attached and freestanding tower. WCFs shall be located in the following priority order:
A. Collocation on an existing tower, structure or building. The applicant shall have the burden of
proving that there are no feasible existing structures upon which to collocate as described below.
B. On city owned property.
C. In areas where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings and other structures provide the
greatest amount of screening.
D. On other nonresidential buildings or vacant nonresidentially zoned land.
E. In residential districts (nontower facilities only) subject to restrictions in this chapter. (2003 Code
§ 11-07-05)
11-7-6: COLLOCATION REQUIRED:
A. No new tower shall be permitted unless the tower is designed and built to be able to support
another carrier's WCF comparable in weight, size, and surface area to the telecommunications
facilities installed on said tower by the applicant. No new tower shall be permitted unless the
applicant provides evidence of the failure of applicant's good faith effort to install or collocate the
applicant's telecommunications facilities on city owned towers or usable antenna support
structures or on towers located on property leased from the city located within a one-half (1/2) mile
radius of the proposed tower site, including good faith efforts to negotiate lease rights, to no avail
and evidence of the following:
1. Lack of existing towers or structures located within the geographic area required to meet the
applicant's engineering requirements;
2. Insufficiency of design of existing tower or structures to meet applicant's engineering
requirements as shown in the master development plan;
3. Insufficiency of existing towers or structures to support the proposed antenna and related
equipment;
4. That the applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the
antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures
would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna; and/or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 433/528
5. The fees, costs of contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing
tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for share are unreasonable. Costs
exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.
B. Collocation requests shall require only an administrative review and staff approval under the terms
of the application procedures set out below. (2003 Code § 11-07-06)
11-7-7: APPLICATIONS:
A. Submittal: Applications shall be submitted to the building inspector department for review.
1. Nonresidential Districts: For permits requested in nonresidential districts for WCFs collocating
on an existing structure, for WCFs attached to utility poles, or for WCFs whose installation on
utility poles requires replacement of existing poles with poles no taller than seventy five feet
(75'), the department is hereby authorized to issue an administrative permit upon its review and
approval of an application submitted as set forth herein.
2. Residential Districts: For permits requested in residential districts for facade attached WCFs or
other permitted WCFs, in addition to the application and supporting documentation required
herein, the applicant shall provide the department with mailing labels for owners of real property
within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the proposed WCF location. The department shall
mail notices to said property owners informing them of the application, the proposed permit
issuance date, and their right to submit written comments or protests regarding the application;
provided, that said comments are submitted within twenty one (21) days of the date of said
notice. For protests to be considered, there must be an allegation of facts, which, if accurate,
show that the WCF will not or cannot substantially comply with the standards set out in this
chapter, including the special WCF permit standards.
a. If no written protests are received before the proposed issuance date, the department may
issue the permit, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
b. In the event the department approves a permit, if timely written protests have been received,
the owners who submitted written protests shall be given written notice of the approval and
their opportunity to appeal in writing to the department, within ten (10) days of the date of the
notice. If an appeal is filed, the department shall notify the applicant of the appeal, set a date
before the planning and zoning commission for its consideration and notify the applicant, any
party having submitted comments, and the property owners described above, of the date, time
and place of the hearing. The department shall prepare a staff report and forward the written
comments and protests and all information it gathers to the planning and zoning commission,
along with the original application for consideration of the commission. The planning and
zoning commission shall conduct the hearing, analyze information, and issue written findings
and a decision regarding issuance of the permit. The planning and zoning commission may
apply conditions that it deems necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the city in the event it decides to issue or uphold the issuance of the permit. Any
aggrieved party who appeared in person or in writing before the department or the planning
and zoning commission may file a written appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the
decision for hearing before the city council at the next available regular city council meeting.
The city council shall review the record of the hearing below and the written appeal and may
accept, reject or modify the decision. The city council may apply conditions that it deems
necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city in the event it
decides to issue or uphold the issuance of the permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 434/528
B. Information Required: Applications must contain the following information:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, any coapplicants, and any authorized
agents for the applicant and/or coapplicants. Written authorization bearing original signatures of
the applicant and/or coapplicants shall be provided for any agent representing the
applicant/coapplicants in this process. The applicant or coapplicant must be a licensed carrier
and provide proof thereof with the application. The application must contain original signatures of
the applicant and all coapplicants.
2. A complete legal description of the subject property.
3. A site plan drawn to a scale of no less than one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20') specifying the
following; provided, that the city may waive any or all of the following for WCFs attached to
existing structures:
a. Location, type, and height of the proposed WCF, including setback measurements.
b. On site structures, land uses and zoning.
c. Circulation information including adjacent roadways, ingress and egress from the roadways,
parking, pedestrian circulation and access.
d. Fences, signs, exterior lighting and storm drainage.
e. Property lines with dimensions, adjacent land uses, structures and zoning.
f. Information demonstrating compliance with the standards of this chapter.
g. Existing watercourses, utility lines, easements, deed restrictions, and any built or natural
features restricting the use of the subject property.
h. North arrow, scale and legend.
4. A landscaping plan (unless the WCF is to be attached to an existing building and all equipment
is located within or on the building) drawn to the same scale as the site plan, clearly depicting all
existing landscaping/vegetation and whether it will be removed or retained; all proposed
landscaping complete with size, location and species of vegetation; specific depiction and
notation of any features necessary to comply with the screening standards of this chapter.
5. Elevation drawing or before and after photographs/drawings simulating and specifying the
location and height of the antennas, support structures, equipment enclosures and other
accessory uses, fences and signs.
6. Elevations of proposed aboveground equipment enclosures.
7. A planning coverage map and/or maps on which are marked the service area of the facility for
which application is being made and all applicant's WCF sites operating within the city limits and
in the area of city impact as defined in Idaho Code. The map shall be drawn to a scale of no less
than one inch equals five hundred feet (1" = 500').
8. Photosimulations of the proposed WCF from affected residential properties and public rights of
way.
9. All information set out in the collocation requirement section of this chapter related to efforts at
collocating facilities and all documentation necessary to show good faith efforts to comply with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 435/528
the siting and facility priority section of this chapter.
10. A description of the support structure or building upon which the WCF is proposed to be
located, and the technical reasons for the design and configuration of the WCF.
11. A signed statement by the applicant certifying that any proposed tower can accommodate
collocation of additional antennas and that the applicant shall enter into agreements for
collocation with other providers.
12. A signed statement that the applicant agrees to remove the WCF and equipment within ninety
(90) days after the site's use is discontinued; and that the WCF shall be designed and erected
so as to comply with all EIA standards and applicable federal, state and city laws and
regulations, including FAA regulations.
13. Certification that usage of the WCF will not interfere with other adjacent or neighboring
transmission or reception functions.
14. Proof that the applicant is licensed with the FCC.
15. A completed right of way use permit application if the WCF is to be located within a public right
of way if not on an existing utility pole.
16. The applicant must attach a copy of correspondence from the owner of the land and/or building
on which the WCF is to be located, acknowledging the owner's approval of the use of the
property for a WCF, the applicant's ability to enter into leases with other providers for collocation,
and specifying the party responsible for removal of the WCF and attendant equipment within
ninety (90) days of discontinuance of its use. (2003 Code § 11-07-07)
11-7-8: HEIGHT STANDARDS:
A. A roof attached WCF shall not exceed ten feet (10') above the highest portion of the roof
membrane. The antenna and support system for whip antennas shall not exceed ten feet (10')
above the highest portion of that roof, including parapet walls.
B. A facade attached WCF shall not extend higher than ten feet (10') above the facade to which it is
attached.
C. A utility pole attached WCF may extend fifteen feet (15') above the height of the existing utility pole;
provided, however, that the maximum height from grade to top of the entire structure may not
exceed seventy five feet (75').
D. Towers are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of the districts where located. Tower
height shall be measured from grade and shall include the tower structure itself, the base pad, and
any other telecommunications facilities attached thereto that extend more than twenty feet (20')
over the top of the tower structure itself.
E. Tower height shall be set as a condition of the special WCF permit. (2003 Code § 11-07-08)
11-7-9: SETBACK STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 436/528
No freestanding WCFs or equipment enclosures shall be located between the face of a structure and
a public street, bikeway, park or residential development, except for approved facade attached WCFs.
In addition to the foregoing prohibition and the setback standards established for individual zoning
districts, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Utility Pole Attached WCF: None.
B. Facade Attached WCF: Maximum projection shall be eighteen inches (18").
C. Roof Attached WCF: The setback from the edge of the building shall be equal to the height of the
antenna and support system as measured from the roof membrane.
D. Tower:
1. All towers up to one hundred feet (100') in height shall be set back on all sides a distance equal
to the underlying setback requirement in the applicable zoning district.
2. Towers in excess of one hundred feet (100') in height shall be set back one additional foot per
each foot of tower height in excess of one hundred feet (100'). Setback requirements may be
modified, as provided in "Criteria For Site Plan Development Modifications", so that a tower can
be placed so as to reduce its visual impact, e.g., adjacent to trees that may partially hide the
tower.
3. Towers shall be separated from all residentially zoned lands by a minimum of two hundred feet
(200') or one hundred ninety five percent (195%) of the height of the proposed tower, whichever
is greater.
E. Equipment Enclosures: In accordance with the underlying zoning district. (2003 Code § 11-07-09)
11-7-10: ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS:
A. WCFs shall be prohibited in wetlands, and may be prohibited in wetland buffer areas to minimize
disturbance to the buffer areas.
B. No hazardous waste shall be discharged on the site of any WCF. If any hazardous materials are to
be used on site, there shall be provisions for full containment of such materials. An enclosed
containment area shall be provided with a sealed floor, designed to contain at least one hundred
ten percent (110%) of the volume of the hazardous materials stored or used on site.
C. Stormwater runoff shall be contained on site. Drainage plans and calculations must be submitted
and approved.
D. Applicants locating WCFs within any floodplain shall comply with any additional placement
standards required by the regulations for that area. (2003 Code § 11-07-10)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 437/528
11-7-11: LIGHTING AND SIGNAGE STANDARDS:
A. Facility lighting shall be designed so as to meet but not exceed minimum requirements for security,
safety or FAA regulations. Lighting of antennas or support structures shall be prohibited unless
required by the FAA. All lighting shall be designed so as to avoid glare and minimize illumination
on adjacent properties and shall comply with all city regulations.
B. Signs shall be limited to those needed to identify the telephone numbers to contact in an
emergency, public safety warnings, certifications or other required seals. These signs shall also
comply with the requirements of the city sign code regulations. (2003 Code § 11-07-11)
11-7-12: PARKING:
If the WCF is nonautomated, sufficient off street parking must be provided to accommodate the
maximum number of employees on site at any one time. (2003 Code § 11-07-12)
11-7-13: ACCESS:
In addition to ingress and egress requirements of the adopted building code, ANSI, and such others
as may be adopted by the city, access to and from WCFs and equipment shall be regulated as
follows: (2003 Code § 11-07-13; amd. 2012 Code)
A. No WCF or equipment shall be located in any required parking, maneuvering or vehicle/pedestrian
circulation area such that it interferes with, or in any way impairs, the intent or functionality of the
original design.
B. The WCF shall be secured from access by the general public but access for emergency services
must be ensured. (2003 Code § 11-07-13)
11-7-14: FACADE ATTACHED AND UTILITY POLE ATTACHED STANDARDS:
A. Facade Attached WCFs: Equipment enclosures shall be attached to the facade or roof of the
support structure or placed or located underground if site conditions permit. Otherwise, equipment
enclosures shall comply with applicable design standards set out below.
B. Utility Pole Attached WCF:
1. Attachment: Only one WCF shall be permitted on any one utility pole. The antenna shall be
equal to or less than six feet (6') in height, including the support system, if any. Surface area of
an antenna shall not exceed five hundred eighty (580) square inches. The antenna shall be
either fully concealed within the utility pole or camouflaged to appear to be an integral part of the
utility pole. An antenna not flush mounted on the side of the utility pole shall be centered on the
top of the utility pole to which it is attached and utilize stealth design.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 438/528
2. Utility Separation: In the event that a utility located upon the utility pole requires vertical
separation between its utility facilities and the antenna so attached, the antenna may be raised
by a support system or pole change out to accommodate the separation requirement to an
elevation not exceeding an additional fifteen feet (15') or the required separation, whichever is
less. Any such support shall not be greater in diameter than the existing utility pole and shall be
designed to blend into the colors and textures of the existing utility pole.
3. Equipment Enclosures: No equipment enclosure may exceed six (6) cubic feet in volume. An
underground equipment enclosure may be connected to an aboveground enclosure for a
combined total volume of no greater than twelve (12) cubic feet. No single dimension of any
aboveground equipment enclosure shall exceed three feet (3') and the structure shall be situated
so as to minimize its visual impact, including screening with evergreen landscaping.
4. Utility Relocation: In the event utilities located on a utility pole are relocated underground, the
WCF shall be relocated underground or to another location pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter. (2003 Code § 11-07-14)
11-7-15: SPECIAL USE WCF PERMIT:
The planning and zoning commission may approve a special use WCF permit, after public hearing,
upon a satisfactory showing that the proposal has met the standards and conditions set out in this
chapter. The planning and zoning commission may establish conditions as it deems necessary to
preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Any substantial or significant change or addition
to a special permit shall require a new permit application. (2003 Code § 11-07-15)
11-7-16: SPECIAL USE WCF PERMIT PROCEDURES:
Applications for special use WCF permits shall be filed with the building inspection department that
shall be responsible for scheduling the hearing before the planning and zoning commission.
Applications shall be accompanied by fees as set by resolution of the city council. The applicant must
provide mailing labels for all owners of property within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed site.
The department shall mail notices to said property owners and publish a public hearing notice in the
local newspaper at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The department shall prepare a staff
report and forward all information it gathers to the planning and zoning commission along with the
application for consideration at the hearing. The planning and zoning commission shall conduct the
hearing, analyze information, and issue written findings and a decision. Any aggrieved party may file a
written appeal with the city clerk, within ten (10) days of the decision, for hearing before the city
council at the next available regular city council meeting. The city council shall review the record of the
hearing below and the written appeal and may accept, reject or modify the decision. The city council
may impose any additional conditions that it deems necessary in order to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens in the event it decides to issue, or uphold the issuance of, the permit. (2003
Code § 11-07-16)
11-7-17: SPECIAL USE WCF STANDARDS:
An applicant must demonstrate that all reasonable steps have been taken to comply with the strict
terms of this chapter and that a special use permit is the sole solution. The following standards are to
be utilized in reviewing any application for a special use WCF permit:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 439/528
A. The WCF should not create an unreasonable hardship upon surrounding property owners.
B. The WCF should not unduly disrupt pedestrian, vehicular or air travel.
C. The WCF should not adversely affect public utilities, public parks or the natural environment to a
greater degree than uses permitted outright in the zoning district.
D. The placement of the WCF should be consistent with the purposes set forth in this chapter.
E. The WCF should be designed to be compatible in appearance and layout with adjacent uses.
F. The WCF should be designed so as to minimize any adverse effects on adjoining land. (2003 Code
§ 11-07-17)
11-7-18: TOWER DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL USE WCF:
A. Hazard Assessment: Applicant must supply written, technical evidence from a qualified engineer
acceptable to the fire department and the building official that the proposed site of the tower or
telecommunications facilities does not pose a risk of explosion, fire or other danger to life or
property due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials such as LP
gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, or corrosive or other dangerous chemicals.
B. Setbacks: Setback requirements for a tower shall be measured from the base of the tower to the
property line of the parcel of land on which it is located. Setback requirements may be modified so
that a tower can be placed so as to reduce its visual impact, e.g., adjacent to trees that may
partially hide the tower. (2003 Code § 11-07-18)
C. Structural Requirements: All towers must be designed and certified by an engineer to be
structurally sound and, at minimum, be in conformance with the adopted building code and any
other standards outlined in this chapter. All towers in operation shall be affixed to land. (2003 Code
§ 11-07-18; amd. 2012 Code)
D. Separation Or Buffer Requirements: For the purpose of this section, the separation distances
between towers shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the
existing or approved structure and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed
tower, drawn to scale. Tower separation distances from residentially zoned lands shall be
measured from the base of a tower to the closest point of residentially zoned property. The
minimum tower separation distances from residentially zoned land and from other towers shall be
calculated and applied irrespective of city jurisdictional boundaries.
1. Towers shall be separated from all residentially zoned lands by a minimum of two hundred feet
(200') or a distance equal to one hundred ninety five percent (195%) of the height of the
proposed tower, whichever is greater.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 440/528
2. Proposed towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from existing
towers or towers that have a development permit but are not yet constructed at the time a
development permit is granted pursuant to this chapter:
a. Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other towers, whether monopole, selfsupporting
lattice, or guyed, by a minimum of three hundred feet (300').
b. Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be separated from all other selfsupporting
or guyed towers by a minimum of nine hundred feet (900').
c. Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be separated from all monopole towers
by a minimum of three hundred feet (300').
E. Illumination: Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the federal aviation
administration (FAA).
F. Exterior Finish: Towers not requiring FAA painting or marking shall have an exterior finish that
enhances compatibility with adjacent land uses, as approved by the planning and zoning
commission.
G. Landscaping: All landscaping on a parcel of land containing towers, antenna support structures or
telecommunications facilities shall be in accordance with the applicable landscaping requirements
in the zoning district where the tower, antenna support structure or telecommunications facilities
are located. The city may require landscaping in excess of the requirements in this code in order to
enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses. (2003 Code § 11-07-18)
H. Access: All fire department and adopted fire code standards regarding emergency vehicle access
must be complied with, unless waived by the city. (2003 Code § 11-07-18; amd. 2012 Code)
I. Stealth Design: All towers not located in an industrial zoning district shall be of stealth design, unless
an exception is granted by the city council. (2003 Code § 11-07-18)
11-7-19: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL REGULATIONS:
All WCFs shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other
agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such
standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the WCFs governed by this chapter shall
bring said WCFs into compliance with the revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of
the effective date of the revised standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance
schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring WCFs into compliance with
such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the WCF at the
owners' expense upon fifteen (15) days' written notice via normal first class mail. (2003 Code § 11-07-
19)
11-7-20: ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE SAFETY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 441/528
The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed antenna and support structure are safe and the
surrounding areas shall not be negatively affected by support structure failure, falling ice or other
debris or interference. All support structures shall be fitted with anticlimbing devices, as approved by
the manufacturer. (2003 Code § 11-07-20)
11-7-21: MAINTENANCE:
A. Each permittee shall maintain its WCF in a good and safe condition, preserving the original
appearance and concealment, disguise or screening elements incorporated into the design at the
time of approval and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state and local
requirements. Such maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, such items as painting, repair
of equipment, and maintenance of landscaping. If the permittee fails to maintain the facility, the city
may undertake the maintenance at the expense of the permittee or terminate the permit, and
remove the WCF at owner's expense, at its sole option upon fifteen (15) days' written notice via
normal first class mail.
B. Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and maintain
in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and
accidents that are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. Tower owners shall
install and maintain towers, telecommunications facilities, wires, cables, fixtures, and other
equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements of the national electrical safety code
and all FCC, state and local regulations, and in such manner that will not interfere with the use of
other property. All towers, telecommunications facilities and antenna support structures shall at all
times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair so that the same shall not
menace or endanger the life or property of any person. All maintenance or construction of towers,
telecommunications facilities or antenna support structures shall be performed by city and state
licensed maintenance and construction personnel. All tower owners shall maintain the towers in
compliance with current RF emission standards of the FCC.
C. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that the tower fails to comply with such codes or standards
and constitutes a danger to person or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of
the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring the tower into compliance with such
standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30) days constitutes
grounds for the removal of the tower at the owner's expense upon fifteen (15) days' written notice
via normal first class mail.
D. In the event that the use of a tower is discontinued by the tower owner, the tower owner shall
provide written notice to the city of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be
discontinued and the tower removed from the premises. (2003 Code § 11-07-21)
11-7-22: MODIFICATIONS:
A. New Permit Obtained: A new permit must be obtained prior to any proposed change or addition to
any WCF; provided, that routine maintenance or replacement of any portion of the WCF with
identical equipment in conformance with this chapter shall not require application for a new permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 442/528
B. Existing Uses: All WCFs existing on the effective date hereof shall be allowed to continue their
operation as they presently exist, subject to the terms of this chapter relating to abandonment or
discontinuance of use. Routine maintenance shall be permitted, but construction involving the
replacement of support structure apparatus, antennas, or any exterior alteration must be done in
compliance with the terms of this chapter.
C. Exception: Emergency service WCFs may obtain a waiver from the city council if required for
preserving the public health and safety. Issuance of the waiver shall require a public hearing and a
finding on the part of the city council that the modifications cannot comply without undue burden on
the citizens of the city. (2003 Code § 11-07-22)
11-7-23: ABANDONMENT OR DISCONTINUATION OF USE:
A. Construction or activation of a WCF shall commence within ninety (90) days of approval of the
WCF permit or the permit shall be null and void. A ninety (90) day written extension approval may
be granted by the building inspection department due to weather conditions or other extenuating
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant as determined by the building inspection
department, after written request by the permittee.
B. At such time that a licensed carrier plans to abandon or discontinue operation of a WCF, the carrier
shall notify the city by first class U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation
of operations. Such notice shall be given no less than thirty (30) days prior to abandonment or
discontinuation of operations. In the event that a licensed carrier fails to give such notice, the WCF
shall be considered abandoned, effective the day of discontinuance.
C. The carrier shall remove the WCF no later than ninety (90) days after the date of abandonment or
discontinuation, properly dispose of all waste materials from the site in accordance with local and
state solid waste disposal regulations, and restore the location to its before use state, landscaping
and grading excepted. Removal shall include, but not be limited to, removal of antennas, support
structures, equipment enclosures and security barriers from the subject property.
D. If a carrier fails to remove a WCF in accordance with this section, the city may cause the facility to
be removed and all expenses of removal, disposal and restoration shall be paid by the owner of
the land where the facility is located. (2003 Code § 11-07-23)
11-7-24: CONFLICTS:
All resolutions, ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. (2003 Code
§ 11-07-25)
Chapter 8
EXCEPTIONS; ACCESSORY AND NONCONFORMING
USES; FENCES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 443/528
11-8-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. Intent: The following provisions shall be subject to the general regulations of this chapter and to the
special provisions and exceptions in this and the following sections so as to secure the intent of
this chapter. In all cases of administration and enforcement of this chapter for which no other
specific provisions are made in this section and other provisions herein, the planning and zoning
commission shall provide for the same by order, resolution or the adoption of a rule, regulation or
bylaw, which provision shall be in accord with and consistent with the objectives and standards of
this chapter.
B. Original Lots Of Record: Any single lot or parcel of land, held in one ownership, that was of record
and a legal lot at the time of adoption hereof, but does not meet the requirements of the district in
which it is located for minimum lot width or area, may be utilized for a permitted use if all other
requirements of this chapter are met. (2003 Code § 11-09-01)
11-8-2: ACCESSORY USES:
A. Permitted: An "accessory use", as defined in section 11-1-3 of this title and as regulated herein, is
permitted in any district where the principal use to which it is accessory is permitted.
B. Height Limit Exceptions: If allowed by conditional use permit, the building height limits provided in
the zone regulations may be exceeded by towers, flagpoles, gables, spire, cupolas, water tanks
and like structures, including mechanical appurtenances, except that in no case shall the excepted
structure cover at any point above the height limit an area greater than fifteen percent (15%) of the
area of the lot.
C. Restrictions On Tower And Gable Structures: No tower, gable, spire or similar structure shall be
used for sleeping or eating quarters, nor for any commercial purposes other than such as is
incidental to the main use.
D. Permitted Uses In Any Yards: The following shall be permitted in any yard:
1. Cornices, canopies, eaves or other architectural projections that do not increase the volume of
space enclosed by the building and do not project into any required yard more than two feet (2');
provided, that an unroofed stair and landing, together with a railing, may project not more than
three feet (3') into the minimum setback requirement.
2. Chimney, not more than eight feet (8') in width projecting no more than twenty four inches (24")
into the minimum setbacks.
3. Access driveways providing reasonable access to required private or public areas, including
garages. Driveways that extend through the setback in other than a perpendicular manner may
be approved if due to physical limitations of the site or for aesthetic or safety purposes. The
planning director may approve such unusual driveways upon a determination that the following
are true:
a. The driveway is clearly for access to a garage or parking area; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 444/528
b. The proposed driveway does not have a negative impact on adjacent properties; and
c. The driveway is required because of physical limitations of the site; or
d. The driveway is required to enhance the aesthetics of the site such as preserving existing
trees; or
e. The driveway is required for safety reasons, such as avoiding backing into a busy street or a
street with limited motorist visibility.
Driveways that are not approved by the zoning administrator/building director require a
variance from the planning and zoning commission.
4. Flagpoles shall conform to the height limit allowed within the zone unless approved in
accordance with the provisions of subsection B of this section.
5. Accessory structures under one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area and under seven feet
(7') in height are permitted in any yard area, except in front of the main building.
E. Permitted Uses In Rear Yards: The following shall be permitted in rear yards:
1. Unroofed balcony in rear yard; provided, that no such balcony shall project more than four feet
(4') into such yard.
2. "Backyard composting", as defined in section 11-1-3 of this title. (2003 Code § 11-09-02)
11-8-3: NONCONFORMING USES:
A. Permitted: Any use or structure lawfully occupying a building or land at the effective date hereof, or
subsequent amendments thereto, or at the time of annexation or rezone, which does not conform
with the regulations of the district in which it is located, shall be deemed a nonconforming use and
may continue to operate as it did prior to the ordinance. A nonconforming use shall exist if the
owner or developer of such use has lawfully, in reliance on existing laws, ordinances or permits,
made substantial expenditures or otherwise committed himself, to a substantial disadvantage,
before the law, ordinance or permit is changed. Substantial shall be measured by consideration of
all factors evidencing a change of position.
B. Enlargement Of Nonconforming Use: No nonconforming use may be enlarged, expanded or altered
except to make it a conforming use. Maintenance and minor repairs necessary to keep a
nonconforming use in sound condition during the continuance shall be permitted. The right to
maintain a nonconforming use runs with the land and is not terminated by a change in ownership,
provided the nonconforming use is not enlarged, expanded or altered.
C. Nonconforming Use Abandonment: Whenever a nonconforming use of land or a building has been
discontinued for a continuous period of six (6) months, or in the case of a building originally
designed for a commercial or industrial use for a continuous period of one year; or whenever there
is otherwise evident a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming use, such
use shall not thereafter be reestablished, and the use of the premises thereafter shall be in
conformity with the regulations for the district. Any nonconforming use that is illegally expanded
shall lose its nonconforming use status.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 445/528
D. Establishing Legal Nonconforming Use: A legal nonconforming use may be established upon
application through the staff level review process outlined in subsection 11-3-5A1 of this title,
subject to review of verification documentation submitted by the applicant. Following is a list of
some, but not all, types of documentation that are accepted as verification of a legal
nonconforming use (grandfather right):
1. Documentation:
a. Licenses; such as beer, liquor, retail, or professional occupation showing dates of use.
b. Rental property; receipts showing dates of use, directories, utility bills, etc.
c. Business; receipts showing types of service or goods provided, dated phone directories,
Polk's directory, etc.
d. Statements from utilities, such as power, water or gas, that indicate date and type of use, i.e.,
commercial, multi-family residential, etc.
e. Notarized statements from neighbors who have observed the nonconforming use over the
required time period.
2. Procedures: Every application for a certificate of legal nonconforming use shall be deemed to be
an application for a zoning certificate. The zoning administrator/building director or his/her
designee must review the verifying documentation submitted and make a determination of
approval or denial of the application within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of application and
will submit the findings and conclusions in writing to the applicant. The decision of the zoning
administrator/building director may be appealed by the applicant or any affected person within
ten (10) calendar days of the date of the approval or denial in accordance with section 11-3-7 of
this title. (2003 Code § 11-09-03)
11-8-4: ZONING RIGHTS OF WAY AND ANNEXED LAND:
All streets, alleys, railroad rights of way, canal rights of way and other public ways, if not otherwise
specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zoning district as the property immediately
abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways, waterways and railroad rights of way. (2003 Code
§ 11-09-04)
11-8-5: MOST RESTRICTIVE REGULATIONS GOVERN:
Wherever the regulations made under the authority of this title require a greater width or size of yards
or courts, are more restrictive as to height of building or permit of a less number of stories, or require a
greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose standards that are more restrictive than are
required by any other city ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this title shall govern. Wherever
the provisions of any other city ordinance or regulation require a greater width or size of yards or
courts, or are more restrictive as to the height of buildings or permit of a less number of stories, or
require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other standards that are more
restrictive than are required by the regulations contained herein, the provisions of such ordinance or
regulation shall govern. (2003 Code § 11-09-05)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 446/528
11-8-6: PUBLIC SERVICES EXCEPTED:
This chapter shall not limit or interfere with the temporary use of any property as a public voting place,
or with the construction, installation or operation of the following by any public agency or private
corporation, when such construction is otherwise in conformity with all federal, state, county and city
regulations:
A. Public street or highway.
B. Poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, wells, valves or any other
similar distributing and transmitting equipment for telephone or other communications, electric
power, gas, water and sewer lines, provided that the installation shall conform when applicable
with the rules and regulations of any federal or state commissions and agencies, or any other
authorities having jurisdiction and subject to other city ordinance provisions, rules and regulations;
except that poles, towers or similar installations of a height of seventy feet (70') or greater are
subject to subsection 11-6A-6J of this title. Electrical substations are considered a major utility
facility and are subject to the requirements of this title.
C. Railroad right of way, excluding yards and stations.
D. Incidental appurtenances to any of the above. (2003 Code § 11-09-06)
11-8-7: FENCE REGULATIONS:
No fence or wall shall be constructed or installed in any zone without the review and approval of such
by the zoning administrator/building director. Permits are valid for one year from the date of approval.
An administrative application shall be submitted to determine compliance with the following approval
criteria:
A. Electric Fences Prohibited: Electric fences are prohibited within the corporate limits of the city.
B. Barbed Wire Fences: Barbed wire may be permitted in commercial and industrial zones only when
used as the top section for security fences. Any barbed wire forming part of a security fence shall
be a minimum of seventy two inches (72") above grade. Public correctional or penal facilities are
exempted from this limitation.
C. Walls And Screens: For the purposes of this section, walls, latticework and screens are considered
to be fences and shall be built and maintained in compliance with the provisions hereof.
D. Use Of Specific Materials Prohibited: The use of boxes, sheet metal, wafer board, OSB, old or
decayed wood, broken masonry blocks or other like unsightly materials for fencing is hereby
prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 447/528
E. Height Regulations:
1. Interior Lots: Solid or closed nonvision fences to a height of thirty six inches (36"), or open vision
type fences to a height of forty eight inches (48"), may be built from the front yard setback to and
including the front property line. Fences to a height of seventy two inches (72") may be built from
the front yard setback to and including the rear property line.
2. Corner Lots:
a. Any fence, wall or planting on or within the clear vision triangle shall be limited to thirty six
inches (36") in height measured from the crown of the street.
b. Solid or closed nonvision fences to a height of thirty six inches (36") or open vision type
fences to a height of forty eight inches (48"), may be built along the front property line and
along the side property line to the front yard setback, except that a fence of seventy two
inches (72") in height may be built upon street and side property lines from the front yard
setback to and across the rear property line provided that no fence that exceeds thirty six
inches (36") in height may be erected in the clear vision triangle.
3. Variance: To vary the above requirement, the provisions of section 11-6A-10 of this title shall be
complied with.
F. Concrete, Masonry Walls: Concrete and masonry walls and fences over six feet (6') tall must also
be approved by the building department.
G. Location; Agreements With Adjoining Property Owners: The fence must be built entirely upon the
property that it was permitted for unless agreements are made with the adjoining property owners.
These agreements need not be submitted with the application; however, the permit shall become
void if the applicant fails to procure them. (2003 Code § 11-09-07)
Chapter 9
LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS
11-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these regulations is to guide and set a minimum standard for the general appearance
and arrangement of commercial, industrial and residential uses in order to create attractive and
dynamic business centers, assure the compatibility of satellite commercial and industrial areas with
their surrounding neighborhoods, and assure the compatibility of dense residential land uses with
surrounding neighborhoods. (2003 Code § 11-12-01)
11-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUFFER YARDS: A landscape area that serves to physically and/or visually separate land uses
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 448/528
having incompatible facilities, activities, or differing intensities of use.
ENVIRONMENTAL LANDSCAPING: The reduction of noise, glare, sun and air pollution through the
introduction of landscaping.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES: A surface that cannot be penetrated or affected by water, ice or
combination of both, dry conditions, radiated heat or direct sunlight. (Typically concrete or asphalt
paving.)
LANDSCAPING: Shall consist of the following or combination thereof: living material such as, but not
limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges or trees and nonliving durable material limited
to pea gravel, walls or fences, bark, decorative cinders and decorative rock. Nonliving durable material
may be used only for accent in landscaping areas.
SHRUBS: Those required by this chapter shall be self-supporting, woody, evergreen species, as
normally grown in Bingham County, Idaho.
TREES (CITY TREES/STREET TREES): Self-supporting wood plants of species that normally grow to
an overall height of a minimum of fifteen feet (15') in Bingham County, Idaho. (2003 Code § 11-12-02)
11-9-3: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN YARD AREAS AND OFF
STREET PARKING AND OTHER VEHICULAR USE AREAS:
All areas used for the display or parking of any and all types of vehicles, boats or construction
equipment, whether such vehicles, boats or equipment are self-propelled or not, and all land upon
which vehicles traverse the property as a function of the primary use of such property, hereinafter
referred to as "other vehicle uses", including, but not limited to, activities of a drive-in nature such as
filling stations, grocery and dairy stores, banks, restaurants, and the like, shall conform to the
minimum landscape requirements hereinafter provided, save and except areas used for parking or
other vehicular uses within buildings, and parking areas serving single-family dwellings and duplexes.
A. Installation: All landscaping shall be installed in a sound workmanship like manner and according to
accepted planting procedures with the quality of the plant materials as hereinafter described. All
elements of landscaping shall be installed so as to meet all other applicable ordinances and code
requirements. The building official, or representative, shall inspect all landscaping and no
certificates of occupancy or similar authorization will be issued unless the landscaping meets the
requirements herein provided.
1. Landscape Plan: A landscape plan must be submitted describing:
a. Boundaries and dimensions of site.
b. All existing trees identified by species.
c. Trees and other vegetation that is to be retained.
d. The location and design of areas to be landscaped.
e. The location, number and type of plant material by common name.
f. Type and design of proposed irrigation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 449/528
2. Natural Vegetation Or Earthen Berm As Substitute:
a. Existing vegetation that is retained, may be used to satisfy these regulations.
b. An earthen berm may be substituted for not more than three feet (3') of the required height of
any screening fence, wall or environmental landscaping. Soil and slope stabilization must
result after installation.
3. Retention Of Existing Trees: Existing trees shall be retained to the maximum extent possible.
Where retention of trees located in the public right of way is not possible, replacement is
required as established in sections 11-9-4, 11-9-5 and 11-9-9 of this chapter. Public or private
trees retained to meet landscape requirements shall comply with subsections A4 and A5 of this
section.
4. Damaged During Construction: Existing trees or shrubs that are retained to meet the
requirements of this chapter shall be protected from damage to bark, branches or roots during
construction. Construction or excavation occurring within the drip line of any public or private
retained tree or shrub may severely damage the tree or shrub. Any severely damaged tree or
shrub shall be replaced.
5. Grade Changes And Impervious Surfaces: Impervious surfaces and grade changes shall be
allowed at a distance from the trunk equal to the diameter of the tree trunk plus two feet (2') and
the installation of an automatically controlled drip irrigation system shall be required. (2003 Code
§ 11-12-03)
6. Prohibited Materials And Landscaping: No artificial trees, plants or carpeting shall be used as a
vegetation substitute. (2003 Code § 11-12-03; amd. 2012 Code)
7. Amount Of Coverage: All landscaping areas shall be planted so as to achieve seventy five
percent (75%) coverage of the area within three (3) years. If this amount of coverage is not
achieved, the area shall be planted immediately or as soon as the planting season permits.
8. Completion Time: The planning department may authorize a delay in the completion of planting
during the months of October, November, December, January, February and March. Should a
delay occur, a bond equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the costs of landscaping will be
provided by the owner/developer and held by the city until said landscaping is complete. No final
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the required landscaping is complete. (2003 Code
§ 11-12-03)
B. Maintenance: The owner, tenant and/or their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible
for the maintenance of all landscaping. Landscaping shall be maintained in good condition so as to
present a live, healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from weeds, refuse and
debris. Landscaped areas, except those utilizing nonliving durable material, shall be provided with
a readily available water supply with a sprinkler irrigation system. All dead trees and shrubs shall
be removed and replaced no later than June 30 of the following growing season. These areas of
landscaping must be maintained to the standards described in city minimum maintenance
ordinance and adopted fire code. (2003 Code § 11-12-03; amd. 2012 Code)
C. Plant Material:
1. Quality: Plant material used to obtain compliance with this chapter shall be of a high quality
equivalent to that provided by local reputable nurseries.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 450/528
2. Trees: Shall be species having an average mature spread of crown of greater than fifteen feet
(15'). Trees shall not be less than one to one and one-half inch (11/2") caliper size at time of
planting; provided all trees must be planted and staked, if necessary, according to professional
nursery standards. No tree or plant that may cause damage to public roadways or sidewalks or
that is regarded as a "trash" tree or plant shall be planted. A list of acceptable trees, shrubs and
ground cover species shall be maintained by the building official for review by the public. Any
other tree, shrub or ground cover species may be planted only upon prior approval from the
building official.
3. Hedges: Hedges shall be composed of shrubs of a minimum of two feet (2') in height when
measured immediately after planting. Hedges, where required, shall be planted and maintained
so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid, visual screen within a maximum of three (3) years
after planting.
4. Shrubs: Shrubs shall be not less than a three (3) gallon size when planted.
D. Required Landscaping Adjacent To Public Rights Of Way: On the site of a building or open lot
providing an off street parking area or other vehicular use area, where such area will not be
entirely screened visually by an intervening building or structure from any abutting right of way,
excluding dedicated alleys, there shall be landscaping provided between such area and such right
of way as follows:
1. A strip of land at least ten feet (10') in depth located between the abutting right of way and the
off street parking area, other vehicular use area or structure and that which is exposed to an
abutting right of way shall be landscaped, such landscaping to include one tree for each fifty (50)
linear feet or fraction thereof. Such trees shall be located between the abutting right of way and
the off street parking area, other vehicular use area or structure and shall be planted in a
planting area of at least twenty five (25) square feet with a dimension of at least ten feet (10').
The required landscaping shall also include a hedge or a planting of at least one shrub for each
five (5) linear feet of the landscaped area. The remainder of the required landscaped area shall
be landscaped with grass, ground cover or other landscaping treatment, excluding pavement.
2. All property other than the required landscaped strip lying between the right of way and the off
street parking area or other vehicular use area shall be landscaped with at least grass of other
ground cover.
3. Necessary accessways from public right of way through all such landscaping shall be permitted
to serve the parking or other vehicular use areas and such accessways may be subtracted from
the linear dimension used to determine the number of trees and shrubs required.
E. Parking Area Interior Landscaping: Off street parking areas and other vehicular use area shall have
interior landscaping covering at least eight percent (8%) of the total parking lot area for lots with
ten (10) or more parking spaces. In addition, other vehicular use areas shall have two (2) square
feet of interior landscaping for each one hundred (100) square feet of paved area. Where the
property contains both parking area and other vehicular use areas, the two (2) types of areas shall
be treated separately for the purpose of determining the required amount of landscaping. Each
separate landscape area shall contain a minimum of fifty (50) square feet and shall have a
minimum dimension of at least five feet (5'). The landscaped areas may be located so as to break
up the expanse of paving or may be located adjacent to any structures located on the property.
One tree shall be planted for every two hundred (200) square feet of interior landscaping. All
remaining land in the area designated for landscaping shall be covered by shrubs, ground cover or
other authorized landscaping materials not to exceed three feet (3') in height. Plans showing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 451/528
location, size and type of plant materials for landscaping in parking areas shall be included in all
applications for a building permit and compliance with this chapter shall be a condition to the
issuance of such permit or clearance.
F. Sight Distance For Landscaping Adjacent To Public Rights Of Way And Points Of Access: When an
accessway intersects a public right of way or when the subject property abuts the intersection of
two (2) or more public rights of way, all landscaping within the triangular areas described below
shall provide unobstructed cross visibility at a level between three feet (3') and ten feet (10');
however, trees or foliage extending into the cross visibility area shall be allowed, provided they are
so located so as not to create a traffic hazard. Landscaping, except required grass or ground
cover, shall not be located closer than three feet (3') from the edge of any accessway pavement.
The triangular areas above referred to are:
1. The areas of property on both sides of an accessway formed by the intersection of each side of
the accessway and the public right of way line, with two (2) sides of each triangle being ten feet
(10') in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of
the two (2) other sides.
2. The area of property located at a corner formed by the intersection of two (2) or more public
rights of way with two (2) sides of the triangle area being forty feet (40') in length along the
abutting public right of way lines, measured from their point of intersection, and the third side
being a line connecting the ends of the other two (2) lines.
3. When the city determines upon the basis of an existing traffic investigation that such a traffic
hazard exists, the city shall notify the owner and order that the hazard be removed within fifteen
(15) days. (2003 Code § 11-12-03)
11-9-4: APPROVED TREE SPECIES:
A list of the official public tree species for the city shall be established by resolution of the city council.
No species other than those included in the list may be planted as a public tree without prior approval
of the planning and zoning commission, which approval will be based upon recommendations from the
city tree committee. (2003 Code § 11-12-04)
11-9-5: SPACING OF TREES:
A. The spacing of public trees located in the street right of way area shall be in accordance with the
three (3) species size classes as established by resolution of the city council. No trees except trees
planted in special planting areas designated or approved by the planning and zoning commission
shall be planted closer together than the following:
1. Small trees: Twenty feet (20').
2. Medium trees: Thirty feet (30').
3. Large trees: Forty feet (40').
B. Street (public) trees required by subsections 11-9-3D and E of this chapter shall be placed on the
abutting right of way along the entire street frontage of the development no farther apart than the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 452/528
following, except as otherwise prohibited by this chapter:
1. Small trees: Thirty feet (30').
2. Medium trees: Forty feet (40').
3. Large trees: Fifty feet (50'). (2003 Code § 11-12-05)
11-9-6: DISTANCE REGULATIONS FOR TREE PLANTING:
A. Distance From Curb And Sidewalk:
1. The distance trees may be planted from curbs and sidewalks shall be in accordance with the
three (3) species size classes established by resolution of the city council, and no trees other
than the exceptions listed in subsections A2 and A3 of this section may be planted closer to any
curb or sidewalk than the following:
a. Small trees: Two feet (2').
b. Medium trees: Four feet (4').
c. Large trees: Six feet (6').
2. Street (public) trees may be planted in the sidewalk right of way locations in areas of commercial
zoning or use subject to the provisions outlined in sections 11-9-5 and 11-9-9 of this chapter.
3. The curb and sidewalk spacing requirements may be reduced by the building official when the
developer or his agent agrees to install root control barriers between the proposed tree planting
location and the adjacent curb and sidewalks.
B. Distance From Streetlights: The distance trees may be planted from streetlights shall be in
accordance with the three (3) species size classes established by resolution, and no tree may be
planted closer to any streetlight than the following:
1. Small trees: Fifteen feet (15').
2. Medium trees: Twenty five feet (25').
3. Large trees: Thirty five feet (35').
C. Distance From Utilities: No street (public) trees, other than those species listed as "small trees" as
established by resolution, shall be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any primary power
overhead line. (2003 Code § 11-12-06)
11-9-7: DEFERMENT OF IMPROVEMENTS AND/OR FEES IN LIEU OF:
In those cases where the developer/agent pursuant to other sections of this code, is permitted to defer
improvements such as sidewalks, curbs and/or paving, the developer/agent may also defer the
installation of street trees, or pay a fee in lieu thereof in an amount equal to the reasonable value of
the tree as determined by the city. In those cases where a fee is paid, the city shall place the fee in a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 453/528
designated fund for the purposes set forth in this chapter for the maintenance and acquisition of street
trees. This section shall not apply in those cases where location of the street trees can be identified in
the immediate future. (2003 Code § 11-12-07)
11-9-8: PROTECTION OF CITY TREES:
A. Prohibited Acts And Activities: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Store oil, gasoline, chemicals and other materials that might be harmful to the trees near public
trees and shrubs.
2. Attach wires, signs and power sources to the trees, unless otherwise authorized by the building
official.
3. Dump paint thinner, paint, plaster or other toxic wastes, liquid or solid, on the ground between
the base of the tree and the point at which the longest branch terminates, or uphill from any tree
where the substance might reach the roots through the leaching process.
4. Expose portions of trees in frequent contact with construction equipment, unless protected by
the owner/developer or contractor as directed by the city.
5. Make cuts in the ground near roots of trees, unless appropriate measures are taken to prevent
exposed soil from drying out and causing damage to tree roots.
6. Damage roots located on public property by excessive compacting or filling on or around the
base of a tree.
B. Root Barriers Required:
1. Root barriers shall be required in the following cases:
a. The installation of curbs, sidewalk or streets less than two feet (2') from an existing tree.
b. During repair of a curb, sidewalk or street that has been damaged or upheaved by roots of a
tree or shrub, when such tree or shrub is not removed.
2. Root barriers shall be installed as specified by nursery professionals. If the installation of root
barriers involves the removal of roots larger than two inches (2") in diameter, recommendations
from nursery professionals will be required. (2003 Code § 11-12-08)
11-9-9: PUBLIC TREES AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS:
A. Removal: Any public tree removal due to local improvement districts (LIDs) shall be reviewed by
the planning and zoning commission. The commission shall take the recommendations of the
public works director into account in making tree removal decisions.
B. Assessments: Assessments for local improvement districts shall include an assessment for the cost
of tree removal and replacement. (2003 Code § 11-12-09)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 454/528
11-9-10: PUBLIC TREE PLANTING IN COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
All trees planted in the public right of way in commercial zoning districts shall meet the following
restrictions:
A. Trees must be planted below finish grade level in accordance with standards by the National
Arborist Association.
B. A minimum width of six feet (6') of clear sidewalk must be provided as measured from the top edge
of the building to the proposed tree trunk location.
C. Noncolumnar trees selected for planting shall be of sufficient height to allow for a minimum seven
feet (7') of clearance measured from finish grade level of sidewalk to the lowest branch.
D. All trees selected for planting in commercial districts must be approved by the building official. The
building official shall base approval or denial on the following criteria:
1. Trees shall be of a species appropriate to existing conditions at the planting site;
2. The species selected for planting in a commercial zone does not comprise more than fifty
percent (50%) of the existing species mix in these districts;
3. The tree material is healthy.
E. A root control planter shall be required when the proposed tree location contains less than one
hundred (100) square feet of pervious surface material surrounding the tree.
F. In all proposed public tree locations surrounded by less than one hundred (100) square feet of
pervious surface material, the owner/developer shall be required to provide an adequate irrigation
system.
G. Public tree planting specifications for rights of way in commercial zoning districts shall be as
specified in this chapter. (2003 Code § 11-12-09.1)
11-9-11: ADJUSTMENT OF STANDARDS:
The building department, upon receipt of an application for adjustment of landscaping requirements
provided herein, shall have the authority and duty to consider and act upon such application. The
applicant shall, in the application, clearly and in detail, state what adjustments of the requirements are
being requested and the reasons such adjustments are warranted, and shall accompany the
application with such supplementary data, such as sketches, surveys and statistical information as is
deemed necessary to substantiate the adjustment. The building department may approve, modify or
deny the requested adjustment, but shall approve or modify only if it determines that approval of any
adjustment would be contrary to the public interest and would be in keeping with and would preserve
the intent of this chapter, and that literal enforcement of the above standards would be impractical and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 455/528
would result in unreasonable and unnecessary hardship. The building department shall act as
expeditiously as possible on the application, and shall state its decision in the form of a short, concise
statement of action taken that shall be served on the applicant by mailing the same to him at the
address on the application. (2003 Code § 11-12-10)
11-9-12: OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to other applicable regulations where such regulations
are more restrictive and are not otherwise inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. (2003 Code
§ 11-12-11)
11-9-13: INCENTIVES:
The building official may reduce the parking requirements by up to five percent (5%) of the required
number of spaces if the proposed landscaping plan incorporates the retention of significant trees,
particularly in the interior of the site, or if the proposed landscaping exceeds the requirements of this
chapter by fifteen percent (15%) or more. The public works director may reduce technical standards of
the parking lot design where paving requirements conflict with the retention of significant trees. (2003
Code § 11-12-11.1)
11-9-14: NUISANCES DECLARED:
No owner/developer shall permit a public nuisance to exist, as herein defined, and found to exist by
the building official or representative. (2003 Code § 11-12-12)
A. Public Nuisances Designated: All trees defaced, broken, dangerous or diseased, or that part of the
tree that constitutes a hazard, or part of the roots of any tree or shrub that interferes with or causes
the surface of the street, curb or sidewalk in public right of way to be upheaved or otherwise
disturbed, or any tree or shrub that has an infestation of pests, insects, or the eggs or larvae that
may spread or the continued existence thereof constitute a serious hazard, or any tree or shrub or
part thereof, whether public or private that overhang a public right of way or are growing thereon in
such a manner as to obstruct or impair the free and full use of the right of way, or that constitute a
sight hazard, as defined in subsection 11-9-3F of this chapter, are declared to be a public
nuisance.
B. Abatement Of Nuisance: If it is determined by the building official or representative that a public
nuisance exists, as defined in this chapter, the building official shall cause a notice to be issued to
abate such nuisance. Such notice shall be headed "Notice To Abate Nuisance", shall contain a
description of the property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the
nuisance, shall describe the nuisance in terms reasonably sufficient to identify the same, shall
direct the abatement of the nuisance, shall specify the penalty and the appeal process as provided
in this chapter. (2003 Code § 11-12-12)
11-9-15: ABATEMENT NOTICE AND SERVICE; APPEAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 456/528
A. Service Of Notice: The notice required by subsection 11-9-14B of this chapter may be served in the
following manner:
1. By personal service on the owner/developer of said premises; and/or
2. By registered mail to the owner/developer of said premises;
3. If said owner/developer does not live within the city limits or surrounding area, by registered mail
to the owner/developer at the address on the last available assessment roll or as otherwise
known, and by personal service on the account of the property if such person can be identified;
or
4. Should the owner/developer not be known and have an available address, by posting of such
notice at a conspicuous place on the land or abutting right of way, and insertion of an
advertisement at least once a week for a period of two (2) weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city, and by personal service on the occupant of the property if such person can
be identified. Said newspaper advertisement shall be a general notice that property in the city
has been posted in accordance with this chapter and contain a general statement of the effect of
such posting. The date of such newspaper advertisement shall not be considered in computing
the appeal periods provided by this chapter.
B. Appeal: Within ten (10) days from date of posting, mailing or personal service of the required notice
or area affected, the owner/developer may appeal to the planning and zoning commission. Such
appeal shall be in writing and filed with the planning and zoning secretary. At the next regular
meeting of the planning and zoning commission, the planning and zoning commission shall
proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal. That decision can be appealed to the city council in
writing and filed with the city clerk within five (5) days. The city council shall hear and make final
decision on that appeal. The decision shall therein be final and conclusive. (2003 Code § 11-12-13)
11-9-16: ABATEMENT REQUIRED; TIME LIMIT:
It shall be the duty of the owner/developer of any lot, place or area in the city that has been declared a
public nuisance, within ten (10) days from the date of notification, or in case of an appeal to the
planning and zoning commission, within ten (10) days from the determination thereof unless the same
is sustained, to remove the public nuisance as required.
A. Failure To Abate; Legal Action: Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner/developer so
notified to remove the public nuisance within the time specified in this section, the building official
or representative as provided in this chapter shall notify the city attorney in writing of the last
known legal owner and property description and general terms, and the city attorney shall cause
legal action to be undertaken.
B. Abatement At City Cost: At the city council's direction, upon failure, neglect or refusal of any owner
so notified to remove a public nuisance, as herein defined, within the time specified in this section,
the building official or representative shall proceed with the work specified in the notice. The cost of
the work shall be transmitted to the city council, who shall cause the same to be paid and levy a
special assessment against the property. (2003 Code § 11-12-14)
11-9-17: ENFORCEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 457/528
The building official or representative shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter. (2003
Code § 11-12-15)
11-9-18: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL:
An appeal from an administrative determination or interpretation made by the building official or
planning and zoning commission under this chapter, may be made by the applicant within ten (10)
days after written notice of decision has been mailed to the applicant. The appeal shall be in writing
and filed with the city clerk, who shall place the matter before the next city council meeting. The city
council may approve, refer back to the building official and planning and zoning commission, or deny
the request. The decision shall be made within fifteen (15) days of the meeting, and written
determination shall be mailed to the applicant at the address on the application. (2003 Code § 11-12-
15.1)
Chapter 10
TREES
11-10-1: STATEMENT OF VALUE:
Established trees are valuable assets to the community of Blackfoot. In the ecosystem typical of the
area, trees are uncommon and dependent on human care to survive. Healthy, strategically placed
trees beautify, increase property values, and make the community a more pleasant place to live. (Ord.
2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to establish a Blackfoot community forestry department and provide direction
in planting and caring for trees. The major objective is to promote and protect the public health, safety
and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, preservation, protection, and proper
maintenance of trees within city limits. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
ANSI A300: That certain standard tree, shrub and other woody plant maintenance standard practice
as set forth in ANSI A300 (part I) - 2001, as published by the American National Standards Institute,
Inc., and approved on May 22, 2001.
ANSI Z133.1: That certain safety standard regarding the planting and maintenance of trees in
proximity to utility lines as published by the American National Standards Institute, Inc., May 22, 2001
edition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 458/528
ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER: Any person(s) owning property adjacent to public rights of way.
ARBORICULTURE: The management of trees; including planting, pruning, watering, fertilizing,
removal or any other action which affects the healthy growth and maintenance of trees.
COMMUNITY FOREST: The sum of all trees and shrubs within the city.
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE: The area under a tree extending from the base of a tree in all directions to a
line ten feet (10') outside of the drip line.
DISEASE: A process that causes anatomical disruptions, physiological dysfunctions, and energy
disruptions that lead to decline and/or death of an organism or any of its parts.
HAZARDOUS TREES: Public or private trees that create any unsafe situation for persons using
adjacent public property.
LICENSE: An annually issued license issued by the city which allows the city to determine adequate
liability insurance coverage and proper knowledge of ANSI standards by any contractor doing tree
contracting within the city limits.
OBSTRUCTIVE TREES, SHRUBS OR HEDGES: Public or private trees that prevent appropriate
passage or safe vision on any public right of way.
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual
names, and all area owned by the city or to which the public has free access as a park.
PERMIT: Written approval issued by the city and required for any activity above or below ground that
may impact the canopy or the critical root zone of any public tree.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company, or other governmental
entity or organization of any kind.
PEST: Any insect, disease, animal or other organism that causes harm or damage to trees.
PRIVATE TREES: Any trees other than public trees.
PROPERTY OWNER: The recorded owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of land.
PRUNING: The practice of managing tree health according to the national standards as set forth in
ANSI A300.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Real property owned, managed, or leased to the city and dedicated to the
public for present or future use.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Improved or unimproved public property owned by, dedicated to, or deeded
to the public for pedestrians, vehicular or other public use. It includes, but is not limited to, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, access routes for public utilities, and open public spaces.
PUBLIC SAFETY: The condition of being safe from bodily harm or injury and/or property damage
resulting from tree conditions and/or failures while using public property.
PUBLIC TREES: Trees located upon public property owned by the city, including street trees.
SHRUB: A woody perennial plant, branched at or near the base and which at maturity is expected to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 459/528
grow less than fifteen feet (15') in height.
STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land lying between
property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways within the city.
TOPPING: The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within
the tree's crown or the removal of the top part (trunk and limbs) of a coniferous tree, thereby removing
the normal canopy and disfiguring the tree.
TREE: A woody perennial plant, usually having one main stem or trunk and many branches and
which, at maturity is expected to exceed fifteen feet (15') in height and two inches (2") in diameter. The
failure to achieve such height at maturity shall not preclude its consideration as a tree. (Ord. 2137, 10-
6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF A COMMUNITY FORESTRY DEPARTMENT:
There shall be a community forestry department to serve and assist with issues involving public trees.
This includes issues involving planting, maintenance, preservation, and removing of trees and shrubs
within city limits. All decisions and plans of the community forestry department are subject to approval
by the Blackfoot city council.
A. Membership: There shall be a total of four (4) members in the community forestry department,
consisting of the parks department superintendent, the street department superintendent, and two
(2) other members picked by the two (2) superintendents. Membership should consist of people
with interest in and knowledge of issues involving trees and urban horticulture. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-
2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-5: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of the two (2) nonsuperintendent members shall be two (2) years, or until his or her
successor is appointed. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-6: OPERATION:
The community forestry department shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations
regarding meetings, and keep a journal of its proceedings. All rules and regulations shall be subject to
city council approval. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. Members will maintain a seventy five percent (75%) attendance rate at meetings and work
sessions, or will be removed from the department and his or her successor shall be appointed for the
unexpired portion of the term. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-7: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES; MEETINGS; COMPENSATION:
A. Responsibilities: The Blackfoot community forestry department shall provide advice to the mayor,
city council and public works department as to the preservation, protection and management of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 460/528
community forest of Blackfoot, in accordance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. The
department shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
1. Assist the city in encouraging landscaping installation and maintenance on private property by
providing information on the value of landscaping and the proper planting and care of trees and
other vegetation;
2. Recommend policies and procedures to identify, mark, publicize and preserve historic and
notable trees on both public and private property;
3. Assist the city in promoting appreciation of trees and the community forest through annual Arbor
Day observances and other activities;
4. Encourage improvement of the community forest through planning and policy development;
5. Assist city departments in every way possible to enhance the community forest in the city;
6. Enhance opportunities for obtaining monetary funds for tree purchases, related supplies and
community forestry activities through local and federal assistantship grants and donations;
7. Serve as an advocate of the city's community forest.
B. Meetings: This department will meet when needed.
C. Advisors: Advisors may also be called to serve under a nonvoting status.
D. Compensation: Members and advisors of the committee shall serve without compensation.
E. Quorum: A majority of the members shall be present for the transaction of business.
F. Journal: The department shall keep a journal of its proceedings. The city will provide an assistant to
record notes and prepare minutes of each meeting. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-8: SPECIES OF TREES PERMITTED:
The "Master List Of Public Trees" shall be the official guideline for the selection and planting of trees
on public property. It shall include tree species recommended and species prohibited for planting on
public property and tree spacing suggestions. The "Master List Of Public Trees" shall be approved by
the city council as set forth in section 11-9-4 of this title.
The department and city forestry advisor shall maintain and periodically update the "Master List Of
Public Trees". The "Master List Of Public Trees" is available at the Blackfoot City Hall and on the city
of Blackfoot website.
It shall be unlawful to plant any tree within any public right of way or planting median or immediately
adjacent to a public street except those trees identified in the "Master List Of Public Trees" unless
advance, written permission is granted by the city council. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 461/528
11-10-9: UTILITIES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any public or private tree under or within ten (10) lateral
feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line,
sewer line, electric transmission or distribution line, or other utility except the species of trees
identified in the "Master List Of Public Trees For Utility Planting".
B. It shall be unlawful to plant any public or private tree at any location in any manner which does not
comply with the safety standards for planting and maintenance of trees in proximity to public
utilities, as set forth in ANSI Z133.1.
C. The city of Blackfoot will not be responsible for damage to any tree or shrub located within a utility
easement as a result of the operation or maintenance of city utility lines. Damage to any public
utility system caused by trees improperly located within the public right of way or easement will be
repaired at the owner's expense. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-10: ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS' RESPONSIBILITIES FOR PUBLIC
TREES:
A. Permits: Adjacent property owners shall:
1. Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary for work done (including, but not limited
to, pruning and removal) on any public trees.
2. Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary prior to commencing repair of damage
done to public streets or sidewalk adjacent to any public trees.
3. Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary for any tree planting on public property.
B. Routine Public Tree Maintenance:
1. Adjacent property owners shall:
a. Prune and maintain trees planted according to ANSI A300, a copy of which is available on the
city of Blackfoot website.
b. Topping, heading, shearing or rounding over are not acceptable forms of tree pruning and are
not allowed on public trees.
c. Except as otherwise determined by the public works department, branches that overhang
sidewalks or streets shall be pruned to provide sufficient vertical clearance over the sidewalk
and street so as not to interfere with public travel.
d. Trees shall be pruned to remove dead limbs or other limbs that are considered a public
nuisance.
2. Control pests on trees located on public rights of way adjacent to the owner's private real
property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 462/528
3. Provide water sufficient to keep trees located on public rights of way adjacent to the owner's
private real property in a healthy, growing condition.
C. Protection/Preservation:
1. Obtain a permit from the city before performing any activity, which may harm any part of a public
tree (inclusive of the critical root zone).
2. Notify the city when any part of a public tree is damaged or destroyed. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015,
eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-11: RESPONSIBILITIES FOR PRIVATE TREES:
All owners of real property shall provide the following routine tree maintenance:
A. Removal of trees located on the owner's private real property that are considered a public
nuisance.
B. Pruning of trees located on the owner's private real property that are considered a public nuisance.
Branches that overhang sidewalks or streets shall be pruned to provide sufficient vertical clearance
over the sidewalk and street so as not to interfere with public travel.
C. Control of pests on trees located on the owner's private real property that may pose a threat to
public trees upon determination by the community forestry department or city forestry advisor.
D. Remove or barricade all debris (wood, branches and leaves) on public property by the end of the
working day on which any tree work is done. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-12: RESPONSIBILITIES FOR ALLEY TREES:
Adjacent property owners shall prune, remove or otherwise abate public nuisances caused by alley
trees. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-13: LICENSING OF PRIVATE TREE SERVICE COMPANIES:
Tree service companies performing work on public trees are required to apply for a license through
the Blackfoot public works department. Applications are then reviewed by designated members of the
Blackfoot community forestry department and the public works department. Upon approval, licenses
shall be issued by the Blackfoot public works department valid for one year from the date of issue for a
fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
A. Licensing Requirements:
1. International Society Of Arboriculture (ISA) certified arborist on staff.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 463/528
2. An ISA certified arborist to be on site while work is being performed.
3. Liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
4. Knowledge and compliance of OSHA regulations.
5. Knowledge and compliance of ANSI A300 standards, a copy of which will be on the city of
Blackfoot website.
B. Revocation Of License: The Blackfoot public works department with the recommendation of the
Blackfoot community forestry department may revoke a license for violation of any section of this
chapter. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-14: NOTIFICATION AND PERMITS:
A. Notification: No person may perform any of the following acts without first notifying the Blackfoot
public works department. Contact the Blackfoot public works department via mail, phone, fax, or email
at a minimum of two (2) business days prior to commencement of the proposed work. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to exempt any person from the requirements of obtaining any
additional permits as required by law:
1. Prune, cut, remove or otherwise disturb any public tree. This provision shall not be construed to
prohibit owners of property adjacent to public rights of way from watering or fertilizing such trees;
2. Attach any object to public tree(s);
3. Dig, trench, excavate or pile soil or any other materials within the critical root zone of any public
tree(s).
B. Permit Application Procedures And Requirements For Public Tree(s) Removal:
1. This is in no way intended to interfere with the immediate removal of a tree that presents a
hazardous or emergency situation;
2. Upon inspection, the Blackfoot community forestry department may issue a permit through the
Blackfoot public works department. Permits are available at the Blackfoot City Hall during
regularly scheduled business hours;
3. The Blackfoot public works department may condition the approval of any permit;
4. Prior to the removal of any public, street, or alley tree, the property owner or private tree service
company intending to perform the work, which is currently licensed by the city of Blackfoot, must
make a request for permit. All work must be completed within thirty (30) days of issuance of said
permit;
5. Whenever a public or street tree is removed, the stump of said tree shall also be removed.
Permit holders shall then replace the removed tree. Tree replacement shall be a condition of
issuance of a permit for removal, unless the Blackfoot community forestry department for good
cause shown waives such requirement. Tree replacement is the responsibility of the permit
holder. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 464/528
11-10-15: REGULATIONS FOR PLANTING STREET TREES:
Street trees shall be classified in accordance with the three (3) species size classes listed in the
Blackfoot approved tree list. Street trees shall not be planted closer together than the following: small
trees, twenty feet (20'); medium trees, thirty feet (30'); large trees, forty feet (40'). No trees may be
planted closer to the back side of any curb or the nearest edge of any sidewalk than the following:
small trees, two feet (2'); medium trees, four feet (4'); and large trees, six feet (6'). All distances shall
be measured from the center of the tree trunk at ground level. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-16: TREES AND SHRUBS OVERHANGING PUBLIC PROPERTY:
All owners, or persons in control of private real property upon which a street tree or shrub is growing,
shall remove or trim, at his or her expense, all limbs or foliage which overhang or project into any
public street, sidewalk, alley or easement and which interfere with public travel or use of such public
way or easement or which do not satisfy the clear view requirements of the landscaping regulations of
the city. Street trees and shrubs shall be trimmed from the ground level to at least twelve feet (12')
above any public street, public easement or alley, and to at least seven feet (7') above the curb and
sidewalk.
All owners, or persons in control of real property within the city of Blackfoot, Idaho, shall remove or
trim, at his or her expense, all trees, bushes and shrubs or other ornamental foliage on such property
which overhang or project into any public street, sidewalk, alley or easement and which interfere with
public travel or use of such public way or easement or which do not satisfy the clear view
requirements of the landscaping regulations (chapter 9 of this title). Any such person who fails to
comply with the provisions of this section within ten (10) days after receiving written notice from the
Blackfoot street department to do so shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any trees and shrubs not
trimmed in accordance with this section may then be trimmed by the city and the expenses therefor
may be charged to the persons or property owners who fail to comply with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-17: ABUSE OF PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS:
A. Unless authorized by an appropriate public officer, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Injure, deface, disfigure or destroy any public tree;
2. Permit any animal under his control to injure any public tree or shrub;
3. Permit any fire to injure any portion of any public tree or shrub;
4. Cause any toxic chemical to be applied to, seep, drain or be emptied on or about any public tree
or shrub;
5. Attach any device or structure to or on public trees, in a manner which harms or which may
potentially harm a public tree;
6. Injure, destroy, cut or pick any flower or ornamental plant growing, standing or being on public
property;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 465/528
7. Make or cause excavations in the soil near roots of public trees unless appropriate measures
are taken to prevent exposed soil from drying out;
8. Damage the roots of a public tree by compacting or filling on or around the base of the tree;
9. To top, prune or trim any public tree, except in accordance with the provisions of ANSI A300;
10. Remove any public or street tree and fail to plant a replacement tree. The replacement tree
shall be an approved variety from the city of Blackfoot "Master List Of Public Trees" and shall be
a minimum of a ten (10) gallon size specimen. Where utility lines are present, a class I type tree
(mature height not greater than 20 feet), shall be required. Replacement tree shall be planted
within thirty (30) days of removal of said tree, or as soon as weather conditions allow.
11. Nothing herein shall prevent or prohibit the pruning, removal, treatment, care or maintenance of
any public tree or shrub, provided such work complies with the provisions of ANSI A300. (Ord.
2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-18: STREET TREE CARE:
The Blackfoot street department shall have the right to remove, trim, destroy and control all street
trees which are planted, grown or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter. The street
department shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove street trees within the lines of all
streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public
safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-
2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-19: TREE TOPPING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prune or top any public tree or other public tree, except in
accordance with ANSI A300. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-20: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
A. The city hereby declares the following actions, practices or objects to be a public nuisance:
1. Any living or standing private or public elm tree or part thereof infected with the Dutch elm
disease fungus Ceratocystis ulmi (Buisman) or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles
Scolytus multistriatus (Marsham) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Eichhoff).
2. Any public or private dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or
other elm material not buried, burned, sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle destroying
insecticide, or from which the bark has not been removed.
3. The cultivation, maintenance or allowing to grow of any private or public tree which harbors any
insect, disease or infestation by any living creature which poses a threat to the health or safety
of any other public or private tree within the city or which poses a health or safety threat to any
person or property.
4. Any public or private tree infested by any insect, pest or disease which is determined by the city
forester to pose a threat to the health of any other public or private tree.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 466/528
5. Any public or private tree, the roots of which are growing beneath a public sidewalk and which
cause a public hazard to the safe and efficient pedestrian travel upon such sidewalk.
6. Any public tree planted, growing or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any person who fails to commence the abatement of any nuisance within ten (10) days after
receiving written notice from the city, or who fails to diligently prosecute and complete the
abatement of such nuisance within a reasonable time after the delivery of such notice, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Such notice shall be delivered to the owner or person in control of any
property upon which such nuisance shall exist. Notice shall be deemed complete upon its deposit
in the United States mail, postage prepaid, certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to
the last known address of such owner or person.
C. In the event any owner or person in control of private real property fails to abate such nuisance in
accordance with the time frame set forth above, then the city may prevent, remove or abate such
nuisance at the expense of such owner or person and may levy a special assessment against the
property upon which such nuisance is located, in accordance with the provisions of Idaho Code
section 50-334. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-21: COMPENSATORY PAYMENTS:
In the event any person removes, destroys or damages any public tree except as otherwise required
by law, that person shall be required to replace such tree with a tree(s) of equivalent dollar value on
public property, unless otherwise determined by the community forestry department. The value of a
tree shall be determined by the city forestry advisor in accordance with accepted plant appraisal
methods set forth in the 9th edition of "The Guide For Plant Appraisal" published by the International
Society Of Arboriculture or the same as amended from time to time. If no suitable location exists in the
vicinity of the tree removed or if the replacement tree(s) is of lesser value, the person causing the tree
to be removed shall make a compensatory payment to the city of Blackfoot equal to the difference in
value between the tree removed and any replacement tree(s). Any public tree that is determined by
the city forestry advisor to be damaged, but not sufficiently to justify its removal, shall be considered to
be devalued. The amount of devaluation shall be paid to the city by the person causing the damage.
Compensatory payments shall be paid into a fund established for that purpose and restricted to use
for community forestry programs. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city of Blackfoot from
negotiating agreements with other governmental entities regarding penalties and compensatory
payment for removal, damage or destruction of public trees. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-22: INTERFERENCE WITH COMMUNITY FORESTRY DEPARTMENT OR
OTHER VIOLATIONS OF THIS CHAPTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the community forestry advisor,
the community forestry department, or any of the city departments, or their agents, while engaging in
and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street trees, park
trees, or trees on public property, as authorized in this chapter. Any violation of this chapter shall be
considered a misdemeanor and subject the person to a fine of not more than three hundred dollars
($300.00) and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days in the county jail. (Ord. 2137,
10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 467/528
11-10-23: ADOPTION OF ANSI A300 AND ANSI Z133.1:
There is hereby adopted as an official code for the maintenance of trees, shrubs and other woody
plants that certain standard maintenance practice as published in ANSI standard A300 (part I) - 2001,
as published by the American National Standards Institute, Inc., and approved on May 22, 2001.
There is also hereby adopted as an official code, that certain safety standard for planting and
maintenance of trees in proximity to utility lines, known as ANSI Z133.1 as published by the American
National Standards Institute, Inc., May 22, 2001 edition. One copy of such codes shall be filed with
and maintained in the office of the city clerk, for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-
2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-24: APPEAL PROCESS:
All portions of this chapter are appealable to the planning and zoning commission or hearing examiner
and subsequently, to the mayor and city council, provided the applicant, or their representative,
exercises that right, timely, by filing an appeal. A mediation process is also available. All procedures
herein to be conducted pursuant to this code. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-25: REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL:
The city council shall consider input from the citizens as well as the community forestry department
and shall make the final decision on issues properly brought before city council. On all issues brought
before city council, the decisions made by city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-
2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
Title 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
12-1-1: TITLE:
These regulations shall officially be known, cited and referred to as the SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO. (2003 Code § 12-01-01)
12-1-2: AUTHORITY:
A. This title is adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to the city pursuant to article 12, section 2
of the Idaho constitution, Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65, and title 50, chapter 13.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 468/528
B. The provisions of this title shall be administered to ensure orderly growth and development and
shall supplement and implement provisions of the comprehensive plan, this code and the capital
improvements plan. By virtue of provisions of this title, the city council, planning and zoning
commission and administrative staff of the city are vested with the authority to review, approve,
approve with conditions, or disapprove applications for the subdivision of land. (2003 Code § 12-
01-02)
12-1-3: APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION:
A. These regulations shall apply to all subdivision of land within the city limits and within the city area
of impact, unless exempt as provided in this title. All divisions of land that were the result of a legal
conveyance in compliance with prior subdivisions ordinances of the city or the county prior to the
effective date hereof, and that meet the requirements of the underlying zoning classification, shall
be considered eligible to apply for building permits. Certain provisions of this title shall apply to the
division of any tract of land outside the corporate limits of the city, but within the area of city impact
as agreed between the city and the county pursuant to Idaho Code.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry out actions constituting the subdivision of land without
first complying with the provisions of this title, and any other provisions of this code.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer ownership of lots constituting the subdivision of land
as defined or required by this title before a plat has been prepared and recorded pursuant to
procedures in Idaho Code title 50, chapter 13, or its successor, and all required improvements
have been constructed and accepted by the city or suitably guaranteed.
D. Exemptions to this title include:
1. Divisions of a tract of land made pursuant to testamentary provisions, the laws of descent, or
similar orders of partition entered by court proceedings to distribute undivided interests. Parcels
of land so created must comply with lot size, frontage and other standards established by this
code and other applicable laws to be eligible for a building permit or to qualify for establishment
of a regulated land use.
2. Divisions made for the purpose of lot line adjustments where no additional lots are created and
where the resultant tracts comply with the requirements of the underlying zoning classification.
3. Divisions made as the result of exercise of the powers of eminent domain as defined and
allowed for by Idaho Code.
4. Divisions made for the expansion or acquisition of road rights of way by a public agency.
5. Divisions for conveyance of land to the city, a public entity, homeowners' association or public
utility for a public or common purpose (well site, drainage site, fire station, school site, park site,
etc.).
6. Divisions made for cemeteries or burial plots. (2003 Code § 12-01-03)
12-1-4: PURPOSES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 469/528
A. Land proposed for subdivision must be suitable and safe for building without danger from flood or
other natural or manmade hazard pursuant to FEMA (federal emergency management agency)
standards. Proposed public improvements shall conform to and not be in conflict with goals and
policies set forth in the comprehensive plan. It is intended that these regulations shall complement
and implement provisions and standards contained in building codes, zoning ordinances, the
comprehensive plan and the capital improvement plan of the city.
B. This title is adopted to provide for the orderly division of land within the city, and:
1. To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city.
2. To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with the comprehensive
plan.
3. To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the city and to
encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the community's lands.
4. To guide public and private policy in order to provide adequate and efficient streets, water,
sewerage, drainage, parks and other public facilities.
5. To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions in order to further
the orderly layout and use of land, and to ensure proper legal description and monumentation of
subdivided land.
6. To ensure that public facilities and services are available concurrent with development and will
have sufficient capacity to serve the subdivision.
7. To ensure that the community will bear no more than its fair share of any cost of providing
services by requiring the developer to pay fees, furnish land, or establish mitigation measures to
provide a fair share of capital facilities needs generated by the development.
8. To assure the adequacy of drainage facilities to safeguard the water table, and to encourage the
wise use and management of natural resources to preserve the stability and beauty of the
community and the value of the land.
9. To provide open space through the most efficient design and layout of the land, while preserving
the density of development as established in the zoning ordinance of the city. (2003 Code § 12-
01-04)
12-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the meaning given in
this chapter:
When not inconsistent with the context, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not
merely directory, unless the express language of the ordinance provides otherwise. Except as
expressly defined herein, words used in this title shall be given their ordinary meaning consistent with
common usage and context.
ADT (AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC): The average number of cars per day that pass by or through a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 470/528
given location.
ADMINISTRATOR: The building official, public works inspector, planning and zoning administrator, or
his/her designee or another official expressly appointed by the mayor to administer all or part of this
title.
ALLEY: A right of way designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties
whose principal frontage is on some other street.
APPROACH: The location at which a driveway intersects with a public street.
ARTERIAL ROUTE: See LHTAC manual for highway and street standards.
BERM: A mound of soil, either natural or manmade, used to obstruct views and/or intercept noise,
and/or to provide separation.
BICYCLE LANE: A lane at the edge of a roadway reserved and marked for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
BICYCLE PATH: A pathway usually separated from the roadway, designed to be used by bicyclers.
BLOCK: A contiguous group of lots within defined boundaries established by plat.
BUFFER: An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to and parallel with the property line,
either consisting of natural existing vegetation or created by the installation of trees, shrubs, fences
and/or berms, designed to provide separation and limit the view of and/or sound transmission from a
site to adjacent sites.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street that carries traffic from residential streets to arterial streets, including
the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a
development.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: Land within or related to a development, not individually owned or
dedicated for public use, that is designed and intended for the common use of the residents of the
development. It may include structures and improvements.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: An adopted document that herein may be referred to as a comprehensive
plan or comprehensive development plan. The document shall show the general location and extent of
present and proposed development, including, but not limited to, housing, industrial and commercial
uses, streets, parks, schools and other community facilities.
CONCEPT PLAN: A preliminary presentation and attendant documentation of a proposed subdivision
of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification.
CONDOMINIUM: An estate consisting of an undivided interest in common real property, in an interest
or interests in real property, or in any combination thereof, together with a separate interest in real
property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination thereof.
CONDOMINIUM PLAN: A plat of the ground in a condominium project along with the legal description
of the individual ownerships within the project.
CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT: An agreement that more particularly describes the
duties and obligations of the parties for the development of a subdivision or portion of a subdivision.
The purpose is to establish specific construction details and guarantees necessary for the timely
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 471/528
construction of public infrastructure improvements and such other improvements as may be
necessary. The construction improvement agreement may be an addendum to the development
agreement.
COVENANT (PROTECTIVE COVENANT): A written promise or pledge.
CUL-DE-SAC: A local street with only one outlet and having the other end for the reversal of traffic
movement.
DEDICATION: An act conveying property rights or interests to the public.
DENSITY: The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land to be developed.
DEVELOPER: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land included in a proposed
development. Also, the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or any other person having
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT: A project involving substantial property improvement and, usually, a change of land
use character within the site; the act of using land for building or extractive purposes.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: An agreement setting forth the responsibilities of the city and the
developer, conditions applicable to the development and development schedules, entered into after
subdivision approval has been granted but prior to construction. Entering into a development
agreement shall be a condition of approval of any subdivision unless no improvements are to be
made. A development agreement is typically not required for a minor subdivision.
DIVIDED STREET: A street having an island or other barrier separating traffic.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner to specific persons or to the public to use land for specific
purposes. Also, a right acquired by prescription.
EXCEPTION: Any requested alternative design or change in subdivision ordinance requirements.
FINAL APPROVAL: The official action of the city council taken on an approved subdivision after all
conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the
required improvements have been installed, or guarantees properly posted for their completion.
FINAL PLAT: The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision that is presented for final approval. (See
also definition of Plat.)
FLOODPLAIN: The relatively flat area of low land adjoining the channel of a river, stream, lake or
other body of water that has been or may be covered by water of a flood of 100-year frequency. The
floodplain includes the channel, floodway and floodway fringe, as established per the engineering
practices as specified by the army corps of engineers, as follows:
Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks to
confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
Flood: The temporary inundation of land adjacent to and inundated by overflow from a river,
stream, lake or other body of water.
Flood Of 100-Year Frequency: A flood magnitude that has a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 472/528
Floodway: The channel or a watercourse and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the
channel that are reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater of any watercourse.
Floodway Fringe: That part of the floodplain that is beyond the floodway. Such areas will include
those portions of the floodplain that will be inundated by a flood of 100-year frequency but which
may be developed when such development will not have a significant effect upon the floodwater
carrying capacity of the floodway and the floodwater levels. Such areas are characterized by
shallow flood depths and low velocities of water flow.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A service street that is parallel to a higher order street that, for purposes of
safety, provides access to abutting properties and separation from through traffic.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A plan outlining general, rather than detailed, development
intentions. It describes the basic parameters of a development proposal, rather than giving full
engineering details. As such, it allows general intentions to be proposed and discussed without the
extensive costs involved in submitting a detailed proposal.
GUARANTEE: See definition of Performance Guarantee.
INFILL DEVELOPMENT: Development that occurs within the boundaries of the city and is most often
associated with smaller parcels (2 acres or less) of land skipped over by larger developments or land
that falls between larger developments that made use of city utilities from another direction or source.
Developments that extend the city's boundaries will not be considered infill development.
LOT: A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
LOT FRONTAGE: That portion of a lot extending along an adjacent primary platted right of way.
LOT LINE: A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from another lot or from a public or
private street or any other public space.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: A realignment of boundary lines between adjoining lots where no additional
lots are created.
MANUFACTURED HOME: See definition of mobile home in section 11-1-3 of this code.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A service street that is parallel to a higher order street that, for
purposes of safety, provides access to abutting properties and separation from through traffic.
MEDIAN: That portion of a divided street separating lanes of traffic proceeding in opposite directions.
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING: A document that memorializes the review process and sets
forth the conditions of approval of a minor subdivision that is signed by the administrator and the
developer after approval by the city council.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: A subdivision containing four (4) or fewer lots and proposing no new streets,
extensions to existing streets, and where infrastructure is in place or available.
MOBILE HOME: A detached single-family dwelling unit with all of the following characteristics:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 473/528
A. Designed for long term occupancy, and combining sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a
tub or shower bath, and kitchen facilities, with plumbing and electrical connections provided for
attachment to outside systems.
B. Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels, or on flatbed or other trailers or
detached wheels.
C. Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete, including major appliances
and furniture, and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, location on foundation supports, connection to utilities and the like.
OFF SITE: Not located on the property that is the subject of a development application or on a
contiguous portion of a street or right of way.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE: A parking space provided in a parking lot, parking structure or
private driveway.
ON SITE: Located on the lot in question or on the property being developed.
ON STREET PARKING SPACE: A parking space that is located on a dedicated street right of way.
OPEN SPACE: Land, essentially free of structures, set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for
the public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space.
PARKING LANE: A lane usually located on the sides of streets, designed to provide on street parking.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE: Security in a form that serves as a guarantee that the public or
identified common improvements required as part of the approval of a development are satisfactorily
completed.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed as a combination of
residential, commercial and industrial uses planned for a tract of land to be developed as a unit under
single ownership or control, which is developed for the purpose of selling individual lots or estates,
whether fronting on private or dedicated streets, which may include two (2) or more principal buildings.
PLAT: The reproducible and permanent drawing of a subdivision and dedications and easements,
prepared for filing and recording with the county recorder in accordance with state law.
PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE: A meeting among developers, city staff, and other
representatives that affords developers the opportunity to present their proposals informally.
PRIVATE STREET: A street designed, constructed and maintained on private property.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: A parcel of land or right of use conveyed or otherwise dedicated to the city,
state or county agency, or other public body for recreational or conservation uses by the public.
RESERVE STRIP: A strip of land reserved by a developer for future development and sale. The strip
generally lies between a road or easement and the undeveloped property. See section 12-6-16 of this
title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 474/528
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY: The number of dwelling units per gross acre of residential land area,
including streets, easements and open space portions of a development.
SITE PLAN REVIEW COMMITTEE: A committee consisting of a representative from the following:
traffic safety, street department, sewer department, water department, fire department, affected school
district, city engineer, parks department, the affected ditch company, and building and public works
construction inspector. The city engineer shall serve as chairperson of the committee and the building
and public works construction inspector shall serve as vice chairperson of the committee.
SKETCH PLAN: A rough plan of a proposed subdivision showing the general location streets and lots
in enough detail to be reviewed.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels, or
other divisions of land for sale or development, subject to the exemptions set forth in this title.
SUBDIVISION (MINOR): A minor subdivision is a subdivision of four (4) or fewer lots that create no
new streets.
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL: The approval status of a subdivision proposal prior to plat approval after
specific elements of a subdivision plan have been approved by the city council.
SUBDIVISION PLAN: A drawing indicating the proposed layout of a development showing locations of
rights of way and lots and blocks and related information that is submitted for preliminary approval.
TRIP: A single or one-way vehicle movement to or from a property or study area. "Trips" can be added
together to calculate the total number of vehicles expected to enter and leave a specific land use or
site over a designated period of time.
UTILITIES: Installations for conducting water, sewage, gas, electricity, television, cable, fiber optics,
telephone, stormwater and similar facilities providing service to and used by the public.
WAIVER OF CONDITIONS: A request for special conditions of subdivision approval as requested by
an applicant.
WARRANTY GUARANTEE: A percentage of the cost of public subdivision improvements provided as
cash in escrow, bond or irrevocable letter of credit to warrant the design, construction materials and
workmanship of the improvements for a specified period of time. (2003 Code § 12-02-01)
12-1-6: ENACTMENT:
In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with these purposes and policies, this title is
hereby adopted and shall become effective upon its passage and publication according to law. All
applications for subdivision approval, including final approval, pending on the effective date of these
regulations, shall be reviewed pursuant to the ordinances in effect at the time an original completed
application was accepted for processing. Pending applications that are allowed to lapse due to
inaction by the applicant shall be governed by this title if refiled after it becomes effective. (2003 Code
§ 12-01-05)
12-1-7: AMENDMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 475/528
When necessary to further its purposes, this title may be amended in the manner prescribed by Idaho
Code. (2003 Code § 12-01-06)
12-1-8: FEES AND MITIGATION:
A. Reasonable fees sufficient to recover incurred costs may be charged. The city council may, by
resolution, adopt fees for services associated with review, processing and inspection of
subdivisions. Such fees shall be reasonably related to the costs of services provided by the city
with respect to the subdivision of land.
B. The city may, as a condition of approval of a subdivision, require mitigation of the effects of
development on the ability of the city, and other political subdivisions, to deliver services without
compromising quality or imposing substantial additional costs to current residents. Such conditions
may not exceed the actual impact of the development unless the developer agrees to such
conditions. In lieu of such mitigation or as a complement thereto, the developer may pay fees that
will be used by the city to mitigate such impacts. (2003 Code § 12-01-07)
12-1-9: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. It shall be the authority of the building and public works construction inspector and the public works
director or his/her designees to enforce the provisions of this title.
B. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or
plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations, nor shall the city have any
obligation to issue certificates of occupancy or to extend utility services to any parcel created or
established in violation of this title. (2003 Code § 12-01-08)
C. Violations of the provisions of this title may be deemed an infraction, or a misdemeanor crime,
punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code, with each day such violation continues
constituting a separate offense. The city shall have recourse to such civil remedies in law and
equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of these regulations. (2003
Code § 12-01-08; amd. 2012 Code)
12-1-10: INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY:
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum
requirements. More stringent provisions may be required if it is demonstrated that such standards
are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
B. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, statute, or other provision of law except as provided in these regulations. Where any
provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 476/528
provision that is more restrictive or imposes the standards most likely to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare shall control.
C. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, private covenant or any other
private agreement or restriction; provided, that where the provisions of these regulations are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or regulation, the requirements of these regulations shall
govern irrespective of private contractual provision.
D. The provisions of this title are severable. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this title is
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of this title. The remainder shall be interpreted to further the purposes of this
title.
E. The provisions of this title serve to supersede prior ordinances regulating subdivision of land in the
city. (2003 Code § 12-01-09)
12-1-11: SAVINGS PROVISION:
A. The adoption of these regulations shall not abate any action now pending under prior subdivision
regulations or abate, modify, or alter any penalty accruing or about to accrue.
B. These regulations shall not waive any right of the city under any section or provision existing at the
time of adoption, or vacate or annul any rights obtained by any person, firm or corporation by
lawful action of the city except as expressly provided for herein. (2003 Code § 12-01-10)
12-1-12: RESERVATIONS AND REPEALS:
Upon the adoption of these regulations according to law, the previously enacted subdivision ordinance
of the city, as amended, hereby is repealed, except as provided above. (2003 Code § 12-01-11)
12-1-13: EXCEPTIONS AND WAIVERS OF CONDITIONS:
A. Where strict compliance with these regulations and/or the purposes of these regulations may be
better served by an alternative proposal, the city council may approve exceptions and/or waiver of
conditions to these regulations. The granting of an exception or waiver of conditions shall not have
the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. The city council shall not permit
exceptions and/or waiver of conditions unless it finds, based upon the evidence presented to it in
each specific case, that:
1. The granting of the exception, or waiver of conditions will not be detrimental to the public safety,
health or welfare or injurious to other property.
2. The conditions upon which the request is based are unique to the property for which the relief is
sought and are not applicable generally to other property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 477/528
3. Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the
specific property involved, a particular and unnecessary hardship to the owner would result if the
strict application of these regulations is applied.
4. The change sought will not vary the provisions of the zoning ordinance or comprehensive plan,
except that those documents may be amended in the manner prescribed by law.
B. In approving exceptions or waivers of conditions, the city council may require conditions that will
secure the purposes of this title. An exception is any alternative design, or proposed change in
subdivision ordinance requirements that is requested by the developer. The exception requested
must be reviewed as an integral part of the overall review process as outlined in this title. A request
for an exception shall be submitted in writing by the developer at the time that the subdivision
application is filed and shall be reviewed along with the subdivision. The request shall specify
which ordinance provisions shall be subject to exception along with the proposed changes and the
reasons why the changes are necessary. The planning and zoning commission shall make a
recommendation to the city council specific to the exception requested. The city council shall
render a decision on the requested exception at the time the subdivision is reviewed.
C. A waiver of conditions is a request to change the conditions of subdivision approval as agreed to in
the development agreement. A request for a waiver of conditions must be in writing and submitted
to the planning department prior to acceptance by the city of construction improvements or
recordation of the final plat. The request shall specify the condition needing to be waived and the
reasons the waiver would be justified. Upon receipt of a request, the administrator will place the
request on the agenda of the planning and zoning commission for hearing. Notice of hearing shall
be provided in the same manner as hearing for subdivision approval. The request will be reviewed
and the planning and zoning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council. The city
council shall review the recommendation and shall render a decision on the waiver of conditions.
(2003 Code § 12-01-12)
Chapter 2
APPLICATION, REVIEW AND APPROVAL
12-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedures for review and action on applications for
subdivisions. The procedure is intended to provide orderly and expeditious processing of subdivision
applications. (2003 Code § 12-03-01)
12-2-2: PREAPPLICATION:
A. Submit Preliminary Plat: Prior to submittal of a subdivision application, the developer shall submit
six (6) copies of a preliminary plat plan to the site plan review committee.
B. Review Scheduled: The city engineer shall schedule and hold the preliminary site plan review
within thirty (30) days from the submittal date, unless the developer agrees to additional time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 478/528
C. Review: A preliminary site plan review allows the developer an opportunity to meet with municipal
staff and other representatives deemed appropriate by the city engineer. A representative of the
various public works departments shall be invited to all preliminary site plan review meetings.
Elected officials and planning and zoning commission members shall not be a part of this process.
Items to be reviewed:
1. The general subdivision process.
2. Overall design, lot sizes and street layout.
3. Preliminary utility design.
4. Conformity to the comprehensive plan.
5. Potential off site impacts/mitigation.
6. Off site/on site improvements.
D. Additional Review: Additional preliminary site plan review may be scheduled by the city engineer
when, in the collective judgment of staff, the proposed subdivision is extraordinarily complex,
proposes large impacts to city utility systems, or requires extraordinary staff time. Total time for
preliminary site plan review shall not exceed sixty (60) days from the date of submittal unless the
developer agrees to additional time.
E. Written Report: At the conclusion of the preliminary site plan review process, the city engineer shall
provide the developer with a written site plan review report, which includes a statement of issues,
concerns and recommendations deemed important by the city staff based upon the level of
information available at the time of preliminary site plan review. The site plan review report allows
the developer to submit an application for subdivision review. A site plan review report states that
the proposed subdivision has been reviewed by appropriate staff and agencies and is eligible to
submit an application and does not constitute an approval in any way. Such notice may include
comments, concerns and recommendations of the staff and participating agencies.
F. Validity; Extension: A site plan review report is valid for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days.
The city engineer may extend the duration of site plan review report for an additional one hundred
eighty (180) days if conditions of the preliminary site plan review have not changed materially. After
expiration of a site plan review report, the developer shall be required to resubmit for a preliminary
site plan review. (2003 Code § 12-03-02)
12-2-3: SUBDIVISION APPLICATION:
A. Submittal: Applications for subdivisions shall be submitted and accepted at least forty five (45) days
before the date of the public hearing at which it is to be reviewed. Minor subdivisions may be
submitted to the city engineer at any time. No application for a subdivision shall be accepted until a
preliminary site plan review has been completed and a written site plan review report has been
issued by the city engineer. The city engineer may waive the preliminary site plan review for a
minor subdivision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 479/528
B. Direction Of City Engineer: The developer shall have the option of seeking the direction of the city
engineer as to which approvals are required and the appropriate review process, or of filing an
application the developer believes to be appropriate. The city engineer's determination shall be
presumed to be correct. (2003 Code § 12-03-03)
12-2-4: SUBMITTAL OF SUBDIVISION APPLICATION:
A. Intent: The documents submitted are intended to provide the approving authority with sufficient
information and data to assure compliance with all municipal codes and specifications and ensure
that the proposed development meets the design and improvement standards contained in this
title.
B. Waiver May Be Permitted: Documents to be submitted are listed and described in this section. In
specific cases and for documented reasons, the city engineer may waive the submission of a
particular document. All documents must be submitted, unless waived in writing, before an
application is accepted and processed.
C. Minor Subdivision: An application for a minor subdivision or subdivision shall include the following:
1. An application form, provided by the planning and building department, filled out completely and
signed by the developer.
2. The names and addresses of the owners of real property within three hundred feet (300') of the
exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
3. Plans of the proposed minor subdivision or subdivision. The number of copies will be
determined by the city engineer. In addition to the plans, six (6) reduced copies, eleven inches
by seventeen inches (11" x 17") in dimension, shall be provided.
4. Plans submitted shall include the elements listed in table 1, "Subdivision Plan Elements", of this
section.
5. Preliminary construction plans shall be submitted for all required improvements, including
sanitary sewer, water supply, stormwater collection and disposal, streets, sidewalks and any
other elements determined to be necessary during preliminary site plan review. Preliminary
construction plans shall be prepared by a civil engineer licensed in the state. Listed elements
may be waived, or additional items added by the city engineer at the preliminary site plan review.
The waiving or the addition of elements to the plans shall be in writing and made a part of the
site plan review report. A list of elements to be included on preliminary construction plans is
found in table 2, "Preliminary Construction Plan Elements", of this section.
TABLE 1. SUBDIVISION PLAN ELEMENTS
Elements Required
Subdivision
Minor
Subdivision
1. Name of subdivision, name and address of the developer X X
2. A vicinity map X
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 480/528
3. Existing/proposed zoning X X
4. North arrow and scale X X
5. Metes and bounds description with dimensions of the site X X
6. Acreage of the tract to the nearest tenth of an acre X X
7. Show location of existing structures and setbacks from
proposed lot lines
X X
8. Location, width and names of all existing or platted streets or
other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the tract
X X
9. Location, sizes, elevations and slopes of existing sewers,
water mains, culverts and other underground structures within
the tract and adjacent thereto
X X
10. All adjacent streets, including swales, curb and sidewalk X X
11. Location and size of proposed water and sewer lines X
12. Location of existing and proposed streetlights X X
13. All proposed streets. Show width, curb, swales and sidewalks
X
14. Location, dimensions and area of all parcels of land to be set
aside for parks, open space or other public use, or for the use of
property owners in the proposed subdivision
X X
15. Location and typical size of proposed lots X X
16. Any existing or proposed easements and right of way
dedications
X X
17. Development phases, or stages, if the project will be done
over several years
X
18. Existing vegetation (trees and significant vegetation) X X
19. Streams, watercourses, natural drainage patterns, wetlands
or floodplains
X X
20. Proposed street names X
21. Topography shall be shown at an appropriate contour
interval. Slopes of over 5 percent shall be shown in 5 foot
intervals
X
22. Data table showing number of lots, density in lots per acre,
and average lot size
X X
TABLE 2. PRELIMINARY CONSTRUCTION PLAN ELEMENTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 481/528
Items Required Subdivision
Minor
Subdivision
1. Proposed utility infrastructure plans, including sanitary sewer,
water and stormwater management
X
2. Soil erosion and sediment control plan if required by the city
engineer
X if required
X if required
3. Street and paving cross sections. Indicate slopes in excess of
5 percent
X X if required
4. Proposed street names X
5. Streetlighting plans X X if required
6. Site identification signs, traffic control signs and directional
signs
X X
7. Pedestrian circulation plans X X
8. Right of way landscape plan and details X X
9. Traffic studies, if required by the city engineer X if required
10. Areas of cuts or fills of more than 4 feet X X
(2003 Code § 12-03-04)
12-2-5: MINOR SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
A. Purpose: The purpose of minor subdivision review is to provide a simplified procedure for
processing minor subdivisions administratively. Minor subdivisions are subdivisions of four (4) or
fewer lots that create no new streets. The process is intended for the creation of lots along existing
streets where infrastructure is available. A minor subdivision may be part of a planned unit
development. A developer proposing to create additional lots on the same original parcel within a
single five (5) year period (multiple minor subdivisions from 1 parcel) as a minor subdivision may
be required by the city engineer to use the full subdivision review process if the city engineer
determines that the multiple minor subdivisions may have a significant impact on public facilities to
be used by the development.
B. Schedule Staff Review: Upon receipt of a complete application, the city engineer shall schedule a
minor subdivision review with staff and the developer. A date for the review will be established
within seven (7) days from the date of application acceptance.
C. Copies Of Documents Submitted; Notice To Adjacent Property Owners: The city engineer shall
provide copies of submitted documents, as necessary, to outside agencies and jurisdictions, that,
in the opinion of the city engineer, may be affected by the proposal. In addition, the city engineer
shall provide written notice to the owners of property adjacent to the property proposed for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 482/528
development. The notice shall provide the adjacent property owners a plan of the minor
subdivision, general information concerning the proposal, and the time frame for submitting written
comments. The period of time for comment or response shall not be less than fourteen (14) days
nor greater than twenty one (21) days from the date of notice.
D. Hearing Officer; Review: The city engineer shall act as hearing officer and shall conduct a minor
subdivision review, along with appropriate staff, to ensure that all applicable ordinance provisions
are followed or completed. Minor subdivision review shall include but not be limited to:
1. Review of lot size and dimensions for conformance to the zoning ordinance.
2. Determination that there are adequate provisions to serve the minor subdivision with sewer and
water.
3. Review of the location of fire hydrants.
4. Review the location for the installation of streetlights if determined to be necessary by the public
works department.
5. Determine if mitigation of any impact is warranted.
6. Define the scope of improvements and dedications required (curb, sidewalk, paving, water,
sewer, drainage, easements, right of way dedication, etc.).
7. Evaluation of the location of potential rights of way to access adjoining parcels.
E. Decision; Notice: A decision shall be rendered within seven (7) days of the review unless
circumstances require otherwise, such circumstances to be set forth in writing to the applicant. The
city engineer shall, by written decision, grant approval, approval with conditions, or deny the minor
subdivision. Notice of the action taken by the city engineer shall also be mailed to the owners of
real property adjacent to the minor subdivision. A decision to deny shall be in writing and indicate
reasons for denial and indicate what steps are necessary to obtain approval. In the case of
approval or approval with conditions, a memorandum of understanding shall be prepared that
details the conditions of approval and the responsibilities of the developer. The memorandum of
understanding shall be signed by the developer and the city engineer prior to proceeding to plat
review.
F. Appeal: The developer or any affected party may appeal the decision of the city engineer by filing a
notice of appeal with the city council, with a copy to the city engineer, no later than fourteen (14)
days after the date of the city engineer's decision. The appeal shall set forth in clear and concise
fashion the basis for appeal. Upon receipt, the city clerk shall schedule the appeal for
consideration at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council at which it can be
accommodated. The appellant shall be allowed to make a presentation under procedures
established by the city council. Those opposing the appeal shall have an opportunity to present
and rebut the appellant's presentation. Staff may provide a staff report. The city council, after
consideration of the elements of the appeal, shall render a decision affirming or reversing the city
engineer within forty five (45) days from the date on which the notice of appeal is filed, unless
circumstances require that more time be taken to reach a decision, the reason therefor being
stated in a formal motion by the city council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 483/528
G. Effective Period Of Approval; Extension: The approval of a minor subdivision shall be effective for a
period of one year from the date of approval. If a plat is not submitted for approval within the one
year period, the minor subdivision approval shall be null and void, and the developer shall be
required to submit a new application. Prior to the expiration date of the effective period, the
developer may request an extension, in writing, from the city engineer. The city engineer may grant
an extension, not to exceed twelve (12) months, upon a showing of good cause by the developer.
The city engineer shall decide a request for extension within fourteen (14) days of the receipt of the
written request. The developer may appeal the city engineer's decision to deny extension to the
mayor.
H. Amendments:
1. At any time after minor subdivision approval and before submission of a subdivision plat, the
developer may request of the city engineer that an amendment be made to the minor subdivision
plan or to conditions of approval. If the proposed amendment is a minor change to the plan and
consistent with conditions of approval, the city engineer may grant the amendment in writing
within ten (10) days of the request, unless the city engineer determines that additional time is
necessary for reasons stated in writing. If the amendment is major or involves a change in the
conditions of approval, the city engineer shall schedule a review with staff, and notify adjoining
landowners, in his discretion, to review the proposed amendment. The date for the review shall
be scheduled within twenty one (21) days of the request.
2. Upon completion of the review for the amendment request, the city engineer may grant the
amendment if the minor subdivision is not substantially changed and does, in fact, remain a
minor subdivision. If the proposed amendment changes the plan to cause it to become a
subdivision, the city engineer shall disapprove the amendment and notify the developer to
adhere to the approved plan or to apply for the full subdivision review process. (2003 Code § 12-
03-05)
12-2-6: SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this process is to provide a timely and efficient review of subdivisions. A
subdivision is any division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots and
accompanied by proposed new streets or extensions to existing streets, and/or extensions of
municipal sewer and water services. A subdivision may be part of a planned unit development
(PUD).
B. Official Submission Date: The date that a completed application is accepted by the city engineer
and the zoning administrator shall be the official submission date.
C. Public Hearing Before Planning And Zoning Commission; Notice: Upon acceptance of an
application for subdivision approval along with all of the required submittals, the zoning
administrator shall schedule a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission. The
public hearing shall be held at least forty five (45) days after but within seventy five (75) days of the
official submission date if the agenda of the planning and zoning commission permits. The zoning
administrator shall:
1. Submit a notice for publication in the official newspaper of the city. Such notice shall provide the
time and place of the public hearing, a description of the location of the subdivision, a brief
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 484/528
statement summarizing the request, and a vicinity map. Notice shall be published at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the public hearing.
2. Mail notices to all owners of property within three hundred feet (300') of the boundaries of the
land proposed to be subdivided and to such owners as the zoning administrator believes should
receive notice. The developer shall provide a current mailing list of all property owners within
three hundred feet (300') of the boundaries of the subdivision. Such notice shall provide the time
and place of the public hearing, a description of the location of the subdivision, a brief statement
summarizing the request and a vicinity map. Notice shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the public hearing.
3. Post notice on the property. The notice shall provide the time and place of the public hearing, a
brief statement summarizing the request, and a phone number to call for information. Notice
shall be posted on the property at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing.
4. Notice and request for comment shall be mailed to agencies, utilities and other jurisdictions
deemed appropriate by the city engineer or required by Idaho Code no later than fifteen (15)
days prior to the public hearing date. The notice and request for comment shall include
application information, notice of the public hearing date, additional staff comments and a date
by which comments are to be received. A copy of the application and a copy of the subdivision
plan shall be included.
D. Report Required: The zoning administrator shall prepare a report for the planning and zoning
commission that provides information about the site and the subdivision to aid the commission in
making a recommendation. The report should include, but is not limited to, the following
information, whether part of the application materials or otherwise:
1. The current zoning and comprehensive plan policies relevant to the proposed subdivision.
2. Existing land use on the site of the subdivision as well as the surrounding land use.
3. The location, size and adequacy of capacity of existing sewer and water lines.
4. A description of the physical characteristics of the site to include a basic inventory of vegetation
and any unique features.
5. A description of existing streets serving the site of the subdivision and a synopsis of the
proposed streets.
6. A preliminary site plan report.
7. An analysis of the impact of the subdivision on the infrastructure of the community. This shall
include deficiencies in existing infrastructure and what improvements would be needed to bring
the infrastructure up to an acceptable level of service.
8. Recommended conditions if the subdivision should be approved.
E. Recommendation To City Council: After the planning and zoning commission has reviewed the
subdivision plan, preliminary construction plans, staff report and testimony and exhibits submitted
at the public hearing, the commission shall forward a recommendation to the city council. The
planning and zoning commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or
disapproval of the subdivision within thirty (30) days of the public hearing, unless circumstances
require a longer review period for reasons set forth in a motion adopted by the commission. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 485/528
zoning administrator shall notify the developer, in writing, within seven (7) days of the action by the
planning and zoning commission. Such notification shall specify any recommended conditions or
changes requested and shall advise the developer that the subdivision will be placed on the
agenda of the city council only upon the developer's written request.
F. Decision Of City Council: The city council, upon receipt of a site plan report and recommendation
from the planning and zoning commission, and after an opportunity to review the file and minutes
of the public hearing, shall act upon the request. The city council shall approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove the subdivision within thirty (30) days of the date of the council meeting
at which it is reviewed, or in such time as it may be determined by motion approved by the city
council. The city engineer shall notify the developer in writing of the decision of the city council
and, in the case of approval or approval with conditions, shall prepare a development agreement
for signature by the developer and the city.
G. Required Findings: No subdivision shall receive a recommendation of approval from the planning
and zoning commission or be approved by the city council, unless findings and conclusions are
made that:
1. Definite provision has been made for a water supply system that is adequate in terms of
quantity, and quality for the type of subdivision proposed.
2. Adequate provisions have been made for a public sewage system and that the existing
municipal system can accommodate the proposed sewer flows.
3. Proposed streets are consistent with the transportation element of the comprehensive plan and
comply with current city design criteria.
4. Adequate provisions have been made for stormwater collection, retention and/or conveyance.
Facilities are sized according to city drainage policy and design criteria.
5. All areas of the proposed subdivision that may involve soil or topographical conditions
presenting hazards have been identified and that the proposed uses of these areas are
compatible with such conditions.
6. The area proposed for subdivision is zoned for the proposed use and the use conforms to other
requirements found in this code.
7. The developer has made adequate plans to ensure that the community will bear no more than
its fair share of costs to provide services by paying fees, furnishing land or providing other
mitigation measures for off site impacts to streets, parks and other public facilities within the
community. It is the expectation that, in most cases, off site mitigation will be dealt with through
the obligation to pay service availability fees. A fee schedule shall be set by city council
resolution.
H. Preparation Of Construction Plans: The developer shall have construction plans prepared by a civil
engineer, licensed in the state. Such plans shall adhere to the design and improvement standards
set forth in this title. No construction of any kind shall take place on the site of an approved
subdivision until final construction plans are reviewed and approved by the public works
department, and a development agreement is. Systems reviewed and subject to staff approval
include, but are not limited to:
1. Streets, including curbs and sidewalks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 486/528
2. Water delivery system and water supply.
3. Sanitary sewer system.
4. Stormwater collection and treatment plans, including stormwater management during
construction.
5. Streetlight plans.
6. Off site improvements (streets, traffic signals, sidewalks, lighting, etc.).
I. Developer To Proceed With Construction: The developer may proceed with construction of the
subdivision if:
1. The city council has approved the subdivision.
2. The city engineer and planning and zoning administrator has approved the subdivision.
3. A development and construction agreement has been completed.
4. All applicable permits are obtained.
J. Time Limits: Time limits contained within this section are directory. Violation of time limits
established in this section shall not be the basis for damages and shall have no effect on the
approval or disapproval of a subdivision. Time limits provided herein may be extended for good
cause. The city engineer shall be informed of any failure of staff to meet time limits, and shall take
appropriate action to ensure that limits are conformed to when circumstances allow. (2003 Code
§ 12-03-06)
12-2-7: CONFORMANCE TO REGULATIONS; APPROVAL DURATION:
A. Conformance Required: Every subdivision shall conform to zoning and subdivision regulations
applicable at the official submission date.
B. Effective Period Of Approval: The approval of a subdivision shall be effective for a period of one
year from the date that the development agreement is approved unless a different time period is
requested by the developer, in writing at the time of application, and agreed to by the city council in
a development agreement. By the end of the time period, the developer must have submitted a
plat for review and approval. If a plat is not submitted for final approval within the one year period,
the subdivision approval shall be null and void, and the developer shall be required to submit a
new application.
C. Extension: Prior to the expiration date of the effective period, the developer may request an
extension, in writing, from the city engineer. The city engineer may grant an extension, not to
exceed twelve (12) months, upon a showing of good cause by the developer. The city engineer
shall render a decision to grant or not grant an extension within fifteen (15) days of the date of
submittal to the city engineer. The developer may appeal the decision of the city engineer to the
mayor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 487/528
D. Amendments: At any time after subdivision approval and before submission of a subdivision plat,
the developer may request of the city engineer, in writing, that an amendment be made to the
subdivision plan or to conditions of approval. If the proposed amendment is a minor change to the
plan, the city engineer may grant the amendment in writing. If the amendment is major or involves
a substantial change in the conditions of approval, the city engineer shall schedule a public hearing
at least thirty (30) days after the receipt of the request. The planning and zoning commission shall
hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment in accordance with the same requirements for a
public hearing for subdivision approval.
E. Public Hearing For Major Amendments: A public hearing on a proposed major amendment shall be
limited to whether the proposed amendment should or should not be approved. The planning and
zoning commission may approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove any proposed major
amendment and may make any modifications in the terms and conditions of subdivision approval
reasonably related to the proposed amendment. The planning and zoning commission shall render
a decision on the proposed amendment within thirty (30) days from the date of the public hearing
or in such time as it may determine by motion approved by the planning and zoning commission.
Any proposed changes to conditions shall be forwarded to the city council for review as would be
the case for a new subdivision proposal. Any changes approved by the city council shall be
included in an addendum to the development agreement for the project. (2003 Code § 12-03-07)
12-2-8: PHASING OR SECTIONALIZING SUBDIVISIONS:
A. Permitted: Large developments may be phased or sectionalized, to be developed in portions
periodically according to a proposed schedule. The developer shall indicate plans for phasing or
sectionalizing at the time of application. The plans, subject to review and approval, shall show
proposed phasing boundaries. Proposed interim or temporary solutions to sanitary sewer and
water systems and to the handling of traffic on local streets, collectors and arterials within the
subdivision, shall be shown on plans submitted along with a narrative description of assurance of
completion of permanent system improvements.
B. Development Agreement: The development agreement for each subdivision must ensure that the
dedication of public streets and improvements will occur according to the phasing plans, subject to
conditions imposed by the city council during subdivision review. The city council may, in the
interest of public safety and welfare, require that certain collector streets and arterials be dedicated
and constructed in their entirety regardless of the phasing plan.
C. Guarantees: In approving a subdivision to be developed in phases, the city council may require that
the development agreement indicate the phasing plans and that the amounts calculated for
guarantees are commensurate with the phasing plan. The city council may require that the
guarantee amount be that amount calculated for each phase and may defer the remaining
amounts of the guarantee until the remaining sections of the subdivision are platted.
D. Phasing Plan: A phasing plan shall coordinate required infrastructure systems, dedications, off site
improvements, open space/parks, landscaping, private utilities, or other elements of a subdivision.
The plan may indicate times or triggering mechanisms for improvements. Agreements between the
developer and the city concerning the acceleration or deceleration of development of the
subdivision may be included in the development agreement. Provisions of a development
agreement shall endeavor to the greatest extent possible to tie together the contingencies of
development of a phased project. (2003 Code § 12-03-08)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 488/528
Chapter 3
PLAT REVIEW AND APPROVAL
12-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedure for plat review. The procedure is intended to
provide orderly and expeditious processing and recordation of subdivision plats. (2003 Code § 12-04-
01)
12-3-2: APPLICATION:
Following approval of a subdivision or minor subdivision, the developer shall file, within the permitted
time period, an application for final plat review with the city engineer. The application for final plat
review shall:
A. Be made on forms provided through the planning and building department.
B. Include the entire subdivision, minor subdivision, or section/phase thereof as determined by a
phasing plan approved during subdivision review.
C. Comply in all material respects with the approved subdivision or minor subdivision plan, whichever
is applicable.
D. Include all formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets, local government uses,
utilities, additional rights of way, parks, and easements in a form approved by the city attorney.
E. Be accompanied by a public works department certification that all the streets, water system,
sanitary sewers, stormwater facilities and other public improvements, including lot improvements
on the individual lots of the subdivision, have been completed and accepted as required in these
regulations, or that a guarantee has been submitted in the proper form. (2003 Code § 12-04-02)
12-3-3: REVIEW:
Upon submittal of the plat to the city engineer, a staff review will be completed within twenty eight (28)
days of acceptance. The review will determine whether all conditions of the approved development
agreement have been completed and whether the final plat is consistent with the approved
subdivision. Such review shall determine that:
A. The plat is in conformance with Idaho Code section 50-1301 et seq., plats and vacations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 489/528
B. The plat layout is as approved by the city council during subdivision review or as approved by the
city engineer during minor subdivision review.
C. A development agreement has been completed.
D. Language on the dedication section of the plat reflects what was agreed to in the development
agreement and that any dedications are accurately described.
E. The appropriate signature blocks are on the plat and that all signatures have been obtained except
for the signatures of the city engineer, mayor, city clerk and county recorder.
F. Construction plans have been reviewed and approved.
G. All required on site and off site improvements have been constructed and accepted by the public
works department, or have been suitably guaranteed.
H. Any mitigation required or determined in a development agreement, has been satisfied or other
suitable arrangements approved by the city council have been made. (2003 Code § 12-04-03)
12-3-4: APPROVAL:
When staff review of the plat is completed and all required terms and conditions are satisfied, staff
may forward the plat to the city clerk recommending that it be submitted to the city council for
approval. The city clerk shall place the request for plat approval on the next available city council
agenda. The city council shall review the subdivision and plat and, upon a finding that all of the
requirements have been satisfied, shall authorize the mayor and the city clerk to sign. The city
engineer's signature shall be the final approval assigned to the plat. (2003 Code § 12-04-04)
12-3-5: RECORDATION:
After the plat is signed by the mayor, city clerk and city engineer, the developer shall record the plat
with the county recorder, and provide the city engineer with a reproducible mylar copy of the recorded
plat. Upon recordation of the plat and receipt of a reproducible mylar of the recorded plat, building
permits may be issued for the lots created. (2003 Code § 12-04-05)
12-3-6: APPLICABLE LAWS:
To obtain plat approval, the developer shall be in compliance with all federal, state and local laws
applicable at the time that the plat is reviewed for approval. The developer shall be in compliance with
all local laws and regulations applicable at the time that the subdivision was approved by the city
council, or in the case of minor subdivisions, at the time the minor subdivision was approved by the
city engineer. A plat shall not be authorized for recordation if there exists a violation of relevant
ordinances or statutes. (2003 Code § 12-04-06)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 490/528
12-3-7: MODEL HOMES:
In approved residential subdivisions, prior to plat approval but subsequent to construction plan
approval and in accordance with terms of the development agreement, a building permit or permits
may be issued for the construction of a home or homes to be used as models. Model homes shall not
be open to the public until the public works department has determined that the homes can be safely
accessed. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued, nor shall utilities be used by a resident, until
streets and utility systems are accepted by the public works department and the plat is recorded.
(2003 Code § 12-04-07)
Chapter 4
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
12-4-1: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
The purpose of a development agreement is to specify certain land use and development regulations
that will apply to the relevant property, to establish conditions of approval, to establish terms of
mitigation, to describe the scope of construction improvements, and to foster an understanding
between the city and the developer. It shall be a requirement of compliance with this title that a
development agreement and construction improvement agreement be entered into and approved by
the city prior to initiating physical construction of subdivision improvements or recordation of a
subdivision plat. (2003 Code § 12-05-01)
12-4-2: SCOPE OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
A development agreement shall constitute a binding contract between the developer of a proposed
subdivision and the city (the "parties") and shall contain those terms and conditions agreed to by the
parties and those required by this title. The staff of the city, in conjunction with the city attorney, is
authorized to negotiate development agreements on behalf of the city. The development agreement
shall be adopted by the city council and recorded in the county recorder's office. Development
agreement requirements may be waived for certain minor subdivisions upon a finding by the city
engineer that they will serve no purpose. (2003 Code § 12-05-02)
12-4-3: ELEMENTS OF AGREEMENT:
The development agreement shall be negotiated by the staff and city attorney and approved by the
city council prior to signature by the parties. A brief statement shall be included describing the
subdivision, its location, legal description, number of lots, and the date of subdivision approval by the
city council. The agreement shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Any conditions of approval from the review and approval process.
B. Time limit and provisions for extension or extinguishing the agreement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 491/528
C. Phasing plans, if any, and a description of any required temporary improvements and the terms of
those improvements.
D. A description of construction improvements to be installed on site and off site.
E. Covenants, if any, made by the developer to the city.
F. Covenants, if any, made by the city.
G. Details of dedications beyond those required in chapter 6 of this title, design and improvement
standards.
H. Construction improvement elements as detailed in section 12-4-10 of this chapter. (2003 Code
§ 12-05-03)
12-4-4: COVENANTS:
The city may, without incurring any liability, engage in action that otherwise would constitute a breach
of any covenant contained in a development agreement if it makes a determination, on the record, that
the action is necessary to avoid a substantial risk to public health, safety and general welfare. All such
covenants shall be subject to an additional proviso that the city may, without incurring any liability,
engage in action that would constitute a breach of any such covenant if the action is required by
federal or state law. (2003 Code § 12-05-04)
12-4-5: THIRD PARTY RIGHTS:
Except as otherwise expressly provided in a development agreement, the development agreement
shall create no rights enforceable by any party that is not a party to the development agreement.
Purchasers of lots in approved subdivisions are not deemed to be third party beneficiaries of
development agreements. (2003 Code § 12-05-05)
12-4-6: LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY:
Any breach of a development agreement by the city shall not give rise to monetary damages, but shall
be enforceable only by resort to an action for specific performance. No provision of any development
agreement that is contrary to law may be enforced. (2003 Code § 12-05-06)
12-4-7: DEVELOPER'S COMPLIANCE:
Performance of the city's duties pursuant to a development agreement are expressly conditioned upon
the developer's substantial compliance with each and every term, condition, provision and covenant of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 492/528
the agreement, and all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. (2003 Code § 12-05-
07)
12-4-8: AGREEMENT TO RUN WITH THE LAND:
A development agreement shall run with the land and bind all successors, heirs and assignees of the
developer. The development agreement, including addenda, shall be filed with the county recorder to
give notice to any prospective purchaser. The development agreement would expire at the agreed
upon date set forth within the agreement or, when the city shall file a release with the county recorder,
when the terms of the agreement have been satisfied or are no longer valid. (2003 Code § 12-05-08)
12-4-9: AMENDMENTS TO AGREEMENT:
Should amendments to the agreement be necessary and if all parties are in agreement, an addendum
to the agreement shall be negotiated subject to review by the city attorney for signature of the parties.
Either party may propose amending the agreement by notifying other parties to the agreement in
writing of the nature of the amendment and the reasons why the amendment is necessary. The party
requesting the amendment shall be responsible for any costs associated with the preparation of the
addendum to the development agreement, unless the parties agree to share the costs. Such cost
sharing arrangement shall be determined and agreed to, by the parties, prior to negotiating the
addendum to the agreement. Amendments must comply with the formalities of approval, including
approval by the city council, which govern original development agreements. (2003 Code § 12-05-09)
12-4-10: CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT:
A component of a development agreement that sets forth the specific public improvements to be
constructed in the subdivision, the manner and timing of the construction, duties and responsibilities of
the developer, estimated costs of the improvements, performance guarantee, maintenance warranty
and standards of construction must be accepted by the city council prior to start of construction. (2003
Code § 12-05-10; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 5
IMPROVEMENTS
ARTICLE A. ASSURANCE OF COMPLETION AND
MAINTENANCE
12-5A-1: COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
All required improvements shall be completed within one year of the effective date of the development
agreement, unless a different time period is approved by city council. Before a plat is signed by the
city engineer, the developer shall be required to complete all street, sanitary and other public
improvements, including lot improvements on individual lots as required in these regulations and as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 493/528
approved by the city council, or the developer shall provide a suitable performance guarantee. No
building shall be occupied, nor shall any use be established in a subdivision, until all necessary
improvements have been installed and accepted for maintenance by the city or other public service
providers. The purpose of this requirement is to ensure to the greatest extent possible that the health
and safety of the public and the residents of new subdivisions are protected. (2003 Code § 12-06-01)
12-5A-2: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
The developer may guarantee to complete all of the agreed upon improvements within one year of the
effective date of the construction improvement agreement or within such alternative time period
approved by city council by providing to the city one or more of the following instruments in an amount
equal to at least one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the value of improvements to be guaranteed:
A. Performance Bond: The developer may provide a performance bond from a company qualified by
law to act as a surety in the state. The bond shall be in the form approved by the city and name the
city as the obligee and the developer as principal.
B. Escrow: The developer may deposit funds in an escrow with a bank or financial institution qualified
by law to do business in the state. The disbursement of the escrow funds shall be governed by an
escrow agreement in a form approved by the city.
C. Irrevocable Letter Of Credit: The developer may cause a bank or financial institution, qualified by
law to do business in the state, to issue an irrevocable letter of credit in a form approved by the
city. (2003 Code § 12-06-02)
12-5A-3: GUARANTEE AMOUNT:
A. The performance guarantee amount shall be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated
costs of all improvements, not including those to be constructed by private utilities. The developer's
engineer shall have prepared, documented and certified each cost estimate. The estimated costs
shall be submitted by the developer to the city engineer for approval. The estimated cost of all
improvements shall be the sum of the estimated cost approved by the city engineer.
B. If the developer is not in default under the terms of the development agreement, the city may allow
a proportionate reduction in the amount of the performance guarantee in increments not less than
twenty five percent (25%) of the surety amount. The amount of the performance guarantee shall
always be greater than or equal to the amount of the cumulative required warranty amount. (2003
Code § 12-06-03)
12-5A-4: RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
As soon as any one of the following occurs, the city may release any performance guarantee that has
not been used or encumbered under provisions of the development agreement or this title:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 494/528
A. The final acceptance of all improvements and the posting of warranty guarantee as set forth in this
title.
B. The expiration of the warranty period as provided in this title. (2003 Code § 12-06-04)
12-5A-5: DEDICATIONS:
Acceptance of dedication of streets or other public areas or facilities shall be by the city council after
review and recommendation by the city engineer. Any dedications for property and/or public
improvements shall be free and clear of all liens and encumbrances. (2003 Code § 12-06-05)
12-5A-6: MAINTENANCE:
The developer shall perform capital maintenance of each required public improvement until the city
has expressly accepted the improvements. Details of the maintenance provisions shall be included in
the construction improvement agreement. (2003 Code § 12-06-06)
12-5A-7: WARRANTY OF IMPROVEMENTS:
A. The developer shall warrant the design, construction materials, and workmanship of the
improvements installed pursuant to this title against any failure or defect in design, construction,
material or workmanship for a period of one year.
B. This warranty shall cover all direct and indirect costs of repair or replacement, and damage to the
property, improvements or facilities of the city or any other person, caused by such failure or defect
or in the course of repairs, any increase in cost to the city of operating and maintaining a city
improvement resulting from such failures, defects, or damages.
C. The warranty shall not extend to any failure or defect caused solely by changes in design,
construction, or materials required by the city as a deviation from regular requirements established
by this title. (2003 Code § 12-06-07)
12-5A-8: WARRANTY GUARANTEE:
A. To secure the developer's performance of the warranty of improvements, the performance
guarantee provided by the developer pursuant to this title shall remain in effect until the end of the
warranty period or the developer shall provide a warranty guarantee by one or more of the
instruments described above by the following table:
Actual Cost Of Improvements Percent To Secure Warranty
Less than $500,000.00 10%
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 495/528
$500,000.00 to $1,000,000.00 7.50%
Over $1,000,000.00 5%
B. In the event the subdivider shall, in any case, fail to complete such work within the period of time
required by conditions of the guarantee for the completion of public improvements, it shall be the
responsibility of the city to proceed to have such work completed. In order to accomplish this, the
city shall reimburse itself for the cost and expense thereof by appropriating the cash deposit,
certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or negotiable bond that the subdivider may have
deposited in lieu of a surety bond, or may take such steps as may be necessary to require
performance by the bonding or surety company and as included in a written agreement between
the city council and the subdivider. (2003 Code § 12-06-08)
ARTICLE B. STANDARDS
12-5B-1: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PLANS:
It shall be the responsibility of the subdividers of every proposed subdivision to have prepared by a
licensed engineer, a complete set of construction plans, including profiles, cross section, specifications
and other supporting data, for all required public streets, utilities and other facilities. Such construction
plans shall be based on preliminary plans, which have been approved with the preliminary plat, and
shall be prepared in conjunction with the final plat. Construction plans are subject to approval by the
responsible public agencies. All construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the public
agencies' standards or specifications. (2003 Code § 12-08-01)
12-5B-2: REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
Every subdivider shall be required to install the following public and other improvements in
accordance with the conditions and specifications as follows:
A. Monuments: Monuments shall be set in accordance with Idaho Code section 50-1303.
B. Streets And Alleys: All streets and alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and
specifications adopted by the city council.
C. Curbs And Gutters: Vertical back curbs and gutters shall be constructed on all streets. All
construction shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the city
council.
D. Bicycle Pathways: A bicycle pathway shall be provided within all subdivisions, as part of the public
right of way or separate easement, as may be specified in an overall bicycle plan as adopted by
the city council when identified by a relevant master plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 496/528
E. Installation Of Public Utilities: Underground utility facilities are required.
F. Driveways: All driveway openings in curbs shall be as specified by the public works department,
highway district or state highway department.
G. Storm Drainage: An adequate storm drainage system shall be required in all subdivisions. The
requirements for each particular subdivision shall be established by the city council. Construction
shall follow the specifications and procedures established by the city council.
H. Public Water Supply And Sewer Systems: All public water supply or sewer systems (serving 2 or
more separate premises or households) shall be constructed in accordance with any adopted local
plans and specifications. All new public water supply or sewer systems shall be an extension of an
existing public system whenever possible. In the event that the proposed public water supply or
sewer system is not an extension of an existing public system, there shall be a showing by the
subdivider that the extension is not feasible and not to the best interest of the public. Idaho Code
section 50-1326 requires that all water and sewer plans be submitted to the state department of
environmental and community services or its authorized agent for approval.
I. Maintenance And Operation Of Public Water Supply And Sewer Systems: The subdivider shall
provide for a perpetual method of construction and operation of the public water supply or sewer
system (serving 2 or more separate premises or households) to ensure the continued usefulness
of the system.
J. Fire Hydrants And Water Mains: Adequate fire protection shall be required in accordance with the
appropriate fire district standards.
K. Street Name Signs: Street name signs shall be installed in the appropriate locations at each street
intersection in accordance with the local standards and shall comply with title 8, chapter 5 of this
code.
L. Sidewalks And Pedestrian Walkways: Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street and
shall be five feet (5') in width, except in business districts, where the sidewalks shall be eight feet
(8') in width.
M. Greenbelt: Greenbelts or landscaping screening may be required for the protection of residential
properties from adjacent major arterial streets, waterways, railroad rights of way or other features.
Subdivision plats shall show the location of any greenbelt areas.
N. Street Lighting: Streetlights shall be installed throughout the subdivision. A subdivider shall conform
to the requirements of the city and the public utility providing such light. (2003 Code § 12-08-02)
O. Secondary Water Systems For Irrigation: The delivery of irrigation water shall be executed in
accordance with Idaho Code section 31-3805 and the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 497/528
1. The use of the city's potable water supply as the primary source of irrigation water in all new
developments shall be prohibited. For purposes of this subsection, the term "new development"
means any new subdivision or any development of any parcel of land of three-fourths (3/4) of an
acre or larger that is not part of a subdivision. The existence of a secondary water system for
irrigation within a subdivision does not prohibit the use of municipal water services for irrigation
when the secondary water system is not reasonably available or operational.
2. All new developments shall include an operating pressure irrigation system constructed to city
standards and approved by the city engineer. There shall be no cross connections allowed
between the irrigation system and the city's domestic water system. The city engineer shall
encourage developers to participate in a regional system as long as the pump station is
operational before the first building permit is issued for that station's service area.
3. The city may assume ownership and responsibility for the development, maintenance, repair,
and any associated costs involved with the secondary irrigation water system. When ownership
is assumed, the city will administer these systems as separate enterprise funds within the city's
water department, assessing only those charges necessary to maintain and operate the specific
systems developed. These charges will include all necessary and appropriate charges from
irrigation entities.
4. The city engineer may authorize in specific cases a variance from the requirement of a pressure
irrigation system, if not contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this subsection would result in unnecessary hardship.
a. Special conditions may include, but are not limited to, small developments in terms of
acreage, developments without viable access to irrigation water delivery, or developments
without water shares.
b. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience or profit, but only where strict
application of the provisions of this title would result in unnecessary hardship.
5. The city engineer shall not authorize a variance from the requirement of an operating pressure
irrigation system unless an alternate provision has been approved by the city engineer.
Alternates may include, but shall not be limited to, required xeriscaping (i.e., landscaping in ways
that do not require supplemental irrigation), payment of an in lieu fee equal to the estimated cost
of construction of an operating pressure irrigation system (including land acquisition), or some
combination of these or other acceptable options.
6. All preliminary plats shall be accompanied by proof of transferable irrigation water rights. All
subdividers are required to complete the transfer of irrigation water rights and installation of the
irrigation water system as proposed. One share of water for each acre of property within the
subdivision shall be deeded to the city before the filing of the final plat for use in the pressurized
irrigation system. (Ord. 2154, 3-7-2017, eff. 3-7-2017)
12-5B-3: CITY PARTICIPATION IN EXTENSION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
A. In order to encourage infill development and to provide developers limited financial relief from past
development policy oversights, the city may, at its own discretion, participate with land developers
in extending water mains, sewer mains and stormwater mains. The city may participate in
extending these utilities up to one hundred fifty feet (150') per development and up to an
accumulative total of one thousand two hundred feet (1,200') per utility, per fiscal year. Footage will
be measured from the mainline connection and through the perpendicular frontage of the corner
lot. Minimum pipe sizes are as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 498/528
Water main - 8"
Sewer main - 8"
Storm drain laterals - 12"
B. If larger diameter pipes are required, the developer shall pay the price difference between the
minimum size and the required size.
C. The city may, at its discretion, perform the work with city crews, equipment and materials, or pay a
portion of the contracted price, or a combination of both, whichever is in the best interest of the
city.
D. The city's participation in infill development does not include fire hydrants, service lines or
appurtenances, unless it is deemed in the city's best interest.
E. Infill participation is limited to utility extensions within rights of way that are perpendicular to streets
with utilities. Terms of the participation shall be detailed in the development agreement.
Development prior to September 18, 2001, is not eligible. (2003 Code § 12-08-03)
12-5B-4: RESERVED UTILITY LINES (REIMBURSEMENT FOR CITY UTILITY
EXTENSION COSTS):
A. Developer Responsibility: It is the responsibility of the developer to bear the cost of installing city
utilities (i.e., water, sewer, storm drains) through the entire frontage of a development.
B. Requirement To Pay; Inflation Factor: If or when development occurs opposite of the development,
the developer who bore the cost of installing the city utilities may at his/her option require the new
developer to pay for half the cost of said improvements. A three percent (3%) inflation factor per
year may be applied. Cost of said improvements must be broken down into per foot basis.
C. Per Foot Cost To Be Filed: If the original developer wishes to become eligible for reimbursement,
he/she must provide to the city a per foot cost of each utility line that will be filed with the
development file. The city engineer will then determine if the costs are reasonable and in
agreement with this section. If and when new development occurs opposite to said development,
the city engineer shall determine how many feet of the new development should be paid toward
existing utilities.
D. Time Limit: A ten (10) year limit shall be placed on any eligible reimbursements.
E. Utilities Beneficiaries: Anyone who may connect to the new lines in a perpendicular fashion most
likely on the opposite side of the public right of way from said development.
F. Exceptions: Consecutive developments (not opposite to said development) are not expected to
participate in the cost of said improvements, but rather become eligible for this policy.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 499/528
G. City Acting As Developer: In cases where the city acts as the developer, the city may impose said
"reserved utility lines" clauses. Furthermore, no time limits will be placed on "city" installed lines.
(2003 Code § 12-08-04)
12-5B-5: EXCEPTION TO REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Application; Hearing: A subdivider may apply to the planning and zoning commission for an
exception or modification to providing one or more of the required public improvements set forth in
section 12-5B-2 of this article. Upon application for such exception, the planning and zoning
commission shall conduct a public hearing on the matter. Such application must be made in
conjunction with the initial application by the subdivider.
B. Considerations: The planning and zoning commission may take one or more of the following
factors, in addition to other relevant factors, into consideration in determining whether to
recommend approval of the exception:
1. Size of the lot(s).
2. Drainage factors, including drainage qualities of the soil.
3. Availability of city water and sewer services.
4. Aesthetics of the surrounding and adjoining neighborhoods.
C. Recommendation; Conditions: Upon conducting a public hearing on the matter, the planning and
zoning commission shall recommend approval or denial of the requested exception or modification
to the city council. The planning and zoning commission may attach conditions to their
recommendation.
D. City Council Consideration: The issue shall then be scheduled to be presented to the city council at
the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. A public hearing shall not be required at the city
council meeting, but may be held in the discretion of the mayor. At such meeting, the city council
may accept, reject, partially accept, or partially reject the recommendations of the planning and
zoning commission. In addition, the city council may add, delete or modify conditions to granting
the exception. (2003 Code § 12-08-05)
Chapter 6
DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
12-6-1: PURPOSE:
The proposed subdivision shall conform to the master planned official map. (2003 Code § 12-07-01)
12-6-2: MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 500/528
All plats submitted pursuant to the provisions of this title, and all subdivisions, improvements and
facilities done, constructed or made in accordance with said provisions shall comply with the minimum
design standards set forth hereinafter in this chapter; provided, however, that any higher standards
adopted by any highway district, state highway department or health agency shall prevail over those
set forth herein. (2003 Code § 12-07-02)
12-6-3: STREETS:
Within a proposed subdivision, streets that will or should be classified as arterial and collector streets
shall be dedicated to the public in all cases; in general, all other streets shall also be dedicated to
public use. (2003 Code § 12-07-03)
12-6-4: CONFORMANCE TO STREET STANDARDS:
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the official
map and master plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. Where not shown on the official map or
master plan, the arrangement and other design standards of streets shall conform to the local highway
technical assistance council (LHTAC) standards. (2003 Code § 12-07-04)
12-6-5: RELATION TO ADJOINING STREET SYSTEM:
The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions for the continuation of the
existing streets in adjoining areas. (2003 Code § 12-07-05)
12-6-6: PROJECTION OF ARTERIAL STREETS:
Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make
provision for the proper projection of streets. (2003 Code § 12-07-06)
12-6-7: STREETS TO BE CARRIED TO PROPERTY LINES:
When a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land susceptible of being subdivided, then the new
streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the tract proposed to be subdivided. (2003 Code § 12-07-
07)
12-6-8: STREET JOGS PROHIBITED:
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall be avoided on
arterial streets. (2003 Code § 12-07-08)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 501/528
12-6-9: DEAD END STREET OR CUL-DE-SAC STANDARDS:
Dead end streets or cul-de-sacs, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than six hundred
feet (600') and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside right of way
radius of at least sixty two feet (62'). If a dead end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround
shall be provided and provision made for future extension of the street into the adjoining properties,
including utility extensions terminated with a fire hydrant for water lines and a manhole for sanitary
sewer lines and stormwater lines if appropriate. (2003 Code § 12-07-09)
12-6-10: FRONTAGE ROADS:
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing arterial street, the mayor and city council may
require frontage roads or other such treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection for
residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. (2003 Code § 12-07-10)
12-6-11: STREET WIDTHS:
A. Street widths shall be as set forth in the local highway technical assistance council (LHTAC)
manual for highway and street standards.
B. In front of areas designed and zoned or where a petition for a change in zoning is contemplated for
commercial use, to permit such use the street width shall be increased by such amount on each
side as may be deemed necessary by the mayor and city council to assure the free flow of through
traffic without interference by parked or parking vehicles and to provide safe parking space for
such commercial or business district. (2003 Code § 12-07-11)
12-6-12: INTERSECTIONS:
The intersection of more than two (2) streets at one point shall be avoided except where it is
impracticable to secure a proper system otherwise. Streets shall intersect one another at an angle as
near to a right angle as possible, and no intersections of streets at angles less than seventy degrees
(70°) shall be approved. Street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of twenty feet (20')
measured at the back of curbs when the said intersection occurs at right angles. If an intersection
occurs at an angle other than a right angle, it shall be rounded with a curve of a radius acceptable to
the mayor and city council. In business districts, the mayor and council may permit comparable cutoffs
or chords.
A. Sight Triangles: See the local highway technical assistance council (LHTAC) manual for highway
and street standards.
B. "T" Intersections: "T" intersections may be used wherever such design will not restrict the free
movement of traffic. (2003 Code § 12-07-12)
12-6-13: STREET DEFLECTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 502/528
See the local highway technical assistance council (LHTAC) manual for highway and street standards.
(2003 Code § 12-07-13)
12-6-14: REVERSE CURVES:
A tangent at least two hundred feet (200') long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial
and collector streets. (2003 Code § 12-07-14)
12-6-15: SUBDIVISION INTO TRACTS LARGER THAN ORDINARY BUILDING
LOTS:
Where a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots (lots greater than 1 acre),
such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow the opening of future streets and logical further
resubdivision. (2003 Code § 12-07-15)
12-6-16: RESERVE AND PLANTING STRIPS:
A. Reserved Utility Line: Where city owned utility lines that have been installed at the cost of a
developer, landowner or the city to serve new development and where adjacent (usually opposite
of the right of way) landowners may benefit by connecting to said utility lines for service, the
adjacent landowner must pay, or reimburse the developer, landowner or city, a fair portion of the
actual cost of the respective utility line extensions.
B. Planting Strips: Planting strips shall be required to be placed next to incompatible features such as
highways, railroads, commercial or industrial uses to screen the view from residential properties.
Such screening shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') wide, and shall not be a part of the normal
street right of way or utility easement. (2003 Code § 12-07-16)
12-6-17: STREET GRADES:
See the local highway technical assistance council (LHTAC) manual for highway and street standards.
(2003 Code § 12-07-17)
12-6-18: RAILROAD ON OR ABUTTING SUBDIVISION:
Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right of way or limited access highway right of
way, the mayor and city council may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of
such right of way at a distance for the approximate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in
residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances
shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade
separations. (2003 Code § 12-07-18)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 503/528
12-6-19: HALF STREETS PROHIBITED:
Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the
subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations and where the mayor and
city council find it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half of
the street shall be platted within such tract. (2003 Code § 12-07-19)
12-6-20: STREET NAMES AND NUMBERING:
All new streets shall be named and numbered pursuant to title 8, chapter 5 of this code. (2003 Code
§ 12-07-20)
12-6-21: ACCESS TO STREETS ACROSS DITCHES:
The subdivider shall provide access to all proposed streets, across all ditches, in a standard method
approved by the city engineer. (2003 Code § 12-07-21)
12-6-22: STREET VACATIONS:
The mayor and city council shall not authorize the vacation of any street or part of a street so
dedicated for public use, if such vacation interferes with the uniformity of the existing street pattern or
any future street plans prepared for the area. (2003 Code § 12-07-22)
12-6-23: PRIVATE STREETS:
Private streets shall be allowed within planned unit developments only. Public utilities such as water,
sewer, storm drains, etc., shall become privately owned facilities at the right of way line. However,
water meter boxes and appurtenances shall remain the property and responsibility of the city. (2003
Code § 12-07-23)
12-6-24: HARDSHIP TO OWNERS OF ADJOINING PROPERTY AVOIDED:
The street arrangement shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in
platting their own land and providing convenient access to it. (2003 Code § 12-07-24)
12-6-25: ALLEYS:
A. Residential Areas: Alleys shall be avoided in residential areas except where deemed necessary by
the city council for the continuing of existing city utilities and the repair and maintenance of such
utilities. Where such alleys are required there shall be deducted as an alley, ten feet (10') on each
side of each rear lot line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 504/528
B. Commercial And Industrial Districts: Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts,
except that the mayor and city council may waive this requirement where other definite and
assured provision is made for service access, such as off street loading, unloading and parking
consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
C. Width: The right of way width of an alley shall be twenty feet (20') minimum.
D. Dead End Alleys: Dead end alleys shall not be permitted, except that the mayor and city council
may waive this requirement where such dead end alley is unavoidable and where adequate
turnaround facilities have been provided. (2003 Code § 12-07-25)
12-6-26: EASEMENTS:
A. Easements Provided For Drainage: Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or street, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right of
way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or
construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. Side lines of lots shall follow the natural
watercourse.
B. Utility Easements: Unobstructed utility easements shall be provided along front lot lines, rear lot
lines, and side lot lines when deemed necessary; total easement width shall not be less than
twenty feet (20').
C. Noncity Utility Easements: Unobstructed noncity utility easements shall be provided along front lot
lines, rear lot lines, and side lot lines when deemed necessary; total easement width shall not be
less than five feet (5'). (2003 Code § 12-07-26)
12-6-27: BLOCKS AND LOTS:
A. Factors Governing Dimensions: Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be
such as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by this title and to provide for
convenient access, circulating control and safety of street traffic.
B. Lengths: Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand four hundred feet (1,400'), or be less than
five hundred feet (500').
C. Arrangement: A block shall be so designed as to provide two (2) tiers of lots.
D. Crosswalks: In blocks over six hundred feet (600') long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required by
the planning and zoning commission in locations deemed necessary to public health, convenience
and necessity. Such crosswalk shall be eight feet (8') wide and be straight from street to street.
Sidewalk easements may be required through the blocks to permit foot traffic.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 505/528
E. Dimensions: Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of this title.
F. Future Arrangements: Where parcels of land are subdivided into unusually large lots (such as when
large lots are approved for septic tanks), the parcels shall be divided, where feasible, so as to
allow for future resubdividing into smaller parcels. Lot arrangements shall allow for the ultimate
extension of adjacent streets through the middle of wide blocks. Whenever such future subdividing
or lot splitting is contemplated, the plan thereof shall be approved by the planning and zoning
commission prior to the taking of such action.
G. Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight lines or radical to
curved street lines.
H. Corner Lots: Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building
setback from and orientation to both streets. Lots abutting on a pedestrian walkway shall be
treated as a corner lot.
I. Uninhabitable Lots: Lots subject to flooding and lots deemed by the mayor and city council to be
uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may
increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate the flood hazard, but such land within the
plat be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or
shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
J. Lot Remnants: All remnants of lots below minimum size leftover after subdividing of a larger tract
must be added to adjacent lots, rather than allowed to remain unusable parcels. (2003 Code § 12-
07-27)
12-6-28: DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS; PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN
SPACES:
A. Public Uses: Subdivisions containing fifteen (15) dwelling units or more may be required to provide
up to four hundred (400) square feet of park or playground space for each dwelling unit therein.
B. Natural Feature: Existing natural features that add value to residential development and enhance
the attractiveness of the community (such as trees, watercourses, historic spots, and similar
irreplaceable assets) shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision.
C. Special Developments: In the case of planned unit developments and large scale developments,
the planning and zoning commission may require sufficient park or open space facilities of
acceptable size, location and site characteristic that may be suitable for the proposed
development.
D. Shown On Master Plan: Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown in a
master plan is located in whole or in part within a subdivision, the subdivision will dedicate or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 506/528
reserve adequate space for such purpose in such area within the subdivision when the mayor and
city council finds the requirement to be reasonably necessary to the public health and welfare.
E. Acceptance By City Required: The requiring of the dedication of public spaces as provided in this
title shall not constitute an acceptance of the dedication by the city, unless such dedication is
accepted by the mayor and city council. (2003 Code § 12-07-28)
Chapter 7
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS
12-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to identify various types of developments that normally pose special
concerns to the commission and elected officials when reviewing and acting upon subdivision
requests. This chapter outlines the plan submittal requirements and design standards that shall be
taken into consideration when acting on special developments. The provisions of this chapter are in
addition to the plan requirements, design standards and improvement standards that are required by
chapter 5, article B and chapter 6 of this title. (2003 Code § 12-09-01)
12-7-2: PLANNED UNIT AND CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS:
A. General: Planned unit and condominium developments shall be subject to requirements set forth in
the zoning ordinance and also subject to all provisions within this title.
B. Site Development Plan: The developer shall provide the Planning and Zoning Commission with a
colored rendering of adequate scale to show the completed development that will include at least
the following:
1. Architectural style and building design.
2. Building materials and color.
3. Landscaping.
4. Screening.
5. Garbage areas.
6. Parking.
7. Open space.
C. Private Streets: Private street construction standards shall be based upon recommendations from
the City Engineer. Adequate construction standards may vary depending on the size of the
development and the demands placed on such improvements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 507/528
D. Homeowners' Association: The homeowners' association bylaws and other similar deed
restrictions, which provide for the control and maintenance of all common areas, recreation
facilities or open space, shall meet with the approval of the City Council. Any and all powers as
specified in such agreements may also be assigned to the City Council for the purpose of
assessing property for delinquencies and enforcement of motor vehicle speed to protect the best
interests of the owners involved and of the general public.
E. Storage Areas: Storage areas shall be provided for the anticipated needs of boats, campers and
trailers. For typical residential development, one adequate space shall be provided every two (2)
living units. The City Council may reduce this if there is a showing that the needs of a particular
development are less.
F. Parking Space: One additional parking space beyond that which is required by the zoning ordinance
may be required for every three (3) dwelling units to accommodate visitor parking.
G. Maintenance Building: A maintenance building shall be provided, size and location to be suitable
for the service needs that are necessary for the repair and maintenance of all common areas.
H. Open Space: The location of open space shall be appropriate to the development and shall be of
such shape and area to be usable and convenient to the residents of the development.
I. Control During Development: Single ownership or control during development shall be required and
a time limit may be imposed to guarantee the development is built and constructed as planned.
(2003 Code § 12-09-02)
12-7-3: MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS:
A. General: Mobile home subdivisions shall be subject to any requirements set forth in the zoning
ordinance.
B. Special Requirements: Mobile home subdivisions shall be subject to the following special
requirements:
1. Developed as a planned unit development with a minimum lot area for the planned development
of five (5) acres.
2. Screening from adjacent areas, other than subdivisions of the same type, by aesthetically
acceptable fences, walls, living planting areas, and existing natural or manmade barriers.
3. Creation of a homeowners' association to assure that all common areas are adequately
maintained. (2003 Code § 12-09-03)
12-7-4: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS:
Due to the impact that a large scale development would have on public utilities and services, the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 508/528
developer shall submit the following information along with the preliminary plat:
A. Identification of all public services that would be provided to the development (i.e., fire protection,
police protection, central water, central sewer, road construction, parks and open space,
recreation, maintenance, schools and solid waste collection).
B. Estimate the public service costs to provide adequate service to the development.
C. Estimate the tax revenue that will be generated from the development.
D. Suggested public means of financing the services for the development if the cost for the public
services would not be offset by tax revenue received from the development. (2003 Code § 12-09-
04)
12-7-5: CEMETERY SUBDIVISIONS:
A. Function: The developer shall provide the planning and zoning commission with written
documentation that will sufficiently explain the functions of the proposed cemetery for either human
or animal remains.
B. Compliance With Idaho Code: The developer shall submit a written statement that has been
prepared by an attorney that adequately assures the compliance of the proposed cemetery with
the procedural management requirements that are outlined in Idaho Code title 27. (2003 Code
§ 12-09-05)
12-7-6: SUBDIVISION WITHIN FLOODPLAIN:
A. Flood Areas: For any proposed subdivision that is located within a floodplain, the developer shall
provide the planning and zoning commission with a development plan of adequate scale and
supporting documentation that will show and explain at least the following:
1. Location of all planned improvements.
2. The location of the floodway and the floodway fringe per engineering practices as specified by
the army corps of engineers.
3. The location of the present water channel.
4. Any planned rerouting of waterways.
5. All major drainageways.
6. Areas of frequent flooding.
7. Means of floodproofing buildings.
8. Means of insuring loans for improvements within the floodplain.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 509/528
B. Justification For Development:
1. Upon the determination that buildings are planned within the floodplain or that alterations of any
kind are anticipated within the floodplain area that will alter the flow of water, the developer shall
demonstrate conclusively to the planning and zoning commission that such development will not
present a hazard to life, limb or property, or will not have adverse effects on the safety, use or
stability of a public way or drainage channel or the natural environment.
2. No subdivision or part thereof shall be approved if levees, fills, structures or other features within
the proposed subdivision will individually or collectively significantly increase flood flows, heights
or damages. If only part of a proposed subdivision can be safely developed, the City Council
shall limit development to that part and shall require the development proceed consistent with
that determination. (2003 Code § 12-09-06)
12-7-7: SUBDIVISION WITHIN AN AREA OF CRITICAL CONCERN:
A. General: Hazardous or unique areas may be designated as areas of critical concern by the City
Council or by the State. Special consideration shall be given to any proposed development within
an area of critical concern to assure that the development is necessary and desirable and in the
public interest in view of the existing unique conditions. Hazardous or unique areas that may be
designated as areas of critical concern are as follows:
1. Avalanche paths.
2. Earthquake locations.
3. Unstable soils.
4. Unique animal life.
5. Unique plant life.
6. Scenic areas.
7. Historical significance.
8. Floodplain.
9. Other areas of critical concern.
B. Plan Submission: The developer shall prepare and submit an environmental impact statement
along with the preliminary plat application for any development that is proposed within an area of
critical concern.
C. Content Of Environmental Impact Statement: The content of the environmental impact statement
shall usually be prepared by an interdisciplinary team of professionals that shall provide answers to
the following questions:
1. What changes will occur to the area of environmental concern as a result of the proposed
development?
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 510/528
2. What corrective action or alternative development plans could occur so as not to significantly
change the area of environmental concern?
3. What changes in the area of environmental concern are unavoidable?
4. What beneficial or detrimental effect would the development have on the environment (i.e.,
animal life, plant life, social concerns, economic noise, visual and other)? (2003 Code § 12-09-
07)
12-7-8: TINY HOUSE SUBDIVISIONS:
A. General: Tiny house planned unit developments shall be subject to requirements outlined in the
zoning ordinance and also subject to all provisions within this section. This section intends that tiny
home subdivisions create a highly vegetated, park-like environment, where the emphasis is placed
on minimalist living. This section only allows for tiny homes on permanent foundations and does
not allow tiny homes on wheels (THOWs). THOWs are encouraged and accommodated in the City
of Blackfoot in designated RV subdivision developments.
Benefits sought by this section are: increased housing stock, increased affordable housing,
facilitating intergenerational living, attracting new residents, increased Municipal revenue,
supporting vulnerable populations, and generally providing residents with more lifestyle freedom.
Infill of underdeveloped single-family areas of the City is considered a strong benefit of tiny house
subdivision.
B. Site Development Plan: The developer shall provide the Planning and Zoning Commission with a
colored rendering of adequate scale to show the completed development that will include at least
the following:
1. Building Envelopes/Lot Layout: Development density shall not exceed fourteen (14) units per
acre.
2. Required Design Standards: Allowed building materials and color/finish schedules. The
developer will provide a schedule of the proposed materials to be allowed in the development
along with color/finish schedules.
3. Perimeter Landscaping, Pathways, And Vegetation Plan: This plan shall include vegetative
buffers made up of a combination of trees, hedges, bushes, and/or shrubbery providing privacy
and a parklike environment around the perimeter of the development. An engineered pathway
system must be integrated into this landscaping plan.
4. Individual Shade And Screening Plan: This plan shall include vegetative buffers made up of a
combination of trees, hedges, bushes, and shrubbery providing privacy and separation between
housing units and areas as well as a landscaping plan including both trees and shrubbery
around the perimeter of the development.
5. Screened Garbage Collection Areas: Garbage collection areas must be screened and gated by
a decorative masonry wall and gate system.
6. Roads And Visitor Parking: Roads and common area visitor parking.
7. Designated Usable Open Space And Recreation Facilities: Open space requirements will be
governed by the maximum lot coverage requirements of the individual overlying zone.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 511/528
8. Utility Infrastructure: Designate locations for water, sewer, power, maintenance building, and site
drainage infrastructure.
This Site Development Plan must be reviewed and recommended for approval by the Planning
and Zoning Commission before a preliminary plat application is submitted.
C. Private Streets And Pathways: Private street construction standards shall be based upon
recommendations from the City Public Works and Fire Department. Streets will meet minimum
access standards. Construction standards may vary depending on the location and size of the
development and the demands placed on such improvements. Roads are anticipated to be
constructed with a reduced street section that may or may not include curb and gutter. A Site
Drainage Plan is required. An engineered Pedestrian Pathway System is required and replaces the
City sidewalk requirement. Generally, parking will not be allowed on streets or access ways other
than in approved turnouts and other common parking areas.
D. Homeowners' Association: Homeowners' association bylaws and other deed restrictions, which
provide for the control and maintenance of all common areas, recreation facilities, and open space,
shall be submitted and be approved by the City.
E. Storage Areas: Screened storage areas or lots shall be provided for the anticipated needs of boats,
campers, and trailers - one (1) 220-square foot space shall be provided for every three (3) living
units.
F. Parking Space: One parking space of 12 feet x 22 feet is required for each living unit, and an
additional visitor parking space is needed for two (2) dwelling units. These may be provided as
distributed pullouts, or as a central parking area/lot.
G. Maintenance Building: A maintenance building shall be provided, size and location to be suitable
for the service needs that are necessary for the repair and maintenance of all common areas.
H. Open Space: The location of open space shall be appropriate to the development and shall be of
such shape and area to be usable and convenient to the residents of the development. Open
space requirements will comply with the maximum lot coverage requirements of the applicable
overlying zone.
I. Control During Development: Single ownership or control during development shall be required and
a time limit may be imposed to guarantee the development is built and constructed as planned.
J. Lot Square Footage: Within a tiny house subdivision, lot square footage shall be a minimum of the
building footprint plus the one required parking area of 12 feet x 22 feet. This parking area shall be
paved upon application for a building permit.
K. Plat And Public Hearing Requirements: Tiny house subdivisions will follow all other requirements
for platting and public hearing required by this title, not in conflict with this section and although no
minimum acreage for a plat shall be required, tiny house subdivision plats are not anticipated to be
approved larger than twenty (20) acres. Tiny house subdivisions do not qualify for a short plat
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 512/528
subdivision process due to the statutory requirements of this section requiring a new road system
and other amenities. (Ord. 2175, 2-5-2019)
Title 13
FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT
13-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES, SEVERABILITY
AND REPEAL OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
A. Statutory Authority: The legislature of the state of Idaho by Idaho Code sections 46-1020 through
46-1024, authorized local government units to adopt a floodplain map and floodplain management
ordinance that identifies floodplains and that sets forth minimum development requirements in
floodplains that are designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizenry.
B. Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas
by provisions designed to:
1. Require that development that is vulnerable to floods, including structures and facilities
necessary for the general health, safety and welfare of citizens, be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction;
2. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or
erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion;
3. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development within the area of special flood hazard
which may increase flood damage or erosion;
4. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert floodwaters or
that may increase flood hazards to other lands;
5. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers that
help to store or channel floodwaters.
C. Objectives: The objectives of this chapter are to:
1. Protect human life, health and property;
2. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water purification and sewage
treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in floodplains;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 513/528
3. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone
areas;
4. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
5. Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
6. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
D. Severability: If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or
applications of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and
to that end the provisions of this chapter are severable.
E. Repeal Of Conflicting Provisions: Upon enactment of this chapter all other ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed. All sections of the aforementioned ordinances
repealed by this chapter shall remain in force as to the authorization and enforcement of said
ordinances prior to the effective date hereof.
F. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or
natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not
create liability on the part of the city of Blackfoot or by any officer or employee thereof for flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or an administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder. (Ord. 2129, 3-3-2015)
13-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted
according to the meaning they have in common usage.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure on the same lot or parcel as a principal structure, the use of
which is incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
APPEAL: A request for review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of provisions of this
chapter or request for a variance.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one
percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Zone designations on FIRMs include the
letters A, AE, V. Also known as the special flood hazard area (SFHA).
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded each year.
Also known as the "regulatory flood".
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The water surface elevation during the base flood in relation to a
specified datum. The base flood elevation (BFE) is depicted on the FIRM to the nearest foot and in the
FIS to the nearest 0.1 foot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 514/528
BASEMENT: The portion of a structure including crawl space with its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BOARD: The elected governing city council of the city of Blackfoot, Idaho.
BUILDING: See definition of Structure.
DATUM: The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from which all elevations
are determined. Historically, that common set of points has been the national geodetic vertical datum
of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical datum currently adopted by the federal government as a basis for
measuring heights is the North American vertical datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not
limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures, or the construction of
additions or substantial improvements to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement
of mobile homes; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the
deposition or extraction of materials; specifically including the construction of dikes, berms and levees.
The term "development" does not include the operation, cleaning, maintenance or repair of any ditch,
canal, lateral, drain, diversion structure or other irrigation or drainage works that is performed or
authorized by the owner thereof pursuant to lawful rights and obligations.
DIGITAL FIRM (DFIRM): Digital flood insurance rate map. It depicts flood risk and zones and flood risk
information. The DFIRM presents the flood risk information in a format suitable for electronic mapping
applications.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: A structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before
November 15, 1979.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the "start of construction" commenced before November 15, 1979.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the national flood insurance program.
FLOOD FRINGE: The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway covered by floodwaters during
the regulatory flood.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, issued by the federal
insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The official report by the federal insurance administration
evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles, floodway boundaries and water surface
elevations of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 515/528
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): An elevation that corresponds to the elevation of the one
percent (1%) chance annual flood (base flood), plus any increase in flood elevation due to proposed
floodway encroachment, plus 0.1 foot of freeboard. Therefore the flood protection elevation for
Bingham County is equal to the BFE, plus proposed encroachment, plus 0.1 foot of freeboard.
FLOODPLAIN1: The land that has been or may be covered by floodwaters, or is surrounded by
floodwater and inaccessible, during the occurrence of the regulatory flood. The riverine floodplain
includes the floodway and the flood fringe.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY/REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and those
portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to discharge and store the floodwater or flood
flows associated with the regulatory flood and delineated on the FIRM.
FREEBOARD: A factor of safety added above a BFE level for the purposes of floodplain
management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to
flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams and the hydrologic effects of
urbanization in a watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG): The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. Refer to the elevation certificate, FEMA
form 81-31, for HAG related to building elevation information.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing maintained by the U.S.
department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or to a district preliminarily determined by
the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior, or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 516/528
1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or
2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
LETTER OF MAP CORRECTIONS (LOMC): Official FEMA determination letters used to amend or
revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, and flood insurance
studies. LOMCs are issued in the following categories:
Conditional Letter Of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment by FEMA as to
whether a proposed project complies with the minimum national flood insurance program
floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does not amend or revise effective flood insurance
rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, or flood insurance studies.
Letter Of Map Amendment (LOMA): A revision based on technical data showing that a property
was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current
effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property is not located in a
special flood hazard area.
Letter Of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data showing that, usually due to
manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway
delineations, and planimetric features. One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a
determination that a structure of parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation
and is excluded from the special flood hazard area.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG): The lowest point of the ground level next to the structure. Refer
to the elevation certificate, FEMA form 81-31, for LAG related to building elevation information.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) used for living
purposes, which includes working, storage, cooking and eating, or recreation, or any combination
thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use including a basement or crawl
space. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access,
or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a structure's lowest floor. The lowest
floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
NEW CONSTRUCTION: A structure for which the "start of construction" commenced after November
15, 1979, and includes subsequent improvements to the structure.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A place where the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pad(s) is completed on or after November 15, 1979).
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
A. Built on a single chassis,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 517/528
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection,
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty truck, and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means either the first placement
of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the
external dimensions of a building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally
above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of its
market value before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of
the structure should be: a) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or
improvement, or b) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual
amount of repair work performed.
The term does not include either:
A. A project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications, which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
B. Alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the governing body from a requirement of this chapter.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American vertical datum (NAVD)
of 1988 (or other specified datum) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains
of coastal or riverine areas. (Ord. 2129, 3-3-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 518/528
13-1-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter applies to all special flood hazard areas within
the areas of the city of Blackfoot, Idaho. All persons, entities and government units, including their
political subdivision, shall comply with this chapter unless specifically exempted by state or federal
law. Nothing in this chapter shall eliminate the need to conform to appropriate state or federal
regulations and the need to obtain any other required permits or to allow uses or structures that
are otherwise prohibited by the zoning ordinance.
B. Basis For Area Of Special Flood Hazard: The special flood hazard areas identified by the federal
emergency management agency in its flood insurance study (FIS) for the city of Blackfoot, Idaho,
with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) or digital flood insurance rate maps
(DFIRM), and other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter.
The FIS and the FIRM are on file at the planning and zoning and city hall offices.
C. Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit: A floodplain development permit shall be
required prior to development activities in special flood hazard areas established in subsection B of
this section.
D. Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 2129, 3-
3-2015)
13-1-4: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Designation Of Floodplain Ordinance Administrator: The building official is hereby appointed as the
floodplain administrator who is responsible for administering and implementing the provisions of
this chapter.
B. Permit Procedures: Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the floodplain
administrator on forms furnished by the administrator or the administrator's designee prior to
starting development activities. Specifically, the following information is required:
1. Application Stage:
a. Plans in duplicate drawn to scale with elevations of the project area and the nature, location,
dimensions of existing and proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or
equipment and drainage facilities;
b. Elevation in relation to the flood protection elevation, or highest adjacent grade, of the lowest
floor level, including crawl spaces or basements, of all proposed structures;
c. Elevation to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 519/528
d. Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed
nonresidential floodproofed structure not exempted by V-D will meet the floodproofing criterion
in section 13-1-5 of this chapter;
e. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a
proposed development.
2. Construction Stage:
a. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the
floodplain administrator an as built certification of the floor elevation or floodproofing level,
using appropriate FEMA elevation or floodproofing certificate, immediately after the lowest
floor or floodproofing is completed. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures,
the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer
or architect and certified by same.
b. Certificate deficiencies identified by the floodplain administrator shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to work proceeding. Failure to submit certification or
failure to make the corrections may be cause for the floodplain administrator to issue a stop
work order for the project.
3. Technical Review:
a. If the community does not have the expertise to evaluate the technical data that is part of the
application, the community may contract for an independent engineering review or require a
review by FEMA through the letter of map revision process.
b. The applicant will pay the costs of an independent technical review.
4. Expiration Of Floodplain Development Permit:
a. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the commencement of work
within one hundred eighty (180) days.
b. A floodplain development permit shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
unless the permitted activity has been substantially begun and thereafter is pursued to
completion.
C. Duties And Responsibilities Of The Administrator: Duties of the floodplain administrator shall
include, but shall not be limited to:
1. Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure that the permit requirements of
this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review proposed development to assure that necessary permits have been received from
governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law. Copies of such
permits shall be provided by the applicant and maintained on file.
3. When base flood elevation data or floodway data are not available, then the floodplain
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway
data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of this
chapter.
4. When base flood elevations or other current engineering data are not available, the floodplain
administrator shall take into account the flood hazards, to the extent they are known, to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 520/528
determine whether a proposed building site will be reasonably safe from flooding.
5. Obtain, and record the actual elevation in relation to the vertical datum on the effective FIRM, or
highest adjacent grade, of the lowest floor level, including basement, of all new construction or
substantially improved structures.
6. Obtain, and record the actual elevation, in relation to the vertical datum on the effective FIRM to
which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
7. When floodproofing is required for a structure as per section 13-1-5 of this chapter, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional
engineer or architect.
8. Where interpretation is needed of the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazard including regulatory floodway (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between
a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the
interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter.
9. All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the city of
Blackfoot's planning and zoning office and shall be open for public inspection. (Ord. 2129, 3-3-
2015)
13-1-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
A. Subdivision Standards:
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
2. All subdivision preliminary plats/development plans shall include the mapped flood hazard zones
from the effective FIRM.
3. Base flood elevation data shall be generated and/or provided for subdivision proposals and all
other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less.
4. All subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
5. All subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
B. Construction Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required:
1. New construction and substantial improvements of an existing structure, including a structure
that has been substantially damaged, shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure.
2. New construction and substantial improvements of an existing structure, including a structure
that has been substantially damaged, shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage and by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
3. All new construction or substantial improvements of an existing structure, including a structure
that has been substantially damaged, that includes a fully enclosed area located below the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 521/528
lowest floor formed by the foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed to be an
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. Designs
for complying with this requirement must be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect or meet the following minimum criteria:
a. Provide a minimum of two (2) openings with:
(1) A total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above the higher of the
exterior or interior grade or floor immediately below the opening;
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices
provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions without manual
intervention.
b. To comply with the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment
used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area.
c. The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate
rooms.
d. For crawl space foundation types, construction must follow the guidelines in FEMA TB 11-01,
crawl space construction for structures located in special flood hazard areas: national flood
insurance program interim guidance, specifically:
(1) Below grade crawl spaces are prohibited at sites where the velocity of floodwaters exceed
five feet (5') per second;
(2) Interior grade of the crawl space below the BFE must not be more than two feet (2') below
the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG);
(3) Height of the below grade crawl space, measured from the lowest interior grade of the
crawl space to the bottom of the floor joist must not exceed four feet (4') at any point;
(4) Contain an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of
the crawl space.
4. All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing,
and other facilities shall be designed and/or elevated to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during flooding.
5. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or to eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
6. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or to eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
7. On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid functional impairment,
or contamination from them, during flooding.
8. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure that is not compliant with the
provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is minimal in order to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 522/528
meet health and safety standards.
C. Manufactured Home Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard where the flood protection
elevation is established, these standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles that
are an allowed use under the zoning ordinance shall apply:
1. Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved:
a. On individual lots or parcels.
b. In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions.
c. In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or on a site in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial
damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
the flood protection elevation.
2. Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision may be elevated so that either:
a. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to the flood protection elevation or one
foot (1') above the level of the base flood elevation, whichever is higher.
b. The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other
foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty six inches (36")
above the highest adjacent grade.
3. Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to, and consistent with, applicable state
requirements.
4. Manufactured homes placed on solid perimeter walls shall meet the flood vent requirements in
subsection B4 of this section.
D. Accessory Structures: Relief from the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be granted for
an accessory structure containing no more than three thousand (3,000) square feet. Such a
structure must meet the following standards:
1. It shall not be used for human habitation;
2. It shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
3. It shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters;
4. It shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
5. Services such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to or above
the flood protection elevation;
6. It shall meet the opening requirements of subsection B4 of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 523/528
E. Recreational Vehicle Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard, recreational vehicles must
either:
1. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached
structures or addition; or
3. The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the
anchoring and elevation requirements.
F. Floodway Standards: The following provisions shall apply in a floodway:
1. A project in the regulatory floodway must undergo an encroachment review to determine its
effect on flood flows. An encroachment analysis must include:
a. Determination and documentation that the filling, grading or construction of a structure will not
obstruct flood flows and will not cause an increase in flood heights upstream or adjacent to the
project site;
b. Determination and documentation that grading, excavation, channel improvements, bridge
and culvert replacements that remove an obstruction, do not cause increases in downstream
flood flows;
c. Certification and documentation by a licensed professional engineer that the project will not
result in a rise in flood heights;
d. The administrator may make the encroachment determination for minor projects, such as
projects that do not increase the natural grade (e.g., paving a driveway or parking lot at
existing grade, open fences and small isolated obstructions such as a mailbox or telephone
pole).
2. Upon demonstrating that there are no alternatives, the applicant may propose an encroachment
in the floodway that will cause an increase in the base flood elevation in excess of the allowable
level provided that the applicant obtain a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA before the
development can be approved and permitted.
G. Standards For Zones With Base Flood Elevations: In special flood hazard areas designated A1-30,
AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following provisions are required:
1. New Residential Construction And Substantial Improvements:
a. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement
of any residential structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, constructed at or above the community's flood protection elevation.
b. If solid foundation perimeter walls are used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the
construction standards in subsection B4 of this section.
2. Nonresidential Construction: New construction or the substantial improvement of any
nonresidential structure located in zones A1-30, AE, or AH must be floodproofed if the new
construction or improvement is not elevated. The structure and attendant utility and sanitary
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 524/528
facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the flood protection elevation or to one foot (1')
above the base flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect
must certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting these provisions, and shall provide certification to the
administrator.
3. Places Where Floodway Not Determined: Where the floodway has not been determined, no new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted in
zones A1-30 and AE on the effective FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect
of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot
(1') at any point within the community. Applicants of proposed projects that increase the base
flood elevation more than one foot (1') are required to obtain and submit to the floodplain
administrator, a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) preconstruction.
4. Postconstruction Application: Postconstruction, the applicant must apply to FEMA for a letter of
map revision for changes to the flood hazard map proposed in the CLOMR.
5. Drainage Paths: In AH zones, drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and
away from proposed and existing structures.
H. Standards For Zones Without Base Flood Elevations And/Or Floodway (A Zones): These standards
apply in special flood hazard areas where streams exist but no base flood elevation data have
been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not
been delineated.
1. When base flood elevation or floodway data have not been identified by FEMA in a flood
insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, then the floodplain administrator shall obtain,
review, and reasonably utilize scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer this chapter. If data are not
available from any source, only then provisions of subsections H2 and H3 of this section shall
apply.
a. Where the floodplain administrator has obtained base flood elevation data, applicants of
proposed projects that increase the base flood elevation more than one foot (1') shall obtain a
conditional letter of map revision preconstruction and a letter of map revision postconstruction.
2. No encroachments, including structures or fill, shall be located within an area equal to the width
of the stream or fifty feet (50'), whichever is greater, measured from the ordinary high water
mark, unless certification by a licensed professional engineer documents that the encroachment
will not result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood.
3. In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and
substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed
area (including basement or crawl space) elevated no less than two feet (2') above the highest
adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the construction standards in subsections B
and C of this section.
I. Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO Zones): Shallow flooding areas designated AO
zones, are areas of special flood hazard that have base flood depths of one to three feet (3'), with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 525/528
no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply:
1. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the adjacent grade at least as
high as the flood depth number specified in feet on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). If no
flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least
two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the construction standards in
subsection B4 of this section.
2. New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be
floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure and attendant utility and sanitary facilities must be
designed to be watertight to the specified base flood level or at least two feet (2') above highest
adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect
of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
these provisions, and shall provide certification to the floodplain administrator.
3. Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from all proposed and
existing structures.
J. Alteration Of A Watercourse: A watercourse is considered altered when any change occurs within
its banks.
1. The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse shall
not be diminished. Prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must
submit a description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a
result of the proposed development and submit certification by a registered professional
engineer that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished.
2. Adjacent communities, the U.S. army corps of engineers and the Idaho department of water
resources stream channel alteration program must be notified prior to any alteration or relocation
of a water source. Evidence of notification must be submitted to the floodplain administrator and
to the federal emergency management agency.
3. The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary maintenance for the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished.
4. The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data in subsections K1 and K2 of
this section when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation or elimination of the
special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts.
K. Requirement To Submit New Technical Data:
1. For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or base flood elevations, the
community shall ensure that technical data reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within
six (6) months of the date such information becomes available. These development proposals
include:
a. Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood elevations or alter floodway
boundaries;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 526/528
b. Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures where the applicant desires to
remove the site from the special flood hazard area in accordance with subsection A3 of this
section;
c. Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard
area, including the placement of culverts;
d. Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring establishment of base flood
elevations according to subsection A3 of this section.
2. It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data prepared in a format required for a
conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and
processing fees for these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 2129,
3-3-2015)
13-1-6: VARIANCE AND APPEAL PROCEDURES:
A. Variance:
1. An application for a variance must be submitted to the floodplain administrator on forms
provided and include at a minimum the same information required for a development permit and
an explanation for the basis for the variance request.
2. Upon receipt of a completed application for a variance, the variance request will be set for a
public hearing before the board.
3. Prior to the public hearing, notice of the hearing will be published in the official newspaper at
least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. In addition to the newspaper publication, written
notice shall be provided to all adjoining property owners by parcel post.
4. The burden to show that the variance is warranted and meets the criteria set out herein is on the
applicant.
B. Criteria For Variances:
1. Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued
is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a small or irregularly
shaped lot contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structure constructed below the
base flood level. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
2. Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge would result.
3. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
4. Variances may be issued upon:
a. A showing by the applicant of good and sufficient cause;
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 527/528
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances.
5. Variances pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not
pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily
address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods.
C. Variance Decision: The decision to either grant or deny a variance by the board shall be in writing
and shall set forth the reasons for such approval and denial. If the variance is granted, the property
owner shall be put on notice along with the written decision that the permitted building will have its
lowest floor below the flood protection elevation and that the cost of flood insurance likely will be
commensurate with the increased flood damage risk.
D. Appeals: The board shall hear and decide appeals from the interpretations of the administrator.
1. An appeal must be filed with the administrator within fourteen (14) days of the date of any permit
denial or interpretation of the administrator. Failure to timely file an appeal shall be considered a
failure to exhaust the administrative remedies. The appeal must set out the interpretation of the
administrator and a narrative setting forth the facts relied upon by the appellant and the
appellant's claim regarding the error in the interpretation.
2. Upon receipt of a completed appeal, the appeal will be scheduled for a public meeting to be
heard by the board. The board shall consider the following in ruling on an appeal:
a. All technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this
chapter, including:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effects
of such damage on the individual landowner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
(5) The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to
flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain
management program for that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the
floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(11) The cost of providing government services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems, and streets and bridges.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=960 528/528
E. Decision: The board's decision on appeal shall be in writing and set out the facts, technical
information and the legal basis for the decision. (Ord. 2129, 3-3-2015)
13-1-7: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered unless in full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions
of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned
for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or both. Each day the violation continues may be
considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city of Blackfoot from taking such other lawful actions as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 2129, 3-3-2015)