
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS1
Sec. 1-1. How code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated The Code of the City of Lewiston, Idaho, and may be so cited. The code may also be cited as the Lewiston City Code, 1974. (Code 1960, § 1-1; Ord. No. 4603, § 1, 9-23-13)

Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise:

City: The words, city, the city or this city shall be construed as if followed by the words of Lewiston.

Code: The words, code, the code or this code mean The Code of the City of Lewiston, Idaho.

Computation of time: The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday and then it is also excluded.

Council: Whenever the word council is used in this code it shall be construed to mean the city council of the city of Lewiston.

County: The words, county, the county or this county shall mean the county of Nez Perce, state of Idaho.

Day: A day is the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.

Daytime: The period of time between sunrise and sunset.

Gender: The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.

Nighttime: The period of time between sunset and sunrise.

Officers, departments, etc.: The officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the city of Lewiston, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.

Person: Any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company.

State: The words, state, the state or this state shall be construed to mean the state of Idaho. (Code 1960, § 1-2; Ord. No. 4603, § 1, 9-23-13)

Sec. 1-3. Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Code 1960, § 1-3; Ord. No. 4603, § 1, 9-23-13)

Sec. 1-4. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
(a) The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.

(b) The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. (Code 1960, § 1-4; Ord. No. 4603, § 1, 9-23-13)

Sec. 1-5. Catch lines of sections.
The catch lines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catch lines, are amended or reenacted. (Code 1960, § 1-5; Ord. No. 4603, § 1, 9-23-13)

Sec. 1-6. Severability of parts of code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code. (Ord. No. 4603, § 1, 9-23-13)

Sec. 1-7. General penalty; continuing violations.
(a) Unless otherwise specifically provided in this code, wherever in this code or in any other ordinance of the city any act or omission is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, the same shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment.

(b) Every day any violation of this code or any other ordinance of the city shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1960, § 1-7; Ord. No. 3061, § 1, 1-10-72; Ord. No. 3321, § 1, 7-19-76; Ord. No. 4603, § 1, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4632, § 1, 6-22-15)

State law reference – The power of the city to enact ordinances and provide penalty may be found in Idaho Code, § 50-302.

Sec. 1-8. City seal.
(a) There is hereby adopted an official seal of the city of Lewiston, Idaho, which seal shall be circular in form with the words CITY OF LEWISTON around the top half, and the words STATE OF IDAHO around the bottom half, of said seal. In the center of said seal shall be the word SEAL.

(b) The city clerk of the city of Lewiston is hereby designated the official custodian of the official seal of the city of Lewiston and is hereby authorized and directed to affix said official seal to such instruments as are required to be executed by him on behalf of the city.

(c) The city clerk of the city of Lewiston is hereby authorized and directed to acquire by purchase said official seal in the form set forth in subsection (a) of this section. (Code 1960, § 1-7.1; Ord. No. 3065, §§ 1 – 3, 1-31-72; Ord. No. 3445, § 1, 5-8-78; Ord. No. 4603, § 1, 9-23-13)

1
State law reference – For state law as to codification of city ordinances and publication in book form, see Idaho Code, § 50-903.


Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 2-1 – 2-17

Art. II.    City Council, §§ 2-18 – 2-35

Art. III.    City Manager, §§ 2-36 – 2-51

Art. IV.    City Clerk, §§ 2-52 – 2-63

Art. V.    City Treasurer and Finance Director, §§ 2-64 – 2-76

Art. VI.    Council Facilities Account, §§ 2-77 – 2-88

Art. VII.    Reserved, §§ 2-89 – 2-108

Art. VIII.    Reserved, §§ 2-109 – 2-124

Art. IX.    Reserved, §§ 2-125 – 2-140

Art. X.    Business Improvement Districts, §§ 2-141 – 2-155

Art. XI.    Code of Conduct, §§ 2-156 – 2-170

Art. XII.    Comprehensive Liability Plan, §§ 2-171 – 2-179

Art. XIII.    Advisory Commissions, §§ 2-180 – 2-206

ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. Public records.
Maintenance and access to the city’s public records shall be as provided for in Chapter 1 of Title 74 of the Idaho Code, and the definition of a public record shall be as provided therein. Audio tape recordings of regular city council meetings shall be maintained as a public record for a period of twenty-four (24) months after the meeting for which the recording was made. (Ord. No. 4034, § 2, 3-9-92; Ord. No. 4638, § 1, 11-9-15)

Secs. 2-2 – 2-7. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4034, adopted Mar. 9, 1992, repealed §§ 2-1 – 2-7, pertaining to public records, derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 2-67 – 2-72, and Ord. No. 2666, §§ 2 – 7.

Sec. 2-8. Adoption of personnel policy; amendment, repeal, etc.; separability from labor agreements.
(a) The city council is hereby authorized to adopt, by resolution, a system of rules and regulations for the management of city employees, including, but not limited to, job and pay classifications, salaries, working hours and conditions, merit examinations and promotions, vacations and sick leave, disciplinary proceedings, appeal procedure, and any other matter or proceeding related to the efficient regulation of the personnel of the city. Such rules and regulations, when adopted, shall be known as “The Personnel Policy of the City of Lewiston, Idaho.”

(b) Such rules and regulations may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, replaced or repealed by resolution duly passed by the city council.

(c) Nothing in the personnel rules and regulations adopted by the city council shall be deemed to supersede the provisions of any collective labor agreement entered into by the city with its employees, or any of them, whether such agreement is now in effect or is entered into hereafter, where the provisions of such rules and the collective labor agreement are in conflict. (Ord. No. 3227, §§ 1 – 3, 8-12-74)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3227, adopted Aug. 12, 1974, did not specifically amend the code. Codification herein as § 2-8 was, therefore, at the editor’s discretion.

Secs. 2-9 – 2-17. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CITY COUNCIL
Sec. 2-18. Presiding officer.
(a) The mayor. The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council and shall be the recognized head of the city for all ceremonial purposes. The mayor shall be elected by majority vote of the full council. The city clerk shall call for nominations by the council; a nomination shall not require a second. The city clerk shall then, by roll call vote, take the vote of each councilor; each councilor may cast a vote for one (1) nominee. If a nominee receives a majority vote of the full council, then such nominee shall be elected as the mayor. If no nominee receives a majority vote of the full council, then a second vote between the two (2) nominees with the most votes shall be taken by roll call vote, and the nominee who receives a majority vote of the full council shall be elected as the mayor. If, following the first vote, more than two (2) nominees receive the same number of votes, then a second vote between such nominees shall be taken by roll call vote until one (1) nominee receives a majority vote of the full council. Such nominee shall be elected as the mayor.

(b) Mayor pro tem. At the time of the election of the mayor, a mayor pro tem shall also be elected by a majority vote of the full council for a term of two (2) years following the same election process as for the mayor. The mayor pro tem shall assume the powers and duties of the mayor in the mayor’s absence. In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor or mayor pro tem, the council shall elect, as soon as practical, a successor to fill the remainder of the original term, in accordance with section 2-32 of this code.

(c) Temporary chairperson. In the event of the absence of the mayor and mayor pro tem, the city attorney shall call the council to order. If a quorum is present, those councilors present shall elect, by majority vote, a temporary chairperson for that meeting. Should the mayor or mayor pro tem arrive, the temporary chairperson shall relinquish the chair immediately upon the conclusion of the item of business then in consideration before the council.

(d) Privileges not affected by status. The presiding officer may move, second, and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are imposed on all councilors. The presiding officer shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a council member by reason of acting as the presiding officer. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-19. Council meetings.
(a) Regular council meetings. The council shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Mondays of each month. Regular meetings shall be held at the Lewiston City Library and shall begin at 6:00 p.m., or at such other location or time as shall be designated in advance. If a day fixed for a regular meeting falls on a holiday, then such meeting shall be cancelled.

(b) Work sessions. The council shall hold a work session on the first Monday of each month. Work sessions shall be held at City Hall and shall begin at 3:00 p.m., or at such other location or time as shall be designated in advance. The council has authority to act on motions and make decisions at work sessions; provided, however, the council should defer final actions and decisions on substantive policy issues to a council meeting other than a work session. During a work session, council may direct staff to take certain actions in accordance with section 2-28 of this code. If a day fixed for a work session falls on a holiday, then such work session shall be cancelled.

(c) Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by a consensus of the council or the city manager. To the extent possible, special meetings should be held on the third Monday of the month, if needed.

(d) Executive sessions. Executive sessions may be placed on a meeting agenda by the presiding officer, city manager, or city attorney. Only council members, the city manager, the city attorney, and persons specifically invited by the council, the city manager, or the city attorney shall be allowed to attend executive sessions. Matters discussed in executive session shall not be disclosed by any person present during such session.

(e) Compliance with Idaho Code. All meetings of the council shall comply with the requirements set forth in Chapter 2 , Title 74, Idaho Code. All council meetings and work sessions shall be open to the public, except executive sessions.

(f) Notice to media. Written notice of council meetings shall be provided to news media that previously requested such notice in writing.

(g) Public comments. The council may only take public comment in accordance with section 2-29 of this code.

(h) Electronic communications. Councilors shall not communicate privately during council meetings, including through emails, texts, social media, and other similar forms of communication; provided, however, councilors may respond to personal emergencies during council meetings. If a councilor uses an electronic device during a council meeting to acquire information on a subject pending before the council, then such councilor shall inform the other councilors of the source of information and the information acquired. Additionally, when an email relates to a matter that may come before the council in the foreseeable future, then a councilor shall not send an email to a quorum of the city council regarding such matter, nor shall a councilor “reply all” or reply to a quorum of the council when he or she receives such an email.

(i) Councilor attendance and participation. Councilors shall devote as much of their time to the duties of their offices as an efficient and faithful discharge thereof may require. Councilors shall attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom by the mayor, city manager, or a majority of the councilors. When a councilor is excused from a meeting, such councilor shall inform the city clerk at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the meeting, unless the councilor’s absence is an emergency and such notification is not possible. Councilors shall perform all duties reasonably expected of them by nature of their office, including, but not limited to, the consideration of ordinances and resolutions, as well as investigation and study of work done for the city according to the committees upon which they may be appointed. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-20. Order of business and agenda.
(a) Order of business. The order of business for regular meetings of the council shall be as follows; provided, however, that when it appears to be in the best interest of the public, the order of business may be changed for a single meeting by two-thirds (2/3) vote:

(1) Opening exercises (includes call to order, pledge of allegiance, announcements, approval of additions and deletions to the agenda, proclamations, awards, ceremonial presentations, and citizen comments).

(2) Public hearings (includes deliberations and decisions and deliberations from hearings held over from previous meetings).

(3) Consent calendar (includes approval of minutes, adoption of routine resolutions, and items of business requiring council action). Items pulled from the consent calendar at the request of a councilor will be considered at the end of the active agenda.

(4) Active agenda.

(5) Unfinished and new business.

(6) Executive session, if called for.

(7) Adjournment.

(b) Agendas. The city clerk shall prepare an agenda for regular and special meetings and work sessions. Council approval of agendas shall not be required.

(c) Agenda packets. In order to be included in the agenda packet, communications to the mayor and the council concerning matters on the agenda must be submitted to the city clerk no later than 10:00 a.m. five (5) business days prior to the date of the council meeting where the matter will be considered. In exceptional circumstances, agenda item materials may be submitted to the city clerk after this time, but in no case later than 12:00 p.m. one (1) business day prior to the date of the council meeting. Any councilor may have a communication concerning a matter on the agenda that does not meet the timelines in this subsection included in the record. The city clerk shall distribute materials for regular meetings to the council no later than three (3) business days preceding the meeting.

(d) Placement of items on the agenda.

(1) Agenda requests. City staff shall submit requests for items to be placed on the next council agenda to the city clerk at least eight (8) business days preceding the meeting. The city manager shall review and finalize the agenda. Councilors may place items on the agenda either by approval of the city manager or upon a majority vote of the council.

(2) Consent agenda. In order to expedite council business, approval of minutes and other routine agenda items shall be placed on the consent agenda. The presiding officer shall read the consent agenda, and all items on the consent agenda shall be approved by a single motion unless an item is removed from the consent agenda for further consideration. A councilor may remove any item from the consent agenda for separate consideration.

(e) Removal of items from the agenda. The council may remove an item from a meeting agenda by majority vote at any time prior to consideration of the active agenda.

(f) Addition of items to the agenda. After a meeting has started, the council may amend the agenda in accordance with Chapter 2 , Title 74, Idaho Code, which requires a good faith reason that the agenda item was not included in the original agenda posting. Council shall only add items that: (1) were not foreseen when the original agenda was posted, and (2) are urgent matters that require immediate attention by council and cannot wait to be addressed until the next council meeting.

(g) Postponement of consideration prior to the meeting. A councilor may request that consideration of an agenda item be postponed to a subsequent meeting if the councilor is unable to attend the meeting during which the item has been scheduled for consideration. A councilor requesting postponement of consideration shall submit a request to the city manager in writing as early as possible. The request to postpone should be honored unless the matter must be acted upon at that meeting due to deadlines or other matters of timing. If the request to postpone an item is made after an agenda has been posted, and less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to a regular meeting or less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to a special meeting, then the council shall vote on whether to postpone such item.

(h) Proclamations and awards. Special recognition, awards given to or by the city of Lewiston, and proclamations that serve to encourage and educate the community may be placed on the agenda at the discretion of the mayor or city manager. Requests for proclamations should be submitted in writing to the mayor or city manager.

(i) Council and city manager comments. The mayor, each councilor, and the city manager or his or her designee shall have the opportunity to comment on any item of public interest during new business; provided, however, such comments shall not be related to an item currently before the council or an item that may come before the council in the foreseeable future. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-21. Communications.
(a) Prohibited. Anonymous communications shall not be introduced in council meetings.

(b) To mayor and council. Communications to the mayor and the council concerning matters not on the agenda shall be provided to the mayor and the council upon receipt. A councilor may briefly present a communication that raises a matter of general interest to the city under new business and, by majority vote of the councilors present, have such matter placed on a subsequent agenda for discussion by the council.

(c) To city manager. The city manager may bring any matter raised by a communication to the attention of the council as an agenda item; provided, that such communication is accompanied by a staff report setting forth the reason the matter should be considered by the council and making a recommendation for council action. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-22. Minutes.
(a) Idaho Code. Meeting minutes of the council shall comply with Chapter 2 , Title 74, Idaho Code.

(b) Maintained by city clerk. Meeting minutes shall be maintained by the city clerk in accordance with the city’s records retention schedule.

(c) Contents. Minutes of regular meetings, special meetings, emergency meetings, and work sessions shall, at a minimum, contain the following information:

(1) The date, time, and place of the meeting or session;

(2) The names of councilors recorded as either present or absent;

(3) A general description of all matters considered during the meeting or session;

(4) All motions, resolutions, orders, and ordinances proposed and their disposition;

(5) The results of all votes, and if the vote is by roll call or upon the request of a councilor, the vote of each councilor by name; and

(6) If applicable, a reference to the specific statutory section authorizing an executive session and sufficient detail to identify the purpose and topic of the executive session.

(d) Councilor protests. A councilor shall have the right to have the reason(s) for his or her dissent from, or protest against, an action of the council entered in the minutes.

(e) Approval. Approval of the minutes shall not require reading of the minutes in open meeting prior to approval. Minutes may be revised at any time by the city clerk only to correct spelling, numbering, and other technical or grammatical errors. Prior to approval, a councilor may request an amendment or correction to the minutes to accurately reflect the substance of any motion, amendment, or matter considered during the meeting to which the minutes pertain. If objection is made by another councilor to such amendment or correction, the amendment or correction shall only be made upon a majority vote of the council. If the facts of the minutes are disputed, then the approval of the minutes shall be postponed to the next meeting, and the city clerk shall validate the information from appropriate sources.

(f) Recordings. Unless otherwise required by law, council meetings are not required to be recorded. However, council meetings may be recorded and, if so, such recording shall be maintained in accordance with the city’s records retention schedule. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-23. General decorum.
(a) Presiding officer. The presiding officer shall preserve decorum and decide all points of order, subject to appeal to the council.

(b) Councilors. Councilors shall preserve order and decorum during council meetings and shall not, by conversation or other action, delay or interrupt the proceedings or refuse to obey the orders of the presiding officer or the rules set forth in this article. Councilors shall, when addressing staff or members of the public, confine themselves to questions or issues then under discussion; shall not engage in personal attacks; shall not impugn the motives of any speaker; and shall, at all times while in session or otherwise, conduct themselves in a manner appropriate to the dignity of their office.

(c) Staff and public. City employees and persons attending council meetings shall observe the same rules of procedure, decorum, and good conduct applicable to councilors.

(d) Removal from meeting. Any person who disrupts a council meeting by making personal, impertinent, slanderous, or unauthorized remarks, or who becomes disruptive while addressing the council or attending a council meeting shall first be warned by the presiding officer that they are out of order and that further disruption shall be cause to remove the person from the meeting. If the person continues to cause a disruption after being warned, the presiding officer shall direct the sergeant-at-arms to remove the person. In case the presiding officer should fail to act, any member of the council may obtain the floor and move to require enforcement; upon affirmative vote of the majority of the councilors present, the sergeant-at-arms shall be authorized to remove the person or persons, as if the presiding officer so directed.

(e) Enforcement of decorum. The city manager, or such member or members of the Lewiston police department as the city manager shall designate, shall serve as the sergeant-at-arms of the council meetings and shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-24. Rules of debate.
(a) Recognition by presiding officer. A councilor desiring to speak at a council meeting shall address the presiding officer and, upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself or herself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language.

(b) Interruptions prohibited. A councilor, once recognized by the presiding officer, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it is to be called to order or as otherwise provided herein. If a councilor, while speaking, is called to order, the councilor shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined and, if in order, the councilor shall be permitted to proceed.

(c) Close of debate. The councilor moving for the adoption of an ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate.

(d) Call for the question. A councilor may call for the question upon being recognized by the presiding officer. If the motion to call for the question is seconded, debate shall not be allowed, and the motion must be approved by two-thirds (2/3) of the councilors present. If the motion is so approved, the council shall immediately vote on the underlying question without further debate. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-25. Consideration of business.
(a) Quorum. A majority of the full council shall constitute a quorum to do business. A lesser number of councilors may meet and adjourn, but no final actions or decisions shall be taken or made at such meetings.

(b) Roll call votes. Roll call votes shall be taken when required by law. Additionally, a roll call vote shall be taken upon any question before the council upon demand by a councilor.

(c) Voting required. Unless otherwise provided by law or this article, every councilor present when a question is put forth shall vote for or against the same. Unless excused from voting, if a councilor refuses or fails to vote, and the result of such refusal or failure creates a tie, that councilor’s vote shall be counted as an “aye.” If a councilor is excused from voting, that councilor may be counted for purposes of determining a quorum, but shall not be counted toward the minimum number of votes required to pass or reject a motion.

(d) Conflicts of interest – In general. If a councilor determines he or she has a conflict of interest (as defined in Chapter 4 , Title 74, Idaho Code), then such councilor, prior to deliberating or voting on an issue, shall disclose the nature and extent of his or her conflict. After disclosure, a councilor may either: (1) request to be excused from debate and voting by a majority vote of the other councilors present, or (2) proceed with debate and/or voting. If a councilor is excused, the councilor shall remain on the telephone or premises for the purpose of maintaining a quorum, if needed.

(e) Conflicts of interest – Land use actions. A councilor shall not participate in any land use proceeding or action in which he or she has a conflict of interest in accordance with the requirements set forth in Idaho Code, Section 67-6506.

(f) Conflicts of interest – Urban renewal. A councilor shall not participate in any urban renewal action in which he or she has a conflict of interest in accordance with the requirements set forth in Idaho Code, Section 50-2017.

(g) Minimum votes required in certain situations. In accordance with Idaho Code, Section 50-902, the passage of any ordinance shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of councilors present at the meeting at which such ordinance is moved for adoption.

(h) Tie vote. A motion shall fail if votes upon such motion are tied. If a tie vote occurs in the appeal of a quasi-judicial matter, the decision by the previous decision-making body shall be affirmed. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-26. Motion to reconsider.
A motion to reconsider an action taken by the council must be made: (1) prior to adjournment of the next regular council meeting, or (2) prior to an ordinance or resolution that is the subject of the motion to reconsider becoming effective, whichever is earlier. Such motion must be made by a councilor on the prevailing side, may be seconded by any councilor, and shall require a vote of the majority of councilors present at the meeting in which the motion to reconsider is made. A motion to reconsider is debatable and shall have precedence over all other motions. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-27. Substitute motions.
A substitute motion is a motion that proposes to replace a pending main motion in its entirety. If seconded, debate on the relative merits of the main motion and the substitute motion shall be in order. If approved, a substitute motion shall stand as the main motion, and the original main motion shall be deemed to have failed. If the substitute motion fails, vote shall proceed to the main motion. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-28. Council requests of staff.
A councilor may request assistance from city staff in accordance with this section. If a request for staff assistance is estimated to require less than one (1) hour of time, such request may be approved by the city manager without council action. If a request for staff assistance is estimated to require one (1) hour or more of time, such request must be approved by a majority of the councilors present at the meeting in which the request is made prior to staff time being utilized. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-29. Public comment.
(a) Opportunities to comment. Public comment shall be allowed at every regular meeting of the council in accordance with this section. Public comment shall only be received by council during citizens’ comments, public hearings, or when authorized by the presiding officer.

(b) Recognition and identification. A person shall not provide public comment unless and until recognized by the presiding officer. Persons providing public comment shall identify themselves by their names and by their cities of residence, but shall not be required to disclose their mailing or home addresses.

(c) Time limit. Persons making comments during citizens’ comments and public hearings shall be limited to three (3) minutes each, unless additional time is allowed by the presiding officer.

(d) Councilor questions. Councilors may, after obtaining the floor, ask questions of speakers during public comment. Councilors shall use restraint when exercising this option, and shall attempt to limit questioning to three (3) minutes. The presiding officer may intervene if a councilor is violating the spirit of this guideline.

(e) Audio and visual materials. Persons providing public comment may utilize audio and visual materials during the time permitted for their comments, and they may utilize city-provided audio or visual equipment located in the council chambers. It is recommended that persons wishing to utilize audio or visual materials provide such materials to city staff prior to the meeting to avoid a delay or disruption of the meeting.

(f) Citizens’ comments. During citizens’ comments, a person may address an agenda item or any issue of city business, but shall not address matters that are or will likely be the subject of a public hearing. Citizens’ comments shall not be used to testify about a quasi-judicial land use matter that has been or is scheduled to be heard by the planning and zoning commission, or to provide additional testimony or information on any matter after the official record of such matter has been closed. Persons commenting may request that items be placed on a future agenda for further discussion; such requests are subject to approval by the city manager or a majority vote of the council.

(g) Comments regarding specific city employees. Comments regarding the performance of a specific city employee are not appropriate during citizens’ comments. Instead, a person wishing to comment on the performance of a specific city employee should schedule a meeting with the city manager. The city manager may then, in his or her discretion, invite such person to a meeting with the council in a duly-noticed executive session.

(h) Repetitive comments. The presiding officer may determine that comments regarding matters that have been previously heard and/or decided by the council are not appropriate for citizens’ comments. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-30. Public hearings.
(a) When held. A public hearing shall be held when required by law or upon majority vote of the councilors present. Public hearings shall be duly noticed.

(b) Identification. All persons shall, prior to giving testimony, state their full names and indicate whether they are residents of the city of Lewiston. Persons testifying shall not be required to state their home addresses.

(c) Procedure. The following order of procedure shall be observed for a public hearing:

(1) The presiding officer shall announce the subject of the public hearing as it is set forth on the agenda, inform the public of any time limits that apply to testimony, and then declare the public hearing open.

(2) Staff shall present a report to the council.

(3) The applicant, in a quasi-judicial hearing, may testify and/or give a presentation to council.

(4) Council shall accept testimony from other members of the public, including affected persons in a quasi-judicial hearing. No person shall testify until the person has been recognized by the presiding officer. All testimony shall be addressed to the council as a body and not to an individual councilor.

(5) The council may ask questions of city staff.

(6) The applicant, in a quasi-judicial hearing, may give rebuttal; provided, that such rebuttal shall be limited to the matters introduced in the hearing.

(7) The presiding officer shall close the public hearing.

Cross-examination of persons testifying at the public hearing shall not be allowed. An applicant shall be allowed the last communication to the council before the public hearing is closed. Quasi-judicial land use hearings shall also be subject to the provisions of Chapter 37 of this code.

(d) Written testimony, exhibits, and evidence. Written testimony, exhibits, and evidence may be submitted to the city clerk prior to the conclusion of the public hearing. Copies of such written testimony, exhibits, and evidence shall be distributed to the applicant and all councilors. If an exhibit or piece of evidence is unable to be copied, the applicant and all councilors shall have an opportunity to examine such exhibit or piece of evidence. In the event that written testimony, exhibits, or evidence is submitted during a public hearing, the council shall review such written testimony, exhibits, or evidence and allow sufficient time for the applicant to review such written testimony, exhibits, or evidence. The applicant shall be allowed to address the written testimony, exhibits, and evidence during the applicant’s rebuttal. Written testimony, exhibits, and evidence submitted to the city clerk shall be included as part of the record of the public hearing.

(e) Public records. Oral testimony, recordings of public hearings, and documents and evidence submitted to the city clerk in the course of public hearings are public records. Therefore, if a person does not wish to have his or her personal information disseminated to the public (such as home address, personal email address, or personal telephone number), then he or she should take care not to include such personal information when testifying or submitting documents or evidence to the city clerk.

(f) Time limits. Persons testifying during legislative or administrative hearings shall be limited to three (3) minutes each, or such other time limit fixed by the presiding officer. Persons testifying at quasi-judicial hearings shall be limited to the following time limits, or such other time limit fixed by the presiding officer:

(1) Staff presentation: fifteen (15) minutes;

(2) Applicant testimony/presentation: fifteen (15) minutes;

(3) Affected persons testimony: three (3) minutes per person;

(4) Council questions of city staff: No time limit;

(5) Applicant’s rebuttal: seven (7) minutes.

A person testifying shall not be interrupted until such time limit has expired or until he or she has finished his or her statement.

(g) Council questions. Councilors may, after recognition by the presiding officer, ask clarifying or follow-up questions of a person providing testimony after such person has completed his or her testimony. Questions posed by councilors should seek to clarify a person’s testimony and should not be used to lengthen or expand the testimony of such person. Questions by the council and answers in response thereto shall not be included in the person’s time limit. Councilors shall use restraint and be considerate of the meeting time of the council when exercising this option. The presiding officer may intervene if a councilor is violating the spirit of this section.

(h) Continuance. Prior to closing the public hearing, council may continue the public hearing to a date certain or indefinitely upon a majority vote of the councilors present. In the event that additional written testimony is submitted during the continuance period, such written testimony shall be provided to the applicant and all councilors, and the applicant shall be allowed to address the written testimony during the applicant’s rebuttal.

(i) Deliberations and decision. Following the closing of a public hearing, the council may deliberate on the issue and render a decision. During deliberations, each councilor shall have an opportunity to express his or her opinions. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-31. Membership on boards and commissions.
Councilors may serve as city council liaisons to city advisory boards and commissions, as set forth in Article XIII of this chapter, except for the planning and zoning commission. The city council shall appoint one (1) councilor to serve on the urban renewal agency board as a voting member and may appoint proxies in accordance with the bylaws of such agency. Councilors may serve on community boards and commissions in their personal capacities without approval from the council. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-32. Vacancies on city council.
(a) Application. When a permanent vacancy on the city council occurs, the city manager shall ensure that adequate public notice of the vacancy is disseminated. The notice shall inform interested persons: (1) they may submit an application setting forth their qualifications and background and a statement of the reasons they wish to be considered to fill the vacancy; (2) application materials shall be filed with the city clerk; and (3) the deadline for submission of the materials. Any person who meets the qualifications set forth in Idaho Code, Section 50-702 and timely submits an application shall be considered to fill the vacancy.

(b) Council review. After the deadline for the filing of application materials, the mayor shall recommend a process to the council for reviewing applications and interviewing applicants. The mayor’s recommendation shall be approved by a majority of the councilors present at the meeting.

(c) Appointment. The mayor shall appoint an applicant to fill the vacancy or direct the city manager to readvertise the vacancy. In the event that the mayor appoints an applicant, such appointment shall be subject to the majority vote of councilors present at the meeting. If a majority of councilors present at the meeting do not consent to the appointment, then the city manager shall readvertise the vacancy.

Following the appointment, the city clerk shall administer the oath of office, and the appointee shall take his or her seat on the council.

(d) Term of office. The appointee shall serve only until the next general city election, at which time such vacancy shall be filled for the balance of the original term. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-33. Attendance by electronic means.
(a) Requirements. Councilors may attend council meetings via a telecommunications device, including telephone or video conferencing; provided, that the following conditions are met:

(1) The councilor notifies the city manager at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting that the councilor would like to attend via a telecommunications device;

(2) At the commencement of the meeting, the presiding officer publicly states for the record that the councilor is attending the meeting via a telecommunications device;

(3) At least one (1) councilor is physically present at the location designated in the meeting notice;

(4) Communications among the councilor attending via a telecommunications device and the councilors physically present at the meeting location are audible to the public attending the meeting in person and the council; and

(5) Any other applicable requirement set forth in Chapter 2 , Title 74, Idaho Code.

(b) Presiding officer. To avoid confusion and promote efficiency, if the mayor will attend a meeting via a telecommunications device, then the mayor pro tem shall act as the presiding officer for the meeting. If the mayor pro tem will attend a meeting via a telecommunications device, then the mayor may select a temporary mayor pro tem for the meeting. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-34. Council compensation.
Council compensation shall be fixed in accordance with Idaho Code, Section 50-203. As of January 1, 2020, the mayor shall receive as compensation one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month. All other councilors shall receive as compensation seven hundred dollars ($700.00) per month. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-35. Suspension of rules.
Except as otherwise provided herein or required by law, the provisions set forth in this article, or portions thereof, may be temporarily suspended by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the councilors present. The vote on any such suspension shall be entered upon the record. (Ord. No. 4720, § 2, 7-23-18)

ARTICLE III. CITY MANAGER2
Sec. 2-36. Office created; appointment.
(a) The office of the city manager is hereby created and established.

(b) The city manager shall be appointed by the council solely on the basis of his administrative qualifications and abilities, without regard to race, creed, sex, or national origin.

(c) He shall hold office at the pleasure of a majority of the full membership of the council. The council may, when necessary or appropriate, designate an acting or temporary city manager, with all of the powers set forth herein. (Ord. No. 3152, § 1, 7-16-73)

Sec. 2-37. Residence requirements; disability.
(a) Residence of the city at the time of appointment shall not be required of the city manager.

(b) No person elected to membership of the council shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city manager until at least one year has elapsed after he has ceased to be a member of the council. (Ord. No. 3152, §§ 2, 3, 7-16-73)

Sec. 2-38. Bond requirement.
The city manager shall execute a corporate surety bond in such sum as may be approved by the council, which bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager as prescribed in this article and by the laws of the state, the cost of which bond shall be paid by the city. (Ord. No. 3152, § 4, 7-16-73)

State law reference – Bonds of officers generally, Idaho Code, § 50-204.

Sec. 2-39. Compensation; reimbursement for expenses.
(a) The city manager shall receive such compensation as the council shall, from time to time, determine and fix, subject to any existing employment contract between the city and the city manager.

(b) The city manager shall, upon proper claim therefor being approved by the council, be reimbursed for all sums necessarily expended or incurred by him in the performance of his duties. (Ord. No. 3152, § 5, 7-16-73)

Sec. 2-40. Removal.
(a) The city manager may be removed from office only by a majority vote of the full membership of the council convened at a regular council meeting, or at a special meeting duly called for that purpose.

(b) Such removal shall be subject to the terms of any existing employment contract between the city and the city manager. (Ord. No. 3152, § 6, 7-16-73)

Sec. 2-41. Same – Procedure.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the city manager shall not be removed from office, other than for willful misconduct in office, during or within a period of one hundred twenty (120) days next succeeding any municipal election held in the city at which councilmen are elected.

(b) The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the council, or a reorganized council, to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his office. (Ord. No. 3152, § 7, 7-16-73)

Sec. 2-42. Duties.
(a) The city manager shall be the administrative head of the city government, under the direction and supervision of the council. He shall, in accordance with the provisions of Idaho Code, Section 50-811:

(1) Have the general control and supervision over all business of the city.

(2) See that the provisions of this code and the ordinances and policies of the city, and the laws of the state pertaining to the city, are faithfully executed.

(3) Attend all meetings of the city council, unless excused therefrom by the city council.

(4) Recommend for adoption to the council such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient.

(5) Appoint or remove all department heads, except the city attorney, subject to approval of the council, supervise and control all employees of the city subject to any applicable personnel regulations and make regular reports to the council concerning actions he has taken with respect to employees of the city.

(6) Supervise in general all departments of the city, except the city attorney.

(7) Keep the council fully advised of the financial condition of the city and its future needs, and prepare and submit to the council such other reports as may be required by the council, or as he may deem advisable.

(8) Prepare and submit to the council the preliminary budget for each fiscal year, and administer the budget after its adoption.

(9) Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city and concerning the service maintained by the public utilities of the city.

(10) Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, public streets, and other public properties which are under the jurisdiction and control of the city.

(11) Serve as ex officio member of such boards and commissions of the city as may be determined by the council, with the right to participate in all deliberations, but without vote.

(12) Devote his full time to the duties and interests of the city.

(13) Exercise all powers delegated to the mayor by Idaho Code, Section 50-606.

(14) Perform such other duties as the council may establish by ordinance, resolution, or motion.

(b) Nothing contained herein shall be construed as derogating from the power of the city council to establish policy, to direct and supervise the affairs of the city as required by law, to create or abolish departments or permanent positions of city government, or to exercise any other powers delegated to it by law. The city council shall, by motion, create and abolish city departments, upon the recommendation of the city manager. (Ord. No. 3173, § 2, 10-15-73; Ord. No. 3522, § 1, 5-12-80)

Sec. 2-43. Officers to cooperate.
It shall be the duty of all other officers, employees, and agents of the city, including the city attorney, to cooperate with and assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city most efficiently, economically, and harmoniously, so far as may be consistent with their duties and obligations to the city. (Ord. No. 3152, § 9, 7-16-73; Ord. No. 3522, § 2, 5-12-80)

Sec. 2-44. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3809, § 1, adopted Feb. 24, 1986, repealed § 2-44, pertaining to city manager as intermediary between council and administrative services, derived from Ord. No. 3152, § 10, enacted July 16, 1973.

Secs. 2-45 – 2-51. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. CITY CLERK
Sec. 2-52. Created; appointment.
There is hereby created the office of city clerk. Such officer shall be appointed by the city manager and confirmed by the council. (Code 1960, § 2-22.1)

Sec. 2-53. Bonding requirement.
The clerk shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, execute a bond to the city conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties, which bond shall be in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). (Code 1960, § 2-22.1)

State law reference – Bonding of city clerk, Idaho Code, § 50-204.

Sec. 2-54. Duties.
In addition to the duties imposed upon the city clerk by Section 50-207, Idaho Code, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep a fair and correct journal of the proceedings of the council; to file and keep all books and papers of the council; to keep and preserve all records and books entrusted to him; to affix the seal of the city to instruments required to be executed by him under the city’s seal; to sign warrants authorized by the council; to administer oaths; and to perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this code and the ordinances and resolutions of the city. (Code 1960, § 2-22.1)

State law reference – Duties of city clerk, Idaho Code, § 50-207.

Sec. 2-55. Deputy – Created.
There is hereby created the office of deputy city clerk, and the city clerk is hereby authorized to appoint one or more deputy city clerks with the consent of the city manager. (Code 1960, § 2-22.1)

Secs. 2-56 – 2-58. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4034, § 7, enacted Mar. 9, 1992, repealed §§ 2-56 – 2-58, relative to the office of deputy clerks, derived from § 2-22.1 of the 1960 Code, and Ord. No. 3050, §§ 1 – 5, adopted Sep. 13, 1971.

Secs. 2-59 – 2-63. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. CITY TREASURER AND FINANCE DIRECTOR3
Sec. 2-64. Created.
There is hereby created the office of city treasurer and finance director. Such officer shall be appointed by the city manager and confirmed by the council. (Code 1960, § 2-16; Ord. No. 4034, § 8, 3-9-92)

Sec. 2-65. Bonding requirement.
The city treasurer and finance director shall, before entering upon the duties of the office, execute a bond to the city for the faithful performance of the treasurer’s duties in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). (Code 1960, § 2-16; Ord. No. 4034, § 8, 3-9-92)

State law reference – Bonding of city treasurer, Idaho Code, § 50-204.

Sec. 2-66. Duties.
(a) In addition to the duties imposed upon the city treasurer and finance director by Idaho Code, Section 50-208, and Chapter 10 of title 50, Idaho Code, the city treasurer and finance director shall receive and keep all money that shall come into the city by taxation or otherwise, and pay out of the same upon the warrant of the mayor and city clerk, or by check signed by the mayor and treasurer and finance director as provided by Idaho Code, Section 50-1018. The treasurer and finance director shall keep the books of account of the city of Lewiston, including an account of the general fund, and a separate account of the separate funds that may be created for any specific object, and, when a warrant is drawn on any particular fund, it can only be paid out of such fund.

(b) The treasurer and finance director shall report all the revenues and expenditures to the council at least once a month. Such records shall be maintained in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles for municipalities.

(c) It shall be the duty of the treasurer and finance director to superintend and supervise the fiscal affairs of the city, and to manage and conduct the same as prescribed by the ordinances and resolutions of the city council. The treasurer and finance director shall keep the books of account of the city and make such financial reports and statement as may be required by the council.

(d) The treasurer and finance director shall keep separate account of each and every appropriation of the city, showing the purpose for which the same is made.

(e) The books of account of the treasurer and finance director shall exhibit accurate and detailed statements of all monies received and expended for the account of the city by all city officials, and shall show in detail the property owned by the city and income derived therefrom.

(f) The treasurer and finance director shall keep a separate and controlling account with each department and fund of the city government in accord with accepted municipal accounting practices, and also such other accounts as may be necessary to show a complete financial statement of the city.

(g) The treasurer and finance director shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the ordinances and regulations of the city. (Code 1960, § 2-16; Ord. No. 3298, § 1, 12-29-75; Ord. No. 4034, § 8, 3-9-92)

Sec. 2-67. Deposit of city funds, generally.
The treasurer and finance director shall deposit and keep all monies of the city in such depositories as may be authorized by law as provided for by Idaho Code, Section 50-1013 and Chapter 1 of Title 57, Idaho Code. (Code 1960, § 2-16; Ord. No. 4034, § 8, 3-9-92)

Sec. 2-67.1. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4034, § 8, enacted Mar. 9, 1992, in its amendment of Art. V, deleted the provisions of § 2-67.1, relative to deposit of demand funds, which derived from Ord. No. 3699, enacted July 5, 1983.

Sec. 2-68. Investments for city.
When any investments are authorized by law, the city treasurer and finance director shall make such investments pursuant to Idaho Code, Section 50-1013. (Code 1960, § 2-16; Ord. No. 4034, § 8, 3-9-92)

State law reference – Deposit and investment of funds by treasurer, Idaho Code, § 50-1013.

Sec. 2-69. Deputy – Created.
The city treasurer and finance director is hereby authorized and empowered to appoint such deputy or deputies to the city treasurer as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the treasurer and finance director. (Code 1960, § 2-16; Ord. No. 4034, § 8, 3-9-92)

Sec. 2-70. Same – Bonding requirement.
All deputies shall be required to post bond for the faithful performance of their duties. The amount of the bond shall be fixed by the city manager or council. (Code 1960, § 2-16; Ord. No. 4034, § 8, 3-9-92)

Sec. 2-71. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4034, § 8, enacted Mar. 9, 1992, in its amendment of Art. V, deleted the provisions of § 2-71, relative to removal of deputies, which derived from § 2-16 of the 1960 Code.

Sec. 2-72. Offices of city treasurer and finance director may be held by different persons.
In the discretion of the council, the offices of finance director and city treasurer may be held by different persons; provided however, that nothing herein shall be construed as derogating from any of the powers or duties of the city treasurer imposed by law. (Ord. No. 3298, § 1, 12-29-75; Ord. No. 4034, § 8, 3-9-92)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3298, § 1, adopted Dec. 29, 1975, amended § 2-16 of the 1960 Code by adding provisions which, at the discretion of the editor, have been codified herein as § 2-72.

Secs. 2-73 – 2-76. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. COUNCIL FACILITIES ACCOUNT
Sec. 2-77. General fixed asset account – Created.
There is hereby created within the general fund of the city a special account to be designated the general fixed asset account from which the city council may make expenditures for the repair, maintenance or replacement of city buildings or fixtures, based on the most critical needs as established by the building depreciation schedule. (Ord. No. 4144, § 1, 9-11-95)

Sec. 2-78. Revenues and expenditures from general fixed asset account.
(a) All revenues for the general fixed asset account shall be made in the discretion of the council during the budget process and may be based upon projected depreciation of city-owned structures and facilities.

(b) Each expenditure from the general fixed asset account shall be made only with the express approval of the city council. (Ord. No. 4144, § 1, 9-11-95)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4034, § 9, enacted Mar. 9, 1992, repealed §§ 2-77 and 2-78, relative to the office of finance director, derived from Ord. No. 3210, § 1, adopted June 3, 1974.

Sec. 2-79.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to establish how fees adopted by the city council and special taxes approved by voters are accounted for and allocated. (Ord. No. 4591, § 2, 2-11-13)

Sec. 2-79.2. Definitions.
(a) Emergency: An emergency situation is defined as any extraordinary physical or financial disaster, any emergency work required to prepare for a physical disaster or any action required to safeguard the public health, safety or welfare in the event of such an emergency.

(b) Excess funds: Excess funds are defined as fees or special taxes that are collected and which exceed what is usual, proper or necessary for the purpose for which a fee or special tax is created. Usual, proper or necessary expenditures of funds shall include the establishment of reasonable reserves as recommended by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB). (Ord. No. 4591, § 2, 2-11-13)

Sec. 2-79.3. Policy.
Fees or special taxes will be deposited into such funds as are designated by the city council and their use will be restricted to those funds except in the event of an emergency declared by a majority vote of the city council.

Excess funds accumulated from fees and special taxes shall be refunded to those who paid such excess fees or special taxes. (Ord. No. 4591, § 2, 2-11-13)

Sec. 2-79.4. Prohibition.
No elected or appointed city official shall approve or issue any financial instrument that has the effect of transferring or loaning monies from one (1) city fund to another except in the event of an emergency declared by a majority vote of the city council or if required by law. (Ord. No. 4591, § 2, 2-11-13; Ord. No. 4597, § 1, 8-19-13)

Secs. 2-80 – 2-88. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. RESERVED4
Secs. 2-89 – 2-108. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. RESERVED5
Secs. 2-109 – 2-124. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. RESERVED6
Secs. 2-125 – 2-129. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4034, § 9, enacted Mar. 9, 1992, repealed §§ 2-125 – 2-129, relative to funds and investments, derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 2-23, 2-25 and 2-25.1.

Sec. 2-130. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Section 2-130, relative to a central purchasing fund, was repealed by Ord. No. 3522, § 4, enacted May 12, 1980. Said section was derived from Ord. No. 3161, § 3, adopted Sep. 17, 1973.

Secs. 2-131 – 2-140.  Reserved.
ARTICLE X. BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
Sec. 2-141. Declaration of policy.
Chapter 26 , Title 50, Idaho Code, grants to cities the authority to create business improvement districts within the corporate boundaries of the city. Final authority for the creation of a business improvement district rests with the city council, therefore, the city council adopts the following regulations to assist the city in the verification of petitions submitted pursuant to state law. (Ord. No. 4114, § 1, 9-19-94)

Sec. 2-142. Contents of petition.
(a) In order for a business improvement district petition to receive city council consideration, the petition’s format must be approved by the city clerk and contain the following elements required by Idaho Code:

(1) A description of the boundaries of the proposed district;

(2) The proposed uses and projects to which the proposed special assessment revenues shall be put and the total estimated cost thereof;

(3) The estimated rate of levy of special assessment with a proposed breakdown by class of business if such classification is to be used.

(b) The initiating petition shall also contain the signatures of the persons who operate businesses in the proposed district which would pay fifty percent (50%) or more of the proposed special assessments.

(c) In addition, each page of the petition shall be consecutively numbered in order to confirm the signatory for the business owner/ operator. (Ord. No. 4114, § 1, 9-19-94)

Sec. 2-143. Data sheet.
Anyone wishing to submit a business improvement district petition for consideration by the Lewiston city council shall submit a business improvement district data sheet (BIDDS) to the city clerk for approval of format prior to obtaining signatures. All businesses located within the proposed district must be listed alphabetically by business name on the BIDDS. The BIDDS shall contain the following data for each business:

(1) Business name;

(2) Business address;

(3) Business owner or operator;

(4) Contact person;

(5) Business telephone;

(6) Method of assessment;

(7) Proposed assessment;

(8) Date business signed petition;

(9) Page number of petition on which business signatory appears. (Ord. No. 4114, § 1, 9-19-94)

Sec. 2-144. Time limit for submitting petition.
After approval of the format of the petition and BIDDS, the petitioner shall have one hundred twenty (120) days to obtain the necessary signature and to submit the petition to the city clerk for validation. The date the petition is submitted to the city will constitute the deadline for determining businesses currently operating with the boundaries of the proposed district. (Ord. No. 4114, § 1, 9-19-94)

Sec. 2-145. Validation of petition by city clerk.
(a) The city clerk shall have thirty (30) days to validate petition or determine that petition is invalid.

(b) Information submitted will be verified by information contained on city of Lewiston business licenses. If the business is not licensed, the city clerk will attempt to contact the business owner/operator or designated contact person to validate information.

(c) If the petition is determined to be invalid, the petitioner shall be notified immediately by certified mail. The petitioner shall have an additional fifteen (15) days in which to obtain sufficient signatures to file a valid petition. (Ord. No. 4114, § 1, 9-19-94)

Sec. 2-146. Restriction on submission of new petition.
If petitioner is unsuccessful in obtaining a valid petition, the city council will not consider another petition concerning the identical business improvement district for a minimum of six (6) months. (Ord. No. 4114, § 1, 9-19-94)

Secs. 2-147 – 2-155.  Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. CODE OF CONDUCT
Sec. 2-156. Declaration of policy.
(a) The public judges its government by the way public officials and employees conduct themselves in the positions to which they are elected or appointed.

(b) The people have a right to expect that every public official and employee will conduct himself in a manner that will tend to preserve public confidence in, and respect for, the government he represents.

(c) Such confidence and respect can best be promoted if every public official and employee, whether paid or unpaid, and whether elected or appointed, will uniformly:

(1) Treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality under the law; and

(2) Avoid both actual and potential conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest.

(d) To help public officials and employees achieve these goals is one of the objectives of this code.

(e) This code shall be in addition to, and is not intended to repeal, the city personnel policy heretofore established.

(f) The other objective is based on the proposition that no man can serve two (2) masters, nor should he attempt to do so. Therefore, this code proposes to relieve him of the impossible task of judging himself. Instead, the code places judgment in the hands of the entire council, which will review the facts and measure them by the yardstick of public morality established by this code. (Code 1960, § 2-73; Ord. No. 3026, § 1, 6-1-71)

Sec. 2-157. Definitions.
The terms used in this code are hereby defined as follows:

Financial interest: Any interest which shall yield, directly or indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit (other than the duly authorized salary or compensation for his services to the city) to the official, or employee, or to any person employing or retaining the services of the official or employee.

Official or employee: Any person elected, or appointed to or employed, or retained by any public office or public body of the city, whether paid or unpaid, and whether part-time or full-time.

Person: Any person, firm, association, group, partnership or corporation, or any combination thereof.

Personal interest: Any interest arising from blood or marriage relationships, or from close business or political association, whether or not any financial interest is involved.

Public body: Any agency, board, body, commission, committee, department or office of the city. (Code 1960, § 2-74; Ord. No. 3026, § 2, 6-1-71)

Sec. 2-158. Fair and equal treatment.
(a) Impartiality. No official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large.

(b) Use of public property. No official or employee shall request, use or permit the use of any publicly owned or publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment, labor or service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of himself or any other person. This rule shall not be deemed to prohibit an official or employee from requesting, using or permitting the use of such publicly owned or publicly supplied property, vehicle, equipment, material, labor or service which it is the general practice to make available to the public at large, or which are provided as a matter of stated public policy for the use of officials and employees in the conduct of official business. (Code 1960, § 2-75; Ord. No. 3026, § 3, 6-1-71)

Sec. 2-159. Conflict of interest.
(a) Financial or personal interest. No official or employee, either on his or her own behalf or on behalf of any other person, shall have any financial or personal interest in any business or transaction with any public body in the city unless he or she shall first make full public disclosure of the nature and extent of such interest.

(b) Disclosure. Whenever the performance of his or her official duties shall require any official or employee to deliberate and vote on any matter involving his or her financial or personal interest, he or she shall publicly disclose the nature and extent of such interest and follow the procedure set forth in section 2-25 of this code.

(c) Incompatible employment. No official or employee shall engage in private employment with, or render services for any private person who has business transactions with any public body of the city unless he [or she] shall first make full public disclosure of the nature and extent of such employment or services.

(d) Representation of private persons. No official or employee shall appear on behalf of any private person, other than himself or herself, before any public body in the city.

(e) Gifts and favors. No official or employee shall accept any gift, whether in the form of money, thing, favor, loan or promise, that would not be offered or given him if he or she were not an official or employee.

(f) Confidential information. No official or employee shall, without prior formal authorization of the public body having jurisdiction, disclose any confidential information concerning any other official or employee, or any other person, or any property or governmental affairs of the city.

As used in this code, the term “confidential information” shall be defined as those records exempt from disclosure by Idaho Code, Section 9-340 as currently codified or as may be hereafter amended and shall include the subject matter of litigation in which the city is involved.

(g) Nepotism. No elected official shall appoint or vote for appointment of any person related to him or her by blood or marriage to any clerkship, office, position, employment or duty when the salary, wages, pay or compensation is to be paid out of public funds.

Councilmember’s spouses and members of their households shall not be appointed or serve on advisory commissions of the city.

(h) Other requirements. Nothing contained herein shall be construed so as to exempt any official from any other requirements of the law. (Code 1960, § 2-76; Ord. No. 3026, § 4, 6-1-71; Ord. No. 3325, § 1, 8-30-76; Ord. No. 4034, § 10, 3-9-92; Ord. No. 4720, § 3, 7-23-18)

Sec. 2-160. Sanctions.
In the event that the city council shall make a determination that the conduct of any official or employee was improper, they may institute appropriate action for censure, suspension or removal from office of said official or employee. (Code 1960, § 2-77; Ord. No. 3026, § 5, 6-1-71)

Secs. 2-161 – 2-170. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. COMPREHENSIVE LIABILITY PLAN7
Sec. 2-171. Compliance with state law.
The city shall provide for a comprehensive liability plan to meet the risk of liability imposed by the Idaho Tort Claims Act, Idaho Code, Section 6-901. (Ord. No. 3821, § 2, 5-19-86)

Sec. 2-172. Risk management policy.
The city’s policy with respect to the management of risk of accidental loss shall have as its objectives the following:

(1) The protection of the city against the financial consequences of accidental losses which are catastrophic in nature.

(2) The minimization of the total long-term cost to the city of activities related to the identification, prevention and control of accidental losses.

(3) The preservation of city assets and public service capabilities from loss, destruction or depletion.

(4) Creation of a system of internal procedures providing a constant reassessment of the exposure to loss and available financial resources, including insurance.

(5) The establishment, to the extent possible, of an exposure-free work and service environment in which city personnel as well as members of the public can enjoy safety and security in the course of their daily pursuits.

(6) Providing for periodic reevaluation of the city’s comprehensive liability plan.

(7) Compliance with any federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations affecting the city’s handling of risk. (Ord. No. 3821, § 2, 5-19-86)

Sec. 2-173. Risk retention.
(a) With regard to risks of accidental loss, it shall be the city’s policy to self-insure all losses which occur with predictable frequency, and which will not have a significant impact on the city’s fiscal position.

(b) As a general guideline, the city will self-insure progressively upward to the extent that self-insurance is cost effective, does not endanger the city’s fiscal stability, and the city’s risk management capabilities are more fully developed and demonstrated. (Ord. No. 3821, § 2, 5-19-86)

Sec. 2-174. Administrator – Designated.
The comprehensive liability plan shall be administered by the city manager or his designee. (Ord. No. 3821, § 2, 5-19-86)

Sec. 2-175. Same – Responsibility for plan.
It shall be the responsibility of the administrator to provide for a comprehensive liability plan by the purchase of insurance, self-insurance or no insurance in any combination. All premium costs or loss funds shall be costs of the comprehensive liability plan. (Ord. No. 3821, § 2, 5-19-86)

Sec. 2-176. Investigation of claims.
The administrator shall provide for a program of investigation of claims against the city and shall provide for claims handling by contract or in-house. Except as provided for by section 2-179, all costs associated with claims handling shall be costs of the comprehensive liability plan. (Ord. No. 3821, § 2, 5-19-86)

Sec. 2-177. Risk management program.
The administrator shall create a program of risk management and safety engineering involving all city employees. The administrator shall conduct training in risk management for all city employees. The comprehensive insurance plan shall fund training and travel costs for employees attending municipal risk management, loss control, or other municipal insurance programs. (Ord. No. 3821, § 2, 5-19-86)

Sec. 2-178. Defense of claims.
The administrator shall provide for the defense of all claims against the city. All costs incurred in defending claims against the city including legal costs, costs of experts, costs for testing and experimentation, filing fees, discovery, copying, exhibit preparation, and mailing shall be costs of the comprehensive liability plan. If legal counsel outside the city attorney’s office is retained by the city to provide for a defense, the retained attorneys shall be supervised by the city attorney. (Ord. No. 3821, § 2, 5-19-86)

Sec. 2-179. Costs of plan.
The cost of the operation of a comprehensive liability plan shall not include salary or wage costs incurred by the city. (Ord. No. 3821, § 2, 5-19-86)

ARTICLE XIII. ADVISORY COMMISSIONS8
Sec. 2-180. Advisory boards and commissions created.
(a) There are hereby established and created the following advisory boards and commissions of the city of Lewiston:

(1) Lewis Clark Valley air quality advisory commission.

(2) Cemetery/urban forestry advisory commission.

(3) Code board of appeals.

(4) Emergency medical service advisory board.

(5) Historical preservation advisory commission.

(6) Library board of trustees.

(7) Parks and recreation advisory commission.

(8) Public educational and governmental programming advisory commission.

(9) Planning and zoning commission.

(10) Youth advisory commission.

(11) Disabilities advisory commission.

(b) The city council may form ad hoc committees at its discretion for the purpose of making recommendations to the city council on specific issues. Unless otherwise provided by city resolution, members of ad hoc committees shall be subject to the same rules and standards as members of advisory boards and commissions, as herein described.

(c) Members of advisory boards and commissions are charged with making recommendations to the city council on issues as may be provided by city resolution, elsewhere in this code and by Idaho Code. For the purposes of this section, the term “recommendation” shall mean to render an opinion to the city council concerning a decision or course of action. The city council shall not be required to accept or act on the recommendation of an advisory board or commission. The city council may assign additional duties to advisory boards or commissions as it deems necessary. (Ord. No. 3966, § 7, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 4090, § 1, 11-1-93; Ord. No. 4124, § 1, 3-27-95; Ord. No. 4138, § 2, 8-21-95; Ord. No. 4181, § 1, 1-27-97; Ord. No. 4240, § 2, 8-16-99; Ord. No. 4305, § 1, 4-22-02; Ord. No. 4327, § 1, 3-10-02; Ord. No. 4441, § 1, 5-8-06; Ord. No. 4500, § 1, 1-7-08; Ord. No. 4547, § 1, 7-26-10; Ord. No. 4554, § 1, 11-22-10; Ord. No. 4605, § 1, 4-28-14; Ord. No. 4661, § 1, 5-9-16)

Sec. 2-181. Terms and appointment.
(a) The terms of the members of the advisory boards and commissions enumerated in section 2-180(a) of this code shall be for three (3) years, except as provided below:

(1) The terms of the members of the planning and zoning commission and the emergency medical services advisory board shall be for four (4) years.

(2) The terms of the members of the library board of trustees shall be for five (5) years.

(3) The terms of the members of the youth advisory commission shall be for two (2) years.

(4) The terms of the members of the disabilities advisory commission appointed during calendar year 2017 shall be as follows:

a. The terms of three (3) members shall be for three (3) years;

b. The terms of two (2) members shall be for two (2) years; and

c. The terms of two (2) members shall be for one (1) year.

The terms of the members of the disabilities advisory commission appointed on or after January 1, 2018, shall be for three (3) years.

(b) Unless otherwise provided by city resolution, all members of the advisory boards and commissions shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council and may in like manner be removed. All members of advisory boards and commissions serve at the discretion of the city council. Five (5) to nine (9) members shall be appointed to each advisory board or commission.

(c) All vacancies of advisory boards or commissions will be advertised prior to the expiration of the term or upon receipt of a midterm resignation. Applications will be accepted by the city clerk until the established closing date. Late applications will not be considered. The city clerk will maintain all applications on file for consideration for future vacancies. A subcommittee, appointed by the mayor, shall review applications submitted for vacancies and may interview applicants if desired. After review of the applications and interviews, if desired, the subcommittee shall make a recommendation to the mayor for appointments to fill existing vacancies. (Ord. No. 3966, § 7, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 4211, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 4240, § 2, 8-16-99; Ord. No. 4305, § 1, 4-22-02; Ord. No. 4661, § 2, 5-9-16; Ord. No. 4695, § 1, 8-21-17)

Sec. 2-182. Residency.
Unless otherwise provided by city resolution, residency in the city of Lewiston is not a requirement for eligibility for membership on an advisory board or commission of the city. (Ord. No. 3966, § 7, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 4163, § 1, 8-19-96; Ord. No. 4211, § 2, 6-15-98; Ord. No. 4240, § 2, 8-16-99)

Sec. 2-183. Chairperson and rules of conduct.
Each advisory board and commission shall elect a chairperson to preside at all meetings. Each advisory board and commission may, subject to the review of the city council, adopt rules of conduct. Meeting times and locations are at the discretion of each advisory board or commission. Special meetings may be called as necessary. All advisory boards and commissions shall comply with the provisions of the Idaho Open Meeting Law, Chapter 2, Title 74 of the Idaho Code. (Ord. No. 3966, § 7, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 4240, § 2, 8-16-99; Ord. No. 4661, § 3, 5-9-16)

Sec. 2-184. Absenteeism.
Each member of an advisory commission or board shall not be absent from any three (3) consecutive commission or board meetings and shall attend at least seven (7) of the commission or board’s preceding twelve (12) regular meetings. Any member who fails to attend regular meetings as above mentioned may, by vote of the board or commission, lose membership on the advisory board or commission and the vacancy shall be filled by the mayor and council. (Ord. No. 3966, § 7, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 4240, § 2, 8-16-99; Ord. No. 4661, § 4, 5-9-16)

Sec. 2-185. Compensation.
All members of advisory commissions and boards shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed actual expense upon the prior approval of the city manager. (Ord. No. 3966, § 7, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 4240, § 2, 8-16-99; Ord. No. 4661, § 5, 5-9-16)

Sec. 2-186. Council and staff support.
The city manager may appoint a city employee to serve as a staff liaison for each advisory commission and board. The staff liaison shall be responsible for preparing agendas and minutes, complying with open meeting notice requirement and transmitting written recommendations from the board or commission to the city council. Staff liaison may participate in board or commission meetings but shall not vote. The mayor may appoint, with the confirmation of the council, a member of the city council to serve as a council liaison to each advisory board or commission. The council liaison may participate in board or commission meetings but shall not vote unless otherwise provided by city resolution or Idaho Code. (Ord. No. 3966, § 7, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 4034, § 11, 3-9-92; Ord. No. 4240, § 2, 8-16-99; Ord. No. 4661, § 6, 5-9-16)

Sec. 2-187. Periodic review of advisory commissions and boards.
Every two years all advisory commissions and boards shall conduct an internal review of the commission or board. The review shall be forwarded to the city council for its consideration. The review shall include:

(1) Accomplishments and activities completed;

(2) Activities and action plan for future;

(3) Analysis or shared responsibilities with other advisory commissions or boards;

(4) Analysis of activities that may be added to the commission or board’s “charge”;

(5) Recommendations of continued existence of the advisory commission or board. (Ord. No. 4392, § 1, 3-14-05; Ord. No. 4661, § 7, 5-9-16)

Secs. 2-188 – 2-206. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4240, § 1, adopted Aug. 16, 1999, repeals §§ 2-187 – 2-206, setting out individually the membership requirements and duties of various city commissions. These sections, as amended, derived from Ord. No. 3966, § 7, adopted July 23, 1990, Ord. No. 3986, § 1, adopted Jan. 28, 1991, Ord. No. 4029, § 1, adopted Feb. 10, 1992, Ord. No. 4034, § 11, adopted March 9, 1992, Ord. No. 4090, §§ 2 – 5, adopted Nov. 1, 1993, Ord. No. 4092, § 1, adopted Dec. 12, 1993, Ord. No. 4124, § 2, adopted March 27, 1995, and Ord. No. 4181, §§ 2 and 3, adopted Jan. 27, 1997.

1
Cross references – Lewiston-Nez Perce County Regional Airport Commission § 5-16 et seq.; board of examiners for license for installation of gas, § 18-10 et seq.; library board of trustees, § 20-2 et seq.; board of examiners for license for installations of oil burning equipment, § 25-12; parks and recreation commission, § 26-16 et seq.; board of plumbing examiners, § 27-17 et seq.; planning and zoning commission, § 37-124 et seq.


2
Cross reference – Council meeting agenda preparation, § 2-20; appointment of city treasurer and finance director, §§ 2-64, 2-69; appointment of city clerk and deputy, §§ 2-52, 2-55; administration of comprehensive liability plan, § 2-174; duties as air pollution control officer, § 4-1.

State law reference – City manager plan in general, Idaho Code § 50-801 et seq.


3
State law reference – Deposit of funds, Idaho Code, § 50-1013.


4
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3522, § 3, adopted May 12, 1980, repealed Art. VII, §§ 2-89 – 2-108, relative to the department of public works, derived from Ord. No. 3153, §§ 1, 2, 4, adopted July 9, 1973, and Ord. No. 3208, § 1, adopted May 13, 1974.


5
Editor’s note – Article VIII, §§ 2-109 – 2-111, relative to the city historian, derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 2-22.2, 2-22.3, and Ord. No. 2806, § 1, was repealed by Ord. No. 3522, § 3, adopted May 12, 1980.


6
Cross references – Perpetual care fund, § 11-48 et seq.; special cemetery fund, § 11-52 et seq.; policemen’s retirement fund, § 29-1 et seq.

State law reference – Finances in general, Idaho Code, § 50-1001 et seq.


7
Editor’s note – Section 2 of Ord. No. 3821, enacted May 19, 1986, amended Ch. 2 by adding thereto a new Art. XII, §§ 2-159 – 2-167. Inasmuch as Ch. 2 already contained provisions numbered as §§ 2-159 and 2-160, the sections of Art. XII are included herein as §§ 2-171 – 2-179.


8
Cross references – Cemetery advisory commission, § 11-2; parks and recreation advisory commission, § 26-2; urban forestry advisory commission, § 26-42.


Chapter 3
ADVERTISING
Sec. 3-1. Certain types prohibited.
No person, except a public officer or employee in performance of official duty, shall paste, paint, print, nail, tack or otherwise fasten any card, banner, handbill, sign, poster or advertisement or notice of any kind or cause the same to be done on any structure, curbstone, lamppost, fence, pole, hydrant, bridge or tree upon a public street or public property within the city, except as may be required by this code or other ordinances of the city or the laws of the state or of the United States. Any advertisement prohibited in this section may be taken down, moved or destroyed by any city official. (Code 1960, § 3-1)

Sec. 3-2. Placing, throwing, etc., advertising – On private property.
No person, either for himself or by his agent or servant, shall leave, distribute or throw any sample packages of medicine or other article of merchandise used for advertising purposes in the lot, yard or enclosure of another, unless the same be personally delivered to some adult person in charge of the premises. (Code 1960, § 3-2)

Secs. 3-3, 3-4. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3527, § 2, enacted Aug. 25, 1980, repealed §§ 3-3 and 3-4, relative to placing advertising matter on public property and on vehicles. Said sections were derived from Ord. No. 3138, §§ 17, 18, adopted April 23, 1973.

Sec. 3-5. Permission necessary to fasten advertising on certain property.
No person shall stick, fasten, paste or put upon any house, fence, wall, walk or other public or private place in this city any printed, written, painted or other advertisement, bill, notice, sign or poster or cause the same to be done without having first obtained permission of the owner of such house, fence, wall or other structure. (Code 1960, § 3-6)

Sec. 3-6. Placing advertisement upon motor vehicles.
No person shall place advertising circulars underneath the windshield wipers or upon the windshield of any motor vehicle within the city of Lewiston, Idaho. (Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 4289, 9-10-01, § 4. Formerly 17-67)

Chapter 4
AIR POLLUTION1
Sec. 4-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, except as otherwise specifically provided herein and except where the context indicates otherwise, the following words shall have the meaning ascribed to them unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

Air contaminant: Any solid, liquid or gas, except uncombined water, discharged into the outdoor atmosphere.

Air pollution: The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one (1) or more contaminants or combinations thereof in such quantities and of such duration that they are or may tend to be injurious to human, plant or animal life, or property, or that interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property or the conduct of business.

Air quality specialist: The person designated as the air quality specialist by the state of Idaho, Department of Health and Welfare, Division of Environment.

Air stagnation: A condition when there is little or no air movement as determined by the air quality specialist.

Control officer: The city manager of the city of Lewiston, Idaho, or his designated representative.

Episode: A condition when an air quality alert or warning is forecast as determined by the air quality specialist.

Impaired air quality: A condition determined by the control officer when air quality may become unhealthful by the production of pollutants from open burning.

Incinerator: Any device, structure or contrivance used to burn refuse as defined herein, or process refuse as defined herein, in any way.

Multiple-chamber incinerator: Any article, machine, equipment, contrivance, structure or part of structure, used to dispose of combustible refuse by burning, consisting of three (3) or more refractory lined combustion furnaces in series, physically separated by refractory walls, interconnected by gas passage ports or ducts and employing adequate design parameters necessary for maximum combustion of the material to be burned.

Open burning: The burning of any matter in such a manner that the products of combustion resulting from burning are emitted directly into the open atmosphere without passing through a stack, chimney or duct of an approved incinerator as defined herein. Open burning does not include road flares, smudge pots and similar devices associated with safety or occupational uses typically considered open flames, recreational fires or use of portable outdoor fireplaces. For the purpose of this definition, a chamber shall be regarded as enclosed when, during the time combustion occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys necessary to provide combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust gas are open.

Particulate matter: Any material, except uncombined water, which exists in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid at standard conditions.

Person: An individual, firm, public or private corporation, association, partnership, political subdivision, municipality or government agency.

Portable outdoor fireplace: A portable, outdoor, solid-fuel-burning fireplace that may be constructed of steel, concrete, clay or other noncombustible material. A portable outdoor fireplace may be open in design, or may be equipped with a small hearth opening and a short chimney or chimney opening in the top.

Recreational fire: An outdoor fire burning materials other than rubbish where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, portable outdoor fireplace, barbecue pit and has a total fuel area of three (3) feet or less in diameter and two (2) feet or less in height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purpose.

Refuse: Any combustible solid, liquid or gaseous waste material, including garbage, rubbish, trade wastes, leaves, salvageable material, yard wastes, agricultural wastes and other wastes.

Rubbish (trash): Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, including residue from the burning of coal, wood, coke or other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery, dust and discarded refrigerators, and heating, cooking or incinerator-type appliances.

Salvage operation: Any business, trade, industry or other activity conducted in whole or in part for the purpose of salvaging or reclaiming any product or material, including but not limited to metals or chemicals.

Smoke: Small gas-borne particles other than water that form visible plume in the air and form a source of atmospheric pollution.

Standard conditions: A gas temperature of sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit and a gas pressure of fourteen and seven-tenths (14.7) pounds per square inch absolute. (Code 1960, § 3A-1; Ord. No. 2858, § 1; Ord. No. 3855, § 1, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3967, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 4628, § 1, 5-11-15)

Sec. 4-2. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4282, § 1, adopted March 26, 2001, repealed former § 4-2, relative to refuse burning restrictions, which derived from the 1960 Code, § 3A-2; Ord. No. 2858, § 2; Ord. No. 3810, § 1, adopted March 3, 1986; Ord. No. 3855, § 2, adopted March 16, 1987; and Ord. No. 3967, § 2, adopted Nov. 19, 1990.

Sec. 4-3. Air quality alert.
(a) In order to prevent the existence of unhealthful air, a voluntary air pollution alert will be declared by the Department of Environmental Quality on days when weather conditions cause air stagnation continuing for at least twenty-four (24) hours. Whenever air pollution alert conditions are met, local print, radio and television news media will be notified and encouraged to announce that during the air quality alert, voluntary shutdown of the operation of uncertified or nonexempt wood stoves or other solid fuel heating appliances is sought. Voluntary compliance is not sought in structures where the wood stove or other solid fuel heating appliance is the sole source of heat for the structure.

(b) As used in this section, wood stove or other solid fuel heating appliance shall mean any enclosed device designated for solid fuel combustion that meets all of the following criteria:

(1) An air-to-fuel ratio averaging less than thirty-five (35) to one (1);

(2) A firebox volume less than twenty (20) cubic feet;

(3) A minimum burn rate less than five (5) kilograms per hour; and

(4) A maximum weight of less than eight hundred (800) kilograms.

Explicitly excluded from this definition are furnaces, boilers, cook stove and open fireplaces.

(c) A person shall not cause or allow any of the following materials to be burned in any wood stove or other solid fuel heating appliance:

(1) Garbage;

(2) Treated wood;

(3) Plastic;

(4) Rubber;

(5) Animals;

(6) Asphaltic products;

(7) Waste petroleum products;

(8) Paints. (Ord. No. 4017, § 2, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 4093, § 1, 3-14-94; Ord. No. 4628, § 2, 5-11-15)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4017, §§ 1 – 3, adopted Sep. 30, 1991, repealed §§ 4-3 – 4-9, and enacted new provisions for §§ 4-3 and 4-4. Former §§ 4-3 – 4-9 were concerned with incinerators and emissions of air contaminants, and derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 3A-3 – 3A-9; Ord. No. 2858, §§ 3 – 9; and Ord. No. 3855, § 3, adopted March 16, 1987.

Sec. 4-4. Smoke control and regulation.
The creation, maintenance or continuation of excessive quantities of smoke produced by wood-burning appliances, including fireplaces and recreational fires, within the city, be and the same is hereby declared a health hazard and a public nuisance.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to allow the production or continuation of excessive quantities of smoke which may be emitted by wood-burning appliances, including fireplaces and recreational fires, which disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety and welfare of any other person or persons of any area within the city.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, after thirty (30) minutes from the initial start up of any wood-burning appliance, including fireplaces, to allow emissions therefrom to exceed an opacity reading of twenty (20) percent as determined by Method 9 in the Procedures Manual for Air Pollution Control, Idaho Air Quality Bureau, Division of Environmental Quality. (Ord. No. 4017, § 3, 9-30-91; Ord. No. 4628, § 3, 5-11-15)

Editor’s note – See editor’s note to § 4-3.

Secs. 4-5 – 4-9. Reserved.
Editor’s note – See editor’s note to § 4-3.

Sec. 4-10. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3966, § 1, adopted July 23, 1990, repealed former § 4-10, relative to the Lewis Clark Valley air quality advisory commission, which derived from Ord. No. 3943, § 1, adopted May 30, 1989.

Sec. 4-11. Open burning prohibited.
(a) Except as provided hereafter, all open burning shall be prohibited within the city.

(b) The following activities are exempt from the regulations of this section:

(1) Barbecues and recreational fires.

(2) Ceremonies.

(3) Fireplaces and portable fireplaces.

(4) Firefighting training under the direction of the fire chief.

(5) Weed or fire hazard control under the direction of the fire chief.

(6) Other buildings, structures and material deemed a hazard to public safety or health by the fire chief. (Ord. No. 3967, § 3, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 4282, § 2, 3-26-01; Ord. No. 4628, § 4, 5-11-15)

Cross reference – Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 15; garbage, rubbish and weeds, Ch. 17.

1
State law reference – Air Pollution Control Act, Idaho Code, § 39-2903.


Chapter 5
AIRPORT1
Sec. 5-1. Joint airport authority.
Pursuant to agreement with Nez Perce County, Idaho, operation, governance, rules and regulations, procedures and all operation of the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Regional Airport shall be established by the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Airport Authority. (Ord. No. 4572, § 2, 2-13-12)

1
Editor’s note – Ordinance No. 4572, adopted Feb. 13, 2012, repealed and replaced Ch. 5 in its entirety. The deleted sections contained provisions relating to the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Airport. These sections derived from Ord. No. 3827, adopted Sep. 2, 1986; Ord. No. 3884, adopted Nov. 2, 1987; Ord. No. 3921, adopted April 4, 1988; Ord. No. 3961, adopted Jan. 29, 1990; Ord. No. 3966, adopted July 23, 1990; Ord. No. 4113, adopted Sep. 12, 1994; Ord. No. 4501, § 1, adopted Feb. 11, 2008, deleting the provisions in § 5-36; Ord. No. 4547, adopted July 26, 2010.

Ordinance No. 3827, adopted Sep. 2, 1986, amended and revised Ch. 5 in its entirety, § 1 of the ordinance adopted a new Ch. 5, and § 2 repealed certain sections of the former Ch. 5. Prior to such enactment, Ch. 5 derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 2-54.1, 2-55 – 2-57.7, and Ord. No. 2384, Ord. No. 2559, Ord. No. 3046, adopted Aug. 30, 1971; Ord. No. 3069, adopted Mar. 20, 1972; Ord. No. 3335, adopted Nov. 22, 1976; Ord. No. 3506, adopted Oct. 22, 1979; Ord. No. 3522, adopted May 12, 1980; Ord. No. 3660, adopted Aug. 2, 1982.

State law references – Joint city and county airports, Idaho Code, § 21-403; Aeronautical Administration Act, Idaho Code, § 21-131 et seq.


Chapter 5.5
ALARM SYSTEMS1
Sec. 5.5-1. Purpose.
(a) The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users and alarm companies to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness and proper utilization of alarm systems and to eliminate false alarms which divert law enforcement from responding to legitimate calls for service.

(b) This chapter governs systems intended to summon law enforcement, provides for penalties for violations, establishes a system of administration, and sets conditions for suspension or loss of registration. (Ord. No. 4278, § 2, 1-29-01)

Sec. 5.5-2. Definitions.
In this chapter:

Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts.

Alarm company means the business, by an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring an alarm system in an alarm site.

Alarm dispatch request means a notification to the Communications Center that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm site.

Alarm review board will consist of members as follows: three (3) members of the public and an alarm company representative. Board members are appointed by the council to deal with conflicts/disputes that cannot be resolved at a lower level.

Alarm site means a single fixed premises or location served by an alarm system or systems. Each tenancy, if served by a separate alarm system in a multitenant building or complex shall be considered a separate alarm site.

Alarm system means a device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to summon law enforcement personnel. “Alarm system” does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle or person unless the vehicle or personal alarm is permanently located at a site.

Alarm user means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity who uses or is in control of any alarm system at its alarm site.

Automatic voice dialer means any electrical, electronic, mechanical or other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message, when activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system, to the Communications Center.

Cancellation is the process by which an alarm company verifies with the alarm user or responsible party that a false dispatch has occurred and that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring law enforcement.

Conversion means the transaction or process by which one alarm company begins monitoring of a previously unmonitored alarm system or an alarm system previously monitored by another alarm company.

Duress alarm means a silent alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening situation or a crime in progress requiring law enforcement response.

False alarm means an alarm dispatch request to the Communications Center, when the responding officer finds no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense or evidence after having completed an investigation of the alarm site.

Robbery alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress.

Law enforcement authority means the chief of police.

Local alarm system means any alarm system that enunciates an alarm only by an internal or external audio device.

Monitoring means the process by which an alarm company receives signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the Communications Center for the purpose of summoning police to the alarm site.

Panic alarm means an audible alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring law enforcement response.

Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or similar entity.

Takeover means the transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over control of an existing alarm system, which was previously controlled by another alarm user.

Verify means an attempt, by the alarm company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site by telephonic or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, before requesting law enforcement in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request.

Zones are subdivisions into which an alarm system is divided to indicate the general location from which an alarm system signal is transmitted. (Ord. No. 4278, § 2, 1-29-01; Ord. No. 4301, § 1, 8-19-02)

Sec. 5.5-3. Alarm systems in apartment complexes.
(a) If an alarm system installed by an individual tenant in an apartment complex unit is monitored, the tenant must provide the name of a representative of the apartment owner or property manager who can grant access to the apartment.

(b) For purposes of enforcing this chapter against an individual residential unit, the tenant is responsible for false alarms emitted from the alarm system in the tenant’s residential unit.

(c) Each apartment unit shall be considered an alarm site. (Ord. No. 4278, § 2, 1-29-01)

Sec. 5.5-4. Duties of the alarm user.
(a) An alarm user shall:

(1) Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms; and

(2) Make every reasonable effort to respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system’s location within twenty (20) minutes when notified by the police to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises or to provide alternative security for the premises; and

(3) Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.

(b) An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will sound for no longer than fifteen (15) minutes.

(c) An alarm user shall have a properly licensed alarm company inspect the alarm system after two (2) false alarms in a one-year period. The alarm administrator may waive an inspection requirement if it determines that a false alarm(s) could not have been related to a defect or malfunction in the alarm system. After four (4) false alarms within a one-year period, the alarm user must have a properly licensed alarm company modify the alarm system to be more false alarm resistant or provide additional user training as appropriate.

(d) An alarm user shall not use automatic voice dialers. (Ord. No. 4278, § 2, 1-29-01)

Sec. 5.5-5. Duties of alarm company.
(a) Upon enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, alarm companies shall not install a device activating a robbery alarm which is a single action nonrecessed button. An alarm company must remove all single action nonrecessed buttons when a takeover or conversion occurs.

(b) Upon enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, alarm companies shall use control panels tested for conformance to the Security Industry Association (SIA) control panel standard features for false alarm reduction.

(c) An alarm company performing monitoring services shall:

(1) Offer a training period in which no request for dispatch by law enforcement will occur during the first seven (7) days after installation of an alarm system, but rather will use that week to train the alarm user on proper use of the alarm system unless circumstances necessitate immediate requests for response as determined by the alarm administrator;

(2) Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the alarm administrator;

(3) Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except a fire, duress and robbery alarm activation before requesting a law enforcement officer to an alarm system signal;

(4) Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the communications center in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator;

(5) Communicate cancellations to the communications center in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator;

(6) Ensure that all alarm users of alarm systems equipped with a fire, duress or robbery alarm receive adequate training as to the proper use of the alarm;

(7) Communicate any available information (north, south, front, back, floor, etc.) about the location of the alarm;

(8) Communicate type of alarm activation (silent or audible, interior or perimeter);

(9) Endeavor to contact the alarm user when an alarm dispatch request is made. (Ord. No. 4278, § 2, 1-29-01)

Sec. 5.5-6. Duties of the alarm administrator.
(a) The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure to record such information on alarm dispatch requests as necessary to permit the alarm administrator to maintain necessary records sufficient to comply with this chapter.

(b) The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure for the notification to the alarm user of a false alarm. Options include, but are not limited to, the officer leaving a door hanger or notice at the alarm site.

(c) If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and suppresses false alarms, the alarm administrator may require a conference with an alarm user and the alarm company responsible for the repair of the alarm system to review the circumstances of each false alarm. (Ord. No. 4278, § 2, 1-29-01)

Sec. 5.5-7. Penalties.
An alarm user shall be subject to penalties, warnings and suspension, depending on the number of false alarms emitted from an alarm system within a twelve-month period. The twelve-month period is from January 1st through December 31st of each year.

Number of false alarms

Penalties

1 – 2

0

3 – 4

$50.00 each

5 or more

$100.00 each

If cancellation occurs prior to law enforcement arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of fines and no fines will be assessed. (Ord. No. 4278, § 2, 1-29-01)

Sec. 5.5-8. Suspension of response.
(a) The alarm administrator may suspend alarm response if it is determined that:

(1) The alarm user has five (5) or more false alarms in one (1) year; or

(2) The alarm user has failed to make timely payment of a fine assessed under section 5.5-7 of this code; or

(3) The alarm user has failed to submit a written certification from an alarm company, that complies with the requirements of this chapter, stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm company.

(b) Unless there is separate indication that there is a crime in progress, the law enforcement authority may refuse law enforcement response to an alarm dispatch request at an alarm site. (Ord. No. 4278, § 2, 1-29-01)

Sec. 5-5.9. Notification.
The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing after each false alarm. The notification shall include the amount of the penalty for each false alarm, the fact that response may be suspended after the fifth false alarm and a description of the appeals procedure available to the alarm user. The alarm administrator will notify the alarm user and the alarm company in writing after the fifth false alarm that alarm response has been suspended. This notice of suspension will also include the amount of the fine for each false alarm and a description of the appeals procedure available to the alarm user and the alarm company. (Ord. No. 4278, § 2, 1-29-01)

Sec. 5.5-10. Appeals.
(a) An alarm user may appeal the assessment of a penalty, suspension, or request reinstatement to the alarm administrator. The filing of an appeal with the alarm administrator stays the assessment of the fine or suspension until the alarm administrator makes a final decision. The alarm user shall file a written appeal to the alarm administrator by setting forth the reasons for the appeal within ten (10) days after receipt of the penalty notification.

(b) If the alarm administrator denies the issuance or renewal of an alarm registration, or suspends response, the alarm administrator shall send written notice of the action and a statement of the right to an appeal.

(c) A second level of appeal is available to the alarm review board in cases where the alarm user is not satisfied with the decision of the alarm administrator.

(1) The alarm user or the alarm company on behalf of the alarm user may appeal the decision of the alarm administrator to the alarm review board by filing a written request for a review setting forth the reasons for the appeal within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice from the alarm administrator.

(2) The alarm review board shall conduct a formal hearing and consider the evidence by any interested person(s). The board shall make its decision on the basis of the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing. The board must render a decision within ten (10) days after the hearing. The board shall affirm or reverse the assessment of the fine. The decision of the board is final as to administrative remedies of the city.

(3) Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action by the alarm administrator suspending a registration or requiring payment of a fine, until the alarm review board has completed the review. If a request for appeal is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the alarm administrator is final. (Ord. No. 4278, § 2, 1-29-01)

Sec. 5.5-11. Reinstatement.
A person whose alarm response has been suspended may have alarm response reinstated by the alarm administrator or the alarm review board if the person has abided by one or more of the following:

(1) Pays, or otherwise resolves all penalties;

(2) Submits a certification from an alarm company that complies with the requirements of this chapter, stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm company;

(3) Submits proof that an employee of the alarm company caused the false alarm;

(4) Files with the alarm administrator a written statement from an alarm inspector that the alarm or alarm system has been inspected and found to be in good working order or repaired. (Ord. No. 4278, § 2, 1-29-01)

Sec. 5.5-12. Government immunity.
This chapter is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. Police response may be based on factors such as availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, etc. (Ord. No. 4278, § 2, 1-29-01)

1
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4278, § 1, adopted Jan. 29, 2001, repealed Chapter 5.5, relating to alarm systems and alarm suppliers. Said chapter was derived from Ord. No. 3568 §§ 1 – 11, adopted Sept. 9, 1981, as amended by Ord. No. 3642, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 3, 1982, Ord. No. 3889, §§ 1, 2, 3, adopted Dec. 7, 1987, and Ord. No. 4014 §§ 1 – 7, adopted Sept. 16, 1991.

Cross reference – Licenses generally, Ch. 21.


Chapter 6
ALCOHOL BEVERAGES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 6-1 – 6-10

Art. II.    Beer and Wine, §§ 6-11 – 6-15

Art. III.    Liquor-By-The-Drink, §§ 6-16 – 6-19

Art. IV.    Alcohol Beverage Catering Permit, §§ 6-20, 6-21

Art. V.    Bar Patio, §§ 6-22 – 6-24

Art. VI.    Restaurant Patio, §§ 6-25 – 6-29

ARTICLE I. GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. Applicability.
(a) This chapter shall supplement the regulations set forth in Title 23 of the Idaho Code. In the event of a conflict between a provision in this chapter and Idaho Code, Idaho Code shall govern.

(b) The provisions of this article shall apply to the entirety of this chapter, unless stated otherwise.

(c) This chapter shall not apply to liquor stores regulated by the state of Idaho. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-2. Definitions.
Alcohol beverage catering permit means the same as defined in Idaho Code, Section 23-934A, as may be amended from time to time.

Bar means an establishment with a retail beer on-premises license, wine-by-the-drink license, and/or liquor-by-the-drink license, including wineries and breweries, that does not qualify as a restaurant, as defined in this chapter.

Bar patio means an outdoor area subordinate, accessory, and adjacent to a bar where, in addition to being served within the bar, beer, wine, and/or liquor by the drink may be consumed. A bar patio is distinct from a restaurant patio, as defined herein.

Beer means the same as defined in Idaho Code, Section 23-1001, as may be amended from time to time.

Building official means the city of Lewiston building official or designee.

Business licensing coordinator means the city of Lewiston business licensing coordinator or designee.

City means the city of Lewiston, Idaho.

City clerk means the city of Lewiston city clerk or designee.

Community development director means the city of Lewiston community development director or designee.

Convention means the same as defined in Idaho Code, Section 23-902, as may be amended from time to time.

Downtown Lewiston area means Main Street west of 18th Street and any other area that is west of 9th Street, north of the Normal Hill bluff, and south of the Clearwater River.

Environmental pretreatment supervisor means the city of Lewiston environmental pretreatment supervisor or designee.

Festival means the same as defined in Idaho Code, Section 23-902, as may be amended from time to time.

Fire chief means the city of Lewiston fire chief or designee.

Fire marshal means the city of Lewiston fire marshal or designee.

Licensee means any person, corporation, partnership, organization, or other entity to which a license has been issued by the city pursuant to this chapter.

Liquor means the same as defined in Idaho Code, Section 23-902, as may be amended from time to time.

Liquor-by-the-drink license means a license issued by the city to sell and serve liquor by the individual drink for consumption on the premises.

Parks and recreation director means the city of Lewiston parks and recreation director or designee.

Party means the same as defined in Idaho Code, Section 23-902, as may be amended from time to time.

Police chief means the city of Lewiston chief of police or designee.

Premises means all lands, structures, places and equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith, whether privately or publicly owned, and including any personal property or vehicle on said premises.

Public works director means the city of Lewiston public works director or designee.

Restaurant means an establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building where there may or may not exist alcohol licensed service, and where food and nonalcoholic beverages account for at least sixty (60) percent of the gross retail sales.

Restaurant patio means an area subordinate, accessory, and adjacent to a restaurant where food and drink are served. A restaurant patio is distinct from a bar patio, as defined herein.

Retail beer off-premises license means a license issued by the city to sell beer in its original, unopened container at retail for consumption off the premises.

Retail beer on-premises license means a license issued by the city to sell and serve beer by the individual glass, can, or bottle for consumption on the premises.

Retail wine license means a license issued by the city to sell wine in its original, unopened container at retail for consumption off the premises.

Wine means the same as defined in Idaho Code, Section 23-1303, as may be amended from time to time.

Wine-by-the-drink license means a license issued by the city to sell and serve wine by the individual glass or by the bottle for consumption on the premises. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-3. License or permit required; licensed premises; display mandatory.
(a) It shall be unlawful to sell: (1) beer within the city without a retail beer off-premises license or retail beer on-premises license; (2) wine within the city without a retail wine license or wine-by-the-drink license, unless pursuant to a wine sponsored event permit as set forth in Idaho Code, Section 23-1338, as may be amended from time to time; and (3) liquor by the drink within the city without a liquor-by-the-drink license. A business license issued by the city pursuant to Chapter 21 of this code shall also be required in order to sell beer, wine, or liquor by the drink within the city; provided, however, that a business license issued by the city pursuant to Chapter 21 of this code shall not be required if wine is sold within the city pursuant to a wine sponsored event permit as set forth in Idaho Code, Section 23-1338, as may be amended from time to time.

(b) It shall be unlawful to serve and/or sell liquor by the drink, beer and wine, or beer, or wine, at a party, festival, or convention that is open to the public within the city without an alcohol beverage catering permit issued by the city, unless pursuant to a wine sponsored event permit as set forth in Idaho Code, Section 23-1338, as may be amended from time to time. It shall also be unlawful to sell liquor by the drink, beer and wine, or beer, or wine, at a party, festival, or convention that is not open to the public within the city without an alcohol beverage catering permit issued by the city, unless pursuant to a wine sponsored event permit as set forth in Idaho Code, Section 23-1338, as may be amended from time to time.

(c) A license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall: (1) only be valid for the premises covered by such license or permit, and (2) be posted and displayed in a conspicuous place within the premises covered by such license or permit. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-4. Age of applicants.
Unless otherwise provided by law, applicants for a retail beer off-premises license, retail beer on-premises license, retail wine license, wine-by-the-drink license, liquor-by-the-drink license, or alcohol beverage catering permit shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-5. Transfers.
A retail beer off-premises license, retail beer on-premises license, retail wine license, or wine-by-the-drink license may be transferred from one licensee to another, subject to the same requirements set forth in this chapter for the original license and subject to a fee, as set by resolution of the city council. A bar patio or restaurant patio approval may be transferred from one licensee to another, subject to the same requirements set forth in this chapter for the original approval. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-6. Consumption and open container in public places.
No person shall consume any beer, wine, liquor, or any other alcoholic beverage or have in his or her possession any open containers or receptacles containing any beer, wine, liquor, or any other alcoholic beverage on any public parks, grounds, streets, alleys, sidewalks, or rights-of-way, or on privately owned parking lots open to the public within the city, or at any other place therein, unless pursuant to a valid license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter or Chapter 26, Article V of this code for parks. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-7. Approval required for serving and/or selling outside premises.
It shall be unlawful for a person or business to serve and/or sell beer, wine, or liquor by the drink at any place outside of premises with a retail beer on-premises license, wine-by-the-drink license, and/or liquor-by-the-drink license, unless: (1) with approval from the city for a restaurant patio, (2) with approval from the city for a bar patio, or (3) pursuant to an alcohol beverage catering permit issued by the city. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-8. Outdoor consumption of beer, wine, or liquor at a licensed retail establishment prohibited except within a licensed restaurant patio or bar patio.
The outdoor consumption of beer, wine, or liquor purchased at an establishment with a retail beer on-premises license, wine-by-the-drink license, and/or liquor-by-the-drink license shall be prohibited; provided, however, that the on-site, outdoor consumption of beer, wine, or liquor may be permitted within a restaurant patio or bar patio or pursuant to an alcohol beverage catering permit issued by the city, meeting the criteria and conditions as provided hereafter and upon receiving approval from the city. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-9. Penalty.
Unless otherwise provided by law, a person or entity found to be in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000) or imprisonment in the Nez Perce County jail for not more than six (6) months, or both. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-10. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such finding shall not affect the validity of other provisions of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

ARTICLE II. BEER AND WINE
Sec. 6-11. Application for license or renewal; fee.
(a) An application for a retail beer off-premises license, retail beer on-premises license, retail wine license, wine-by-the-drink license, or renewal thereof shall be made, in writing, upon a form furnished by the community development department and shall be submitted to the business licensing coordinator. Such application shall be accompanied by copies of the applicant’s required alcohol licenses from Nez Perce County and the Idaho State Police.

(b) An application for a retail beer off-premises license, retail beer on-premises license, retail wine license, wine-by-the-drink license, or renewal thereof, shall be accompanied by a fee, as set by resolution of the city council.

(c) Upon receipt by the business licensing coordinator of a completed application and fee for a retail beer off-premises license, retail beer on-premises license, retail wine license, wine-by-the-drink license, or renewal thereof, the business licensing coordinator shall create a file for the application and notify the city clerk.

(d) Recommendations on an application for a retail beer off-premises license, retail beer on-premises license, retail wine license, wine-by-the-drink license, or renewal thereof shall be solicited from the police chief and fire chief, which recommendations may include conditions to ensure public safety. The city clerk shall approve or deny an application for a retail beer off-premises license, retail beer on-premises license, retail wine license, wine-by-the-drink license, or renewal thereof within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the business licensing coordinator’s receipt of a completed application and fee, in accordance with Idaho Code, Sections 23-1016 and 23-1318, as applicable and as amended from time to time.

(e) If the city clerk denies an application for a retail beer off-premises license, retail beer on-premises license, retail wine license, wine-by-the-drink license, or renewal thereof, then the city clerk shall explain the following in writing:

(1) The statutes, ordinances, and standards used in evaluating the application;

(2) The reasons for denial; and

(3) The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the retail beer off-premises license, retail beer on-premises license, retail wine license, wine-by-the-drink license, or renewal thereof.

Service of the city clerk’s written denial may be accomplished by hand-delivery or mail. If such written denial is hand-delivered, it shall be deemed received immediately. If such written denial is mailed, it shall be deemed received seventy-two (72) hours after depositing the same in the U.S. mail, first class, certified, or registered and addressed to the applicant’s last known address. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-12. Appeals.
(a) An applicant aggrieved by a written denial of the city clerk may appeal such written denial to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of such written denial, in accordance with Idaho Code, Section 23-1016, as applicable and as amended from time to time. The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for appeal.

(b) If an appeal is not filed within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of the city clerk’s written denial, then the city clerk’s written denial shall be final.

(c) The city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal. The appellant shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel at the hearing and rebut any evidence that is submitted. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply.

(d) The city council shall issue a written decision within twenty (20) calendar days after the hearing. The city council may affirm, reverse, or modify the city clerk’s denial. The city council’s decision shall be final.

(e) An applicant aggrieved by a final decision of the city council is entitled to judicial review only as provided by law. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-13. License revocation, suspension, or denial of renewal.
(a) In accordance with Idaho Code, Section 23-1042, as may be amended from time to time: (1) the city clerk shall have the same powers to revoke, suspend, or deny renewal of a retail beer off-premises license or retail beer on-premises license as are granted to the director of the Idaho State Police; and (2) the city clerk’s determination to revoke, suspend, or deny renewal of a retail beer off-premises license or retail beer on-premises license shall be upon the same grounds set forth in Idaho Code, Section 23-1037, as may be amended from time to time, and/or that the licensee violated this chapter.

(b) The procedure to revoke, suspend, or deny renewal of a retail beer off-premises license or retail beer on-premises license shall be governed by Idaho Code, Section 23-1042 and other applicable provisions set forth in Chapter 10 of Title 23 of the Idaho Code, as may be amended from time to time.

(c) A person or entity whose retail beer off-premises license, retail beer on-premises license, retail wine license, and/or wine-by-the-drink license was revoked or suspended shall immediately surrender such license(s) to the city clerk. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-14. Hours of sale.
Beer and wine may be sold pursuant to a retail beer off-premises license, retail beer on-premises license, retail wine license, or wine-by-the-drink license, as applicable, until 2:00 a.m. within the city, in accordance with Idaho Code, Sections 23-1012 and 23-1318, as applicable and as amended from time to time. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-15. Churches and schools.
Within the downtown Lewiston area, retail beer on-premises licenses and wine-by-the-drink licenses may be issued by the city for any place where beer or wine is sold or dispensed to be consumed on the premises, whether conducted for pleasure or profit, that is within three hundred (300) feet of any public school, church, or any other place of worship measured in a straight line to the nearest entrance to the licensed premises.

For all other areas within the city, a retail beer on-premises license or wine-by-the-drink license shall not be issued for any place where beer or wine is sold or dispensed to be consumed on the premises, whether conducted for pleasure or profit, that is within three hundred (300) feet of any public school, church, or any other place of worship measured in a straight line to the nearest entrance to the licensed premises without the approval of the city council. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

ARTICLE III. LIQUOR-BY-THE-DRINK
Sec. 6-16. Application for license or renewal; fee.
(a) An application for a liquor-by-the-drink license or renewal thereof shall be made, in writing, upon a form furnished by the community development department and shall be submitted to the business licensing coordinator. Such application shall be accompanied by copies of the applicant’s required alcohol licenses from Nez Perce County and the Idaho State Police.

(b) An application for a liquor-by-the-drink license or renewal thereof shall be accompanied by a fee, as set by resolution of the city council.

(c) Upon receipt by the business licensing coordinator of a completed application and fee for a liquor-by-the-drink license or renewal thereof, the business licensing coordinator shall create a file for the application and notify the city clerk.

(d) The city clerk shall: (1) solicit recommendations on an application for a liquor-by-the-drink license or renewal thereof from the police chief and fire chief, which recommendations may include conditions to ensure public safety; and (2) schedule the application for consideration by the city council.

(e) The city council shall approve or deny an application for a liquor-by-the-drink license or renewal thereof within forty-five (45) calendar days of the business licensing coordinator’s receipt of a completed application and fee.

(f) If the city council denies an application for a liquor-by-the-drink license or renewal thereof, then the city council shall explain the following in writing:

(1) The statutes, ordinances, and standards used in evaluating the application;

(2) The reasons for denial; and

(3) The actions, if any, the applicant can take to obtain the liquor-by-the-drink license or renewal thereof.

(g) The city council’s decision on an application for a liquor-by-the-drink license or renewal thereof shall be final. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-17. License revocation, suspension, or denial of renewal.
(a) In accordance with Idaho Code, Section 23-933B, as may be amended from time to time: (1) the city council shall have the same powers to revoke, suspend, or deny renewal of a liquor-by-the-drink license as are granted to the director of the Idaho State Police; and (2) the city council’s determination to revoke, suspend, or deny renewal of a liquor-by-the-drink license shall be upon the same grounds set forth in Idaho Code, Section 23-933, as may be amended from time to time, and/or that the licensee violated this chapter.

(b) The procedure to revoke, suspend, or deny renewal of a liquor-by-the-drink license shall be governed by Idaho Code, Section 23-933B and other applicable provisions set forth in Chapter 10 of Title 23 of the Idaho Code, as may be amended from time to time.

(c) A person or entity whose liquor-by-the-drink license was revoked or suspended shall immediately surrender such license to the city clerk. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-18. Hours and days of sale.
(a) Liquor by the drink may be sold pursuant to a liquor-by-the-drink license until 2:00 a.m. within the city, in accordance with Idaho Code, Section 23-927, as may be amended from time to time.

(b) Liquor by the drink may be sold pursuant to a liquor-by-the-drink license on Sundays, Memorial Day, and Thanksgiving within the city, in accordance with Idaho Code, Section 23-927, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-19. Churches and schools.
Within the downtown Lewiston area, liquor-by-the-drink licenses may be issued by the city for any premises in any neighborhood that is predominantly residential or within three hundred (300) feet of any public school, church, or any other place of worship measured in a straight line to the nearest entrance to the licensed premises.

For all other areas within the city, a liquor-by-the-drink license shall not be issued for any premises in any neighborhood that is predominantly residential or within three hundred (300) feet of any public school, church, or any other place of worship measured in a straight line to the nearest entrance to the licensed premises without the approval of the city council. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

ARTICLE IV. ALCOHOL BEVERAGE CATERING PERMIT
Sec. 6-20. Application for permit; filing fee.
(a) Idaho Code, Sections 23-934A and 23-934B, as may be amended from time to time, shall govern the application, processing, and approval requirements for alcohol beverage catering permits issued by the city.

(b) An application for an alcohol beverage catering permit shall be made, in writing, upon a form furnished by the community development department and shall be submitted to the business licensing coordinator at least fourteen (14) calendar days before the applicable party or at least twenty-one (21) calendar days before the applicable festival or convention. An application for an alcohol beverage catering permit shall be accompanied by a: (1) detailed site plan and/or floor plan showing the area where liquor by the drink, beer, and/or wine will be served and locations of exits; and (2) filing fee in the amount required by Idaho Code, Section 23-934A, as may be amended from time to time.

(c) Upon receipt by the business licensing coordinator of a completed application for an alcohol beverage catering permit, the business licensing coordinator shall forward the application to the community development director, city clerk, police chief, and fire chief. If the party, festival, or convention will occur at a city park, then the business licensing coordinator shall also forward the application to the parks and recreation director. The police chief, fire chief, and parks and recreation director, as applicable, shall make recommendations on an application for an alcohol beverage catering permit, which recommendations may include conditions to ensure public safety.

(d) The community development director shall approve or deny applications for alcohol beverage catering permits, in accordance with Idaho Code, Section 23-934B, as may be amended from time to time.

(e) If the community development director denies an application for an alcohol beverage catering permit, the community development director shall explain the following in writing:

(1) The statutes, ordinances, and standards used in evaluating the application;

(2) The reasons for denial; and

(3) The actions, if any, the applicant can take to obtain the alcohol beverage catering permit. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-21. Permit revocation.
The community development director may revoke an alcohol beverage catering permit if: (1) a term or condition of the alcohol beverage catering permit is violated by the holder of the alcohol beverage catering permit; (2) the holder of the alcohol beverage catering permit violates this chapter or applicable state or federal law in the course of serving alcohol under the alcohol beverage catering permit; (3) it is found, after issuance, that alcohol cannot be safely served under the alcohol beverage catering permit; and/or (4) it is found, after issuance, that the alcohol beverage catering permit was issued pursuant to false, inaccurate, or incomplete information on the application. Written notice of such revocation shall be delivered to the holder of the alcohol beverage catering permit by personal service or certified mail. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

ARTICLE V. BAR PATIO
Sec. 6-22. Bar patio approval or denial process.
(a) A request for a bar patio shall be made, in writing, as part of a new business license application or as an amendment or addition to an existing business license, and shall be submitted to the community development department along with: (1) a detailed site plan showing the area where beer, wine, or liquor will be served and locations of exits in the bar patio, (2) a seating plan for the bar patio, (3) a letter approving the site from the Idaho State Police, and (4) a certificate of occupancy issued by the city.

(b) Upon receipt of a request for a bar patio, the business licensing coordinator shall solicit recommendations from the police chief; fire chief; building official; city planner; and environmental pretreatment supervisor, if water usage and/or disposal will be used in the bar patio. Such recommendations may include conditions to ensure public safety. The business licensing coordinator shall approve or deny a request for a bar patio, with or without conditions, within twenty (20) business days of receipt of a completed request.

(c) If the business licensing coordinator denies a request for a bar patio, then the business licensing coordinator shall explain the following in writing:

(1) The statutes, ordinances, and/or standards, used in evaluating the request;

(2) The reasons for denial; and

(3) The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain approval for a bar patio.

Service of the business licensing coordinator’s written denial may be accomplished by hand-delivery or mail. If such written denial is hand-delivered, it shall be deemed received immediately. If such written denial is mailed, it shall be deemed received seventy-two (72) hours after depositing the same in the U.S. mail, first class, certified, or registered and addressed to the applicant’s last known address. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-23. Appeals.
An applicant aggrieved by a written denial of the business licensing coordinator may appeal such written denial in accordance with Chapter 21 of this code regarding business licenses. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-24. Bar patio requirements.
(a) A bar patio may be located on the same premises as a bar.

(b) A bar patio shall have direct access into and from the associated bar and shall have no other entrance or exit, unless required and authorized by the fire marshal and police chief.

(c) A bar patio shall be monitored to ensure compliance with alcohol service and consumption laws.

(d) Ingress and egress for a bar patio shall be subject to the requirements of the International Building Code and International Fire Code, as adopted by Chapters 10 and 15 of this code, and shall be approved by the building official and fire marshal.

(e) Materials, design, and arrangement of seating and enclosures for a bar patio shall be subject to the requirements of the International Building Code and International Fire Code, as adopted by Chapters 10 and 15 of this code, as determined by the building official and fire marshal.

(f) If beer or wine, but not liquor by the drink, will be served within a bar patio, then such bar patio shall be enclosed on all sides by a fence, wall, or temporary partition that is at least thirty-six (36) inches in height, which clearly designates the area in which beer or wine may be consumed. If said fence, wall, or temporary partition contains a gate, then said gate shall also be at least thirty-six (36) inches in height and shall be kept closed and locked, unless: (1) used for loading or unloading purposes, or (2) as otherwise required by the fire marshal. Said gate shall have a sign stating that no alcohol is allowed beyond the gate.

If liquor by the drink will be served within a bar patio, then such bar patio shall be enclosed on all sides by a sight-obscuring fence or wall that is at least seventy-two (72) inches in height, which fence or wall shall be anchored into the ground or otherwise securely affixed so it is not readily movable. If said fence or wall contains a gate, then said gate shall also be sight-obscuring and shall be at least seventy-two (72) inches in height. Said gate shall be kept closed and locked, unless: (1) used for loading or unloading purposes, or (2) as otherwise required by the fire marshal. Said gate shall have a sign stating that no alcohol is allowed beyond the gate.

(g) A bar patio shall not displace parking required by Chapter 37 of this code. Parking for a bar patio shall be provided as required by Chapter 37 of this code. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

ARTICLE VI. RESTAURANT PATIO
Sec. 6-25. Conditions for approval of a restaurant patio.
Upon proper application, approval for a restaurant patio may be granted as an addition to an existing business license or as part of a new business license, upon meeting the following criteria and conditions:

(1) A restaurant patio shall be operated by an adjacent restaurant maintaining a current city of Lewiston business license.

(2) A restaurant patio shall not extend more than a combined total of twenty-five (25) feet parallel to the street beyond the sidewalls of the adjacent restaurant of which the restaurant patio is a part.

(3) The property owner shall maintain all areas adjacent to and including areas where tables and chairs are located in a clean and sanitary manner, including the provision of appropriate trash receptacles. Maintenance shall include sweeping on a daily basis any adjacent right-of-way where the restaurant patio is located and the immediate clearing of any food debris, broken glass, and other trash. Materials associated with the restaurant shall be removed from the right-of-way by sweeping and picking up or vacuuming. Debris shall not be swept, washed, hosed, or blown into the adjacent streets and/or parking areas.

(4) The city reserves the right to preclude the placement or use of outdoor tables or other street furniture on city property during special public events or parades where due to overcrowding, congestion, or other public safety concerns, the use or placement may create a hazard and/or interfere with the general health and safety of the public. The chief of police or designee is authorized to place further restrictions on consumption of beer, wine, and liquor during special events or parades as deemed necessary.

(5) The ratio of outdoor seats to indoor seats shall not exceed one (1) outdoor seat for each three (3) seats inside the restaurant.

In addition to subsections (1) through (5) of this section, a restaurant patio serving beer, wine, and/or liquor must meet subsections (6) through (11) of this section.

(6) A necessary and valid liquor-by-the-drink license, retail beer on-premises license, and/or wine-by-the-drink license shall have already been issued or be issuable to the restaurant for consumption within the restaurant and in the outside areas as defined in the approved site plan drawing.

(7) The restaurant patio shall be a bona fide restaurant and may be required to demonstrate or report to the satisfaction of the city or its designee that it has maintained at least sixty (60) percent of gross retail sales from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages through reports submitted with the application for a restaurant patio on public sidewalks. Such demonstration or report shall contain copies of sales tax receipts and other documents including those prepared for the Idaho Tax Commission if required by the city.

(8) Beer, wine, and/or liquor shall only be sold and consumed at a restaurant patio during the respective days and timeframes set forth in this chapter. No person other than the business owner or an employee of the business shall serve any beer, wine, or liquor consumed on-site at a restaurant patio, unless pursuant to an alcohol beverage catering permit issued by the city or a wine sponsored event permit as set forth in Idaho Code, Section 23-1338, as may be amended from time to time.

(9) The business owner shall be responsible for making sure guests do not leave the restaurant patio area with beer, wine, or liquor. No beer, wine, or liquor shall be authorized beyond the area described by subsection (10) of this section.

(10) Temporary partitions thirty-six (36) inches in height shall be installed to clearly designate the area in which beer, wine, and liquor may be consumed. Beer, wine, and liquor shall not be consumed outside the area so designated. Temporary partitions shall receive prior approval from the public works department and shall be placed in such a manner as to not obstruct pedestrian traffic, damage the sidewalk, or constitute a safety hazard.

(11) A sign shall be placed at all exits of the restaurant patio. This sign shall be at least eight and one-half (8 1/2) inches by eleven (11) inches and displayed at a height of at least five (5) feet. Said sign shall read, “It is unlawful on these premises to consume alcoholic beverages not purchased at [premises name] or to remove the same from the boundaries of this sidewalk café.” (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-26. Encroachment of restaurant patio on city right-of-way.
A restaurant patio within the central business district, as defined by section 37-145 of this code, may be licensed to encroach onto city right-of-way on the following conditions:

(1) All the conditions set forth in section 6-25 of this chapter are satisfied.

(2) There shall be a continuous 42-inch wide unobstructed clear passage area for pedestrians and persons in wheelchairs between chairs, tables, umbrellas, partitions, and other obstructions to allow persons to pass the restaurant patio. For the purposes of this policy, other obstructions shall include, but not be limited to, light poles, sign poles, building fronts, trees, or other permanent street furniture and/or fixtures. The holder of the license with approval for a restaurant patio shall be responsible for preserving this 42-inch clear passage at all times.

(3) Table umbrellas shall be permitted under the following conditions:

a. The minimum height of the umbrella canopy shall be seven (7) feet.

b. No umbrella shall obstruct any street signs.

c. An umbrella with a sign on it shall comply with Chapter 30 of this code.

d. No portion of an umbrella shall encroach on the 42-inch passage area.

(4) Furniture or partitions may only be installed within the right-of-way or to any object within the right-of-way with the permission of the public works director or designee. Said permission may require the posting of a bond to cover the expenses of potential damage to the right-of-way or improvements contained therein. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-27. Contents of application.
Prior to the approval for a restaurant patio associated with an adjacent restaurant and for a restaurant patio associated with an adjacent restaurant to encroach onto city right-of-way, an application for a restaurant patio shall be made, in writing, on a form furnished by the community development department, and shall be submitted to the business licensing coordinator. Such application shall be accompanied by the following:

(1) A copy of the encroachment permit issued by the public works department;

(2) A detailed site plan showing the area where beer, wine, or liquor will be served, if applicable, and locations of exits in the restaurant patio;

(3) A scale drawing of proposed locations of tables, chairs, and partitions to designate the proposed restaurant patio area;

(4) A letter approving the site from the Idaho State Police if beer, wine, or liquor will be served in the restaurant patio;

(5) Any information requested by the city to ensure compliance with conditions and regulations of restaurant patios provided above;

(6) A fee, as set by resolution of the city council; and

(7) When beer, wine, or liquor is proposed to be served at the restaurant patio, proof of necessary state of Idaho, Nez Perce County, and city alcohol licenses. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-28. Application approval or denial.
The business licensing coordinator shall, after the review and recommendation by city staff, approve or deny an application for a restaurant patio within twenty (20) business days of the business licensing coordinator’s receipt of a completed application. If the business licensing coordinator denies an application for a restaurant patio, then the business licensing coordinator shall explain the following in writing:

(1) The statutes, ordinances, and/or standards used in evaluating the application;

(2) The reasons for the denial; and

(3) The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain approval for a restaurant patio.

Service of the business licensing coordinator’s written denial may be accomplished by hand-delivery or mail. If such written denial is hand-delivered, it shall be deemed received immediately. If such written denial is mailed, it shall be deemed received seventy-two (72) hours after depositing the same in the U.S. mail, first class, certified, or registered and addressed to the applicant’s last known address. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

Sec. 6-29. Appeals.
An applicant aggrieved by a written denial of the business licensing coordinator may appeal such written denial in accordance with Chapter 21 of this code regarding business licenses. (Ord. No. 4710, § 2, 12-10-18)

1
Editor’s note – Ordinance No. 4710, adopted Dec. 10, 2018, repealed and replaced Ch. 6 in its entirety. The deleted sections contained provisions relating to alcoholic beverages. Former Chapter 6 derived from Code 1960, §§ 4-1, 4-2 and 4-4 through 4-34.1; Ord. No. 2035, § 1; Ord. No. 2038, § 1; Ord. No. 2085, § 1; Ord. No. 2509, § 1; Ord. No. 2612, § 1, adopted June 1, 1965; Ord. No. 2668, § 1; Ord. No. 2782, § 1; Ord. No. 2786, § 1; Ord. No. 2859, § 1; Ord. No. 3023, § 1, passed May 17, 1971; Ord. No. 3088, § 1, adopted May 8, 1972; Ord. No. 3099, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 24, 1972; Ord. No. 3147, §§ 1 – 7, adopted June 11, 1973; Ord. No. 3231, § 1, adopted Aug. 26, 1974; Ord. No. 3369, § 1, adopted May 23, 1977; Ord. No. 3397, § 1, adopted Sept. 12, 1977; Ord. No. 3459, § 1, adopted Sept. 6, 1978; Ord. No. 3569, §§ 2, 3, adopted Apr. 20, 1981; Ord. No. 3582, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 10, 1981; Ord. No. 3650, § 1 – 3, adopted June 1, 1982; Ord. No. 3703, §§ 1 – 4, adopted Sept. 12, 1983; Ord. No. 3842, § 4, adopted Nov. 3, 1986; Ord. No. 3950, §§ 1 – 4, adopted June 5, 1989; Ord. No. 3984, § 1, adopted Oct. 29, 1990; Ord. No. 4023, § 1, adopted Dec. 9, 1991; Ord. No. 4033, §§ 1 – 7, 9 – 13, adopted Feb. 10, 1992; Ord. No. 4098, § 1, adopted Apr. 11, 1994; Ord. No. 4222, § 1, adopted Sept. 21, 1998; Ord. No. 4331, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 2003; Ord. No. 4339, § 1, adopted Sept. 22, 2003; Ord. No. 4357, §§ 1 – 4, adopted July 26, 2004; Ord. No. 4373, §§ 1 – 5, adopted Nov. 22, 2004; Ord. No. 4436, §§ 1 – 8, adopted Mar. 27, 2006; Ord. No. 4561, § 1, adopted Nov. 14, 2011; and Ord. No. 4567, §§ 2 – 20, adopted Dec. 12, 2011.


Chapter 7
AMBULANCE SERVICE1
Art. I.    Charges, §§ 7-1, 7-2

Art. II.    Emergency Medical Services System, §§ 7-3 – 7-12

ARTICLE I. CHARGES
Sec. 7-1. Ambulance charges.
Ambulance service fees shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. No. 4583, § 2, 8-27-12; Ord. No. 4637, § 1, 8-24-15; Ord. No. 4708, § 1, 9-11-17)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4583, § 1, adopted August 27, 2012, repealed § 7-1, designating ambulance charges. Said section was derived from Code 1960, § 2-4.2, as amended by Ord. No. 3267, § 1, adopted April 14, 1975, Ord. No. 3343, § 1, adopted January 17, 1977, Ord. No. 3461, § 1, adopted September 25, 1978, Ord. No. 3670, § 1, adopted September 27, 1982, Ord. No. 3702, § 1, adopted July 25, 1983, Ord. No. 3887, § 1, adopted October 5, 1987, Ord. No. 3978, § 1, adopted September 10, 1990, Ord. No. 4021, § 1, adopted January 13, 1992, Ord. No. 4077, § 1, adopted August 30, 1993, Ord. No. 4106, § 1, adopted August 1, 1994, Ord. No. 4131, § 1, adopted June 5, 1995, Ord. No. 4199, § 1, adopted September 8, 1997, Ord. No. 4244, § 1, adopted August 23, 1999, Ord. No. 4275, § 1, adopted October 16, 2000, Ord. No. 4311, § 1, adopted August 26, 2002, Ord. No. 4341, § 1, adopted September 22, 2003, Ord. No. 4369, § 1, adopted August 23, 2004, Ord. No. 4417, § 1, adopted August 22, 2005, Ord. No. 4482, § 1, adopted August 27, 2007, Ord. No. 4514, § 1, adopted August 25, 2008, Ord. No. 4528, § 1, adopted February 23, 2009, and Ord. No. 4549, § 1, adopted August 23, 2010.

Sec. 7-2. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4131, § 2, adopted June 5, 1995, repealed § 7-2, designating charges for fireboat service. Said section was derived from Ord. No. 3757, § 2, adopted April 1, 1985, as amended by Ord. No. 3778, § 1, adopted May 20, 1985, Ord. No. 3860, § 1, adopted May 4, 1987, and Ord. No. 4021, § 2, adopted January 13, 1992.

ARTICLE II. EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES SYSTEM
Sec. 7-3. Purpose.
This article is enacted for the purpose of establishing a basic framework to direct the provision of emergency and nonemergency ambulance services within the city of Lewiston. It is the intent of the city council to define the structure of the city’s commitment to emergency medical care to the citizens of the city of Lewiston, to determine working relationships between different care providers and to develop the most cost effective and highest quality patient care solutions to emergency and nonemergency ambulance medical care within the city. (Ord. 4138, § 1, 8-21-95)

Sec. 7-4. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Article 12, Section 2 of the Idaho Constitution and Idaho Code, Sections 50-301, 50-302 and 50-304. (Ord. 4138, § 1, 8-21-95)

Sec. 7-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

Advisory board: The Lewiston emergency medical service advisory board appointed by the Lewiston city council pursuant to the provisions of this article.

Ambulance services: Ambulance service providers holding a current emergency medical service certificate of compliance and/or a current nonemergency transfer service certificate of compliance.

City council: The city council of the city of Lewiston.

Dispatch: The system of communication which provides public access to emergency and nonemergency ambulance services and which activates and coordinates the responses of emergency and nonemergency ambulance service providers.

Emergency medical services: Out-of-hospital, emergency health care delivered by an emergency ambulance service utilized in responding to a perceived individual need for immediate care in order to prevent loss of life or aggravation of physiological or psychological illness or injury. Expressly excluded from this definition are the operation of medical offices by licensed physicians and the operation of hospitals and air ambulance emergency and nonemergency transport services.

Medical emergency: Any event or series of events which prompts an individual to believe that immediate health care needs cannot be met by the individual him/herself or his/her family.

Nonemergency transport services: The nonemergency transport service by ambulance of a patient to and/or between home, hospital, care facility, medical office or rehabilitation facility under medical supervision.

Paramedic program: The provision of state of Idaho licensed and certified paramedic services.

Provider: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, public agency or corporation which offers or supplies out-of-hospital medical care or health related transportation services to the public within the city of Lewiston. (Ord. 4138, § 1, 8-21-95)

Sec. 7-6. Advisory board.
(a) There is hereby established a Lewiston emergency medical services advisory board (EMSAB) which shall serve to advise the city council in matters affecting the provision of emergency and nonemergency ambulance services within the city and to review applications for a certificate of public convenience and necessity and make recommendations to the city council on the same. The EMSAB shall annually review the overall performance of emergency and nonemergency ambulance service providers, ensure the highest quality of patient care, suggest methods to improve service delivery and minimize costs, provide recommendations to the city council in the development of rules and policies governing providers, hear and investigate complaints against ambulance service providers and to perform such other emergency medical services related tasks as the city council shall designate.

(b) The EMSAB shall be comprised of seven (7) members, all residents of the city of Lewiston. EMSAB members shall be appointed to four (4) year terms as provided in section 2-181 of this code; however, initial appointments shall be made with four (4) members receiving four (4) year terms and three (3) members receiving two (2) year terms. Members shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. One member shall represent the Lewiston fire department. One member shall represent each medical transport service provider operating in the city. One member shall represent St. Joseph Regional Medical Center. One member shall represent the private health care sector. One member shall represent the extended care facility industry. The remaining members shall be from the general public and unaffiliated with the medical care industry. The EMSAB shall meet at least once a year and as necessary throughout the year. Staff support to the EMSAB shall be provided by the emergency medical service division chief from the Lewiston fire department. Business of the EMSAB shall be governed by sections 2-183 through 2-186 of this code. (Ord. 4138, § 1, 8-21-95)

Sec. 7-7. Authority of personnel at emergency care sites.
Authority to direct activities of providers present at the care site of a medical emergency shall reside in the ranking paramedic from the Lewiston fire department. This section is intended to apply only to medical services and does not affect authority of law enforcement, fire suppression or other nonmedical service activities by legally responsible responding public agencies. In the event personnel of a nonemergency ambulance service encounters a patient in need of emergency medical services, the personnel are obligated to immediately notify the Lewiston fire department to arrange for an emergency ambulance rendezvous in order to ensure paramedic service and adequate staffing are available to the person in need of emergency medical services. (Ord. 4138, § 1, 8-21-95)

Sec. 7-8. Policies, procedures and standards.
For the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city of Lewiston, the city council, with the assistance of the EMSAB, shall develop and implement policies, procedures and standards for the provision of emergency and nonemergency ambulance services within the city, including dispatch policies. Any emergency medical service provider or nonemergency transfer service who acts contrary to adopted policies, procedures and standards may, after proper notice and opportunity for hearing, have its certificate of compliance revoked. (Ord. 4138, § 1, 8-21-95)

Sec. 7-9. Certificate of compliance.
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or public agency shall provide emergency or nonemergency ambulance services with a point of origin and destination within the city of Lewiston without obtaining a certificate of compliance from the EMSAB. Certificates of compliance shall be issued on an annual, calendar year basis, for no charge, to all emergency medical service providers who submit and maintain documentation which complies with the following standards:

(1) Current Idaho ambulance licenses issued to the provider and a copy of the current Idaho application listing all vehicles in its service which will serve as ambulances.

(2) A list of the names of all paramedic, advance EMT-A, EMT-A and EMT staff members working for the provider, along with copies of each’s current certification and driver’s license. Such certification reports shall be updated continually within the course of the year as personnel changes dictate.

(3) Copies of a certificate of insurance indicating that the provider has in force general liability insurance and motor vehicle liability insurance, with a face amount of at least $500,000. Said insurance must remain in full force throughout the course of the calendar year.

(4) A certificate, executed by the provider’s chief executive, indicating the provider will comply with the provisions of this article and any applicable policies, procedures and standards adopted by the city council. (Ord. 4138, § 1, 8-21-95)

Sec. 7-10. Certificate of public convenience and necessity.
No certificate of compliance shall be issued to a new provider unless the city council finds that the provider’s proposed service is required by the public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit, willing and able to provide service that conforms to the policies, procedures and standards set by this article. (Ord. 4138, § 1, 8-21-95)

Sec. 7-11. Unlawful acts and penalties.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or provider of emergency or nonemergency ambulance services to commit any act that would obstruct the orderly delivery of emergency or nonemergency ambulance services by any certificated provider.

(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to provide emergency or nonemergency ambulance services within the city without a current certificate of compliance.

(c) It shall be unlawful for any person or provider to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this article or the policies, procedure and standards adopted pursuant hereto.

(d) Any person or provider who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a criminal misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided for in section 1-7 of this code. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 4138, § 1, 8-21-95)

Sec. 7-12. Emergency waiver.
In the event of a major disaster or major incident requiring the response and use of mutual aid resources from outside the city, the city manager may temporarily waive the requirement to possess a certificate of compliance to provide emergency and nonemergency ambulance services. (Ord. 4138, § 1, 8-21-95)

1
State law reference – Provisions relating to ambulance service generally, Idaho Code, Chapter 39 of Title 31.


Chapter 8
ANIMALS AND FOWL1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 8-1 – 8-20

Art. II.    Dogs, §§ 8-21 – 8-48

ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 8-1. Keeping animals.
(a) No person shall keep or maintain any livestock, any fur-bearing animal except a dog or cat, any chicken, duck, goose, turkey or other fowl within the city, except as authorized by the zoning ordinance.

(b) Every person maintaining or keeping livestock or fowl within the city shall maintain and keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition.

(c) Such persons shall at all times comply with sanitary regulations imposed by the city health officer. (Code 1960, § 5-1; Ord. No. 3994, § 1, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Cross reference – Keeping of animals, § 37-108.

Sec. 8-2. Running at large.
No owner or custodian shall permit any animal owned by him or under his control to run at large in or upon any street, lane, alley or on any public property, vacant lot, or unenclosed private property not the property of the owner. Any animal found running at large may be taken up and impounded. A cat shall not be deemed to be at large unless it is causing, or is a nuisance, or has been complained of or is sick or injured. No owner or custodian shall permit any animal owned by him or under his control to be upon the premises of another within the city without the consent of the owner of such premises. (Code 1960, § 5-2; Ord. No. 3927, § 1, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 3994, § 2, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-3. Excessive noise from animals prohibited.
No owner or custodian shall permit any animal to cause excessive noise of such a type, volume or duration as to disturb the sleep, peace, quiet, comfort or repose of any person or residential neighborhood. A violation of this section shall be a civil infraction and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). In lieu of a court appearance, any person charged with having committed a civil infraction prohibited by this section may forfeit to the Nez Perce County Court a penalty in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. No. 4320, § 4, 6-23-03)

Sec. 8-4. Impoundment of animals and fowl running at large – Authorized; notice to owner.
The animal control officer may, when any animal or fowl is found running at large in or upon any of the streets, lanes, alleys or public grounds of the city, or upon the premises of another within the city without the consent of the owner of such premises, immediately impound the same and notify the owner thereof, if known. (Code 1960, § 5-4; Ord. No. 3368, § 1, 5-23-77; Ord. No. 3927, § 3, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 3994, § 3, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Secs. 8-5, 8-6. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Former §§ 8-5 and 8-6 were repealed by Ord. No. 3927, §§ 4 and 5, adopted Nov. 7, 1988. Said sections related to the sale of impounded animals and fowl and impounding fees, respectively, and originated from the 1960 Code, §§ 5-5 and 5-6; and Ord. No. 3368, §§ 2 and 3, adopted May 23, 1977.

Sec. 8-7. Driving herds through city.
No person shall drive or attempt to drive any loose livestock along or over any of the streets, avenues, alleys or other thoroughfares of the city. (Code 1960, § 5-8; Ord. No. 3927, § 6, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-8. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3368, § 4, adopted May 23, 1977, repealed § 8-8 designating routes over which herds could be driven through the city. Said section was derived from the 1960 Code, § 5-9.

Sec. 8-9. Animal protection – Cruelty, killing and otherwise mistreating animals.
It is unlawful for any person to maliciously kill, maim or wound an animal, the property of another, or for any person having the charge or custody of any animal, to subject any animal to needless suffering or to inflict any unnecessary cruelty upon the same; or, in any manner, to abuse an animal or fail to provide the same with proper food, drink, veterinary care, shelter or protection from the weather; or to cruelly drive, ride or otherwise use the same when unfit for labor. No person shall intentionally annoy, harass, or taunt any confined animal within the city. No person shall kill or injure any wild birds within the city; provided however, this section shall not apply to the destruction of English sparrows, starlings and feral pigeons. (Code 1960, § 5-11; Ord. No. 3927, § 7, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-10. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Former § 8-10 was repealed by Ord. No. 4095, § 1, adopted April 4, 1994. Said section related to killing birds, and was derived from the 1960 Code, § 5-13; and Ord. No. 3368, § 5, adopted May 23, 1977.

Sec. 8-11. Terms defined.
Animal: As defined by Idaho Code, Section 18-2112.

Cruelty: Includes every act, omission or neglect, whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering is caused or permitted.

Dangerous animal: Any animal (excluding dogs; see section 8-22) which has previously attacked or bitten any person or persons or other animal without cause or which has behaved in such manner that the person who harbors or keeps said animal knows or should reasonably know the animal is possessed of tendencies to attack or bite persons; also includes any animal whose temperament or habits create a reasonable apprehension of injury to persons or other animals.

Livestock: Any animal normally kept for breeding, product or work including but not limited to cow, calf, ox, steer, bull, horse, mare, colt, stallion, mule, jack, jenny, hog, pig, goat, kid, llama, sheep, lamb or rabbit.

Torment: Includes every act, omission or neglect, whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering is caused or permitted.

Torture: Includes every act, omission or neglect, whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering is caused or permitted.

Wild animal: Any live monkey or ape, raccoon, skunk, fox, snake or other reptile, leopard, wolf, coyote, panther, tiger, bear, lion, lynx or any other animal or any bird of prey which can be normally found in a wild state. (Ord. No. 3927, § 8, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 3994, § 4, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-12. Wild or dangerous animals.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild or dangerous animal for display or exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed to apply to humane research programs, zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions or circuses.

(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, or permit to be kept, any wild animal as a pet, unless a permit has been granted by the director of the departments of fish and game of the state for said animal.

(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or to keep a dangerous animal within the city. Any animal which has attacked or bitten any person or other animal, without cause, may be seized by any police officer or other citizen. Upon establishment, to the satisfaction of any court of competent jurisdiction, of the vicious character, said animal may be destroyed by a police officer or other agent of the city, county or state. Provided, however, this section shall not apply to animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency, nor to animals which are kept for the protection of property; provided that such animals are restrained by a cage, fence, or other adequate means from contact with the general public or with persons who enter the premises with the actual or implied permission of the owner or occupant and from any children who may wander onto the property; furthermore, that notices of the presence of such animal are conspicuously displayed, whereby the same may be seen by passing persons within the vicinity where such animal may be kept.

(d) Any person owning or harboring any wild animal or dangerous animal shall be strictly liable for damages caused by said animal.

(e) The chief of police (or designee) shall have the power to order an investigation pertaining to the harboring of any dangerous animal and shall have the power to order the destruction of any dangerous animal. The chief may cause the dangerous animal to be taken into custody, which action shall set forth the basis for the determination that the animal is dangerous. A notice of this decision shall be left at the residence of the owner or may be served in such other manner deemed adequate by the chief. The owner of the animal shall then have two (2) days (excluding weekends and holidays) to file a written appeal of the decision with the chief of police. The appeal shall be heard by a three-member commission selected by the police department from a nine-person pool or a two-year term within five (5) days (excluding weekends and holidays) of the appeal. Such appeal shall be a de novo hearing, and the appellant shall have due process rights similar to those available in city personnel hearings.

(f) In determining whether an animal is dangerous, the fact finder may consider past incidents, provocation for the bite, whether the attack occurred on the premises where the animal resided, the legal status of the victim on the premises and any other fact or allegation which might have justified the attack.

(g) The written decision of the commission on appeal shall be final (unless stayed by court action) and shall be implemented, unless the decision is appealed to the district court within two (2) days (excluding weekends and holidays).

(h) Any impoundment fees incurred during this period shall be paid for by the owner of the animal except when said animal is found not dangerous on appeal or by a competent court. (Ord. No. 3927, § 9, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 3994, § 5, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Secs. 8-13 – 8-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. DOGS2
Sec. 8-21. Findings of fact; authority.
The city council of the city of Lewiston, Idaho, hereby finds and declares that dogs running at large within the city constitute an immediate danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city; that unneutered dogs contribute more severely to problems of dogs running at large and resultant problems of impoundment and disposal than do neutered dogs, thereby justifying different treatment and impoundment fees for unneutered dogs than for neutered dogs; and that it is within the police powers of the city, granted by Article 12, Section 2, Idaho Constitution, and Idaho Code, Section 50-319, to legislate for the control, including the licensing and impoundment, of dogs for the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. No. 3431, § 1, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and terms shall mean:

Allow: To permit by neglecting to restrain or prevent.

Animal control officer: Any person designated by the chief of police to carry out the provisions of this article.

Animal shelter: Any premises designated by the city for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under the authority of this article.

At large: To be off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner or another person.

Bite: Any aggressive or voluntary closure by an animal’s mouth causing a redness, breaking or tearing of the skin of any person or which damages or destroys the personal property of another.

Chief of police: The chief of the police department of the city of Lewiston or any other person acting under his orders or direction.

Dangerous dog: Any dog which exhibits a known inclination or tendency to attack or bite a person or persons or other animal or damage property without cause, or which has behaved in such manner that the person who harbors said dog knows or should know that the dog exhibits such tendencies to bite or harm persons or other animals or destroy property, may be declared a dangerous dog. A dog shall be determined dangerous and assigned a level of dangerousness according to the following guidelines:

Level 1 behavior: Level 1 behavior is established if a dog, while at large, is found to menace, chase and display threatening or aggressive behavior or otherwise threaten or endanger the safety of any person, domestic animal or fowl.

Level 2 behavior: Level 2 behavior is established if a dog, whether or not under control, aggressively bites any person, domestic animal or fowl, or maliciously damages or destroys the personal property of another.

Level 3 behavior: Level 3 behavior is established if:

(1) Any dog, whether or not under control, causes the serious injury or death of any person; or

(2) Any dog, while at large, kills any domestic animal or fowl; or

(3) Any dog engages in or is found to have been trained to engage in exhibitions of fighting; or

(4) There are repeat violations of level 2 behavior by a dog declared/determined to be a level 2 dangerous dog.

Dogs used in law enforcement shall be excluded from this section.

Dog: Any member, male or female, of the family canis familiaris.

Dog under control: A dog secured by a leash or lead not exceeding eight (8) feet in length and by a responsible person, or confined within a vehicle or confined within the boundaries of its owner’s real property.

Harboring: The keeping of any dog. The occupant of any premises on which a dog remains, or to which it customarily returns daily for food and care, for three (3) consecutive days or more is presumed to be harboring or keeping the dog for the purposes of this article.

Kennel: Any lot or premises or portion thereof, other than a veterinary office or animal shelter, grooming facility, or pet shop on which four (4) or more dogs are maintained, harbored, possessed, boarded, bred or cared for in return for compensation or kept for sale.

Leash: A cord, thong, leash or chain, not more than eight (8) feet in length, by which a dog is controlled by the person accompanying it.

Neutered dog: Male or female dogs rendered incapable of reproducing offspring. Proof of such sterilization must be evidenced by an acknowledgment of the owner.

Officer: Any police officer or any person designated by the chief of police as an animal control officer.

Owner, custodian or keeper: Any person, including any firm, association, partnership or corporation or their agents, or persons acting with their permission, owning, keeping or harboring a dog.

Premises: All of the real property under a person’s or persons’ ownership, lease or control inside the inner line of a sidewalk; or, if there is no sidewalk, inside the curb, ditch or shoulder marking the edge of the traveled or used portion of the public right-of-way. “Premises” also includes the inside of a closed motor vehicle.

Veterinary clinic or hospital: Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for the boarding of animals or the diagnosis, treatment and care of diseased or injured animals. (Ord. No. 3431, § 2, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 3479, § 4, 1-2-79; Ord. No. 3911, § 1, 1-18-88; Ord. No. 3927, § 10, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-23. License required.
The keeping of any dog within the city is hereby forbidden and unlawful, unless the owner, custodian, keeper or person harboring the dog shall procure a license from the city for such dog. The license shall be obtained from any person authorized by the city manager to act as an agent for the city for the sale and distribution of dog licenses. This provision shall not apply to a dog under six (6) months of age; nor shall it apply to a nonresident keeping a dog within the city for no longer than sixty (60) days; nor shall it apply to the keeping of any dog within a properly licensed kennel, as provided for in section 8-34 of this article. In any prosecution for a violation of this section, the absence of a tag to be appended to a dog, as provided in section 8-27 of this article, excluding dogs used in law enforcement, shall be prima facie evidence that the dog has not been legally licensed. No prosecution for a violation of this section shall be commenced prior to March 1st of any calendar year. Whenever any person, after applying for and receiving a city dog license, shall move from the address named in such application, such person shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, notify the deputy treasurer of the city in writing of such address change. (Ord. No. 3431, § 3, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 3479, § 1, 1-2-79; Ord. No. 3735, § 1, 3-19-84; Ord. No. 3927, § 11, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 4320, § 1, 6-23-03)

Sec. 8-24. Information required.
No license or renewal license shall be issued for any dog over three (3) months of age until the applicant shall show the age, breed, sex, color, and other identifying characteristics of the dog for which the license is sought. In addition to identifying characteristics, no license or renewal license shall be issued unless the owner can provide proof of a rabies vaccination within three years of the date of the license application. (Ord. No. 3431, § 4, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 3479, § 2, 1-2-79; Ord. No. 3927, § 12, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 3994, § 6, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 4320, § 2, 6-23-03)

Sec. 8-25. Annual license fee.
(a) After providing the information required in section 8-24 of this article, the license fee for dogs for each calendar year or part thereof shall be as follows:

Per year, registered seeing
eye dog

No charge

Per year, neutered dog

$ 8.00

Per year, unneutered dog

25.00

For lifetime license, neutered dog

25.00

For lifetime license, unneutered dog

50.00

Dangerous dog

100.00

Replacement tag (including dogs licensed elsewhere and for which license is applied for within sixty (60) days of locating within the city)

2.00

Kennel, per year

25.00

(b) All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year for which they are issued. A license for the succeeding calendar year can be obtained prior to the expiration of the current year’s license but shall not be effective until the expiration of the current license. No part of any dog license fee shall be refundable. (Ord. No. 3431, § 5, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 3479, § 3, 1-2-79; Ord. No. 3513, § 1, 12-10-79; Ord. No. 3927, § 13, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94; Ord. No. 4119, § 1, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4320, § 3, 6-23-03)

Sec. 8-26. Veterinary hospital and animal shelter exempt from license requirement.
No dog license fee pursuant to section 8-25 above shall be required of any veterinary clinic or veterinary hospital or of any dog belonging to a law enforcement agency acting within the city limits. Animal shelters under contract with the city shall be exempt from individual dog licensing under section 8-25. (Ord. No. 3431, § 6, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 3927, § 14, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-27. License tag – Issuance; duration; duplicates.
Upon payment of the required license fee, and upon proof of required rabies inoculation, the city treasurer or designate shall issue a license to the person applying therefor, which license shall remain in force until December 31st of that year. The treasurer shall furnish with such license a metal tag which shall be stamped with a number corresponding to the number of such license and the year for which it is issued. Such tag shall be appended to a collar to be worn by the dog at all times. If a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate tag shall be issued upon a showing of payment of the license fee for the current year and the payment of two dollars ($2.00) for a duplicate tag. (Ord. No. 3431, § 7, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-28. Same – Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, steal, mutilate, or destroy the license identification tag of any dog. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to show or exhibit, at any reasonable time, to any animal control officer or police officer any dog in his or her possession or custody, or to show any license or identification tag issued therefor. (Ord. No. 3431, § 8, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-29. Same – Transfer of ownership.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any license tag for any dog other than the one for which it is issued. If there is a change of ownership of a licensed dog, the new owner shall apply for and obtain a new license. (Ord. No. 3431, § 9, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-30. Revocation of license.
(a) The city treasurer may, after ten (10) days’ written notice, revoke any license if the person holding the license fails or refuses to comply with any provision of this article.

(b) Any person whose license is revoked shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, remove the dog from the city or humanely dispose of the dog, and no part of the license fee shall be refunded.

(c) It shall be a condition of the issuance of any dog license that any police officer or animal control officer shall be permitted to inspect all dogs, at any reasonable time, and, if permission for such inspection is refused, the dog license shall be revoked.

(d) The withholding or falsification of any required information on an application shall be grounds for refusal to issue a license or for revocation of a license which has been issued.

(e) A person who has been denied a license may reapply for a license, but shall pay an additional ten dollar ($10.00) fee therefor. (Ord. No. 3431, § 10, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-31. Dogs at large.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, or allow a dog or dogs, owned, harbored, controlled, or kept by him or her, to roam, run, or stray away from the premises in which the dog or dogs are owned, harbored, controlled, or kept, except where the dog or dogs are kept under control by means of a leash or chain not exceeding eight (8) feet in length by the owner or other person. A leash or chain shall not be required for a dog which is securely confined in any vehicle. Every female dog in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog cannot come in contact with another dog except for planned breeding. (Ord. No. 3431, § 11, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-32. Offenses.
No person owning, harboring, controlling or keeping any dog shall permit the dog to do any of the following acts:

(1) Behavior described in levels 1 through 3 (see definition for “dangerous dog” in section 8-22).

(2) Scatter garbage, refuse or debris.

(3) Chase any person, vehicle or animal.

(4) Deposit fecal material on any property not that of its owner or custodian without the owner or custodian immediately removing it.

(5) Bark, howl or otherwise cause noise which disturbs or is likely to disturb the peace and quiet of any person.

(6) Trespass upon the property of another person. (Ord. No. 3431, § 12, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 3927, § 15, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-33. Prohibited acts.
(a) No person shall keep or harbor within the city any dog whose behavior is established to be level 3, as defined in section 8-22 above.

(b) No person shall keep, harbor or maintain a dog or dogs within the city in such a manner that the keeping of the same results in a nauseous, foul or offensive condition.

(c) No owner or custodian of a dog shall fail to provide it with adequate food, water, shelter and necessary veterinary care which shall include a rabies vaccination every three (3) years.

(d) No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat or abuse any dog.

(e) No person shall train any dog to exhibit level 3 behavior as defined by this code. (Ord. No. 3431, § 13, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 3927, § 16, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 3994, § 7, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-34. Kennels.
No person shall operate or maintain a kennel, except as authorized by the zoning ordinance, within the city of Lewiston, without first obtaining a license therefor. (Ord. No. 3431, § 14, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 3889, § 4, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 3911, § 2, 1-18-88; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-35. Impoundment generally.
Any dog found without a license or running at large, or in violation of any other provision of this article, may be impounded and placed in an animal shelter. Any officer taking such action or receiving an impounded dog shall make a registry of such action, entering the breed, color and sex of such dog and any available license information. If the dog is licensed, an entry shall be made showing the name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag. If the owner is known or may be determined, the officer may, as an alternative, or in addition, to impoundment, issue to the owner or keeper of the dog an infraction citation and complaint in the form and manner prescribed by law. (Ord. No. 3431, § 15, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-36. Interference with impoundment.
(a) No person shall interfere with, hinder, delay or impede a police officer or animal control officer in the enforcement of the provisions of this article.

(b) No person shall falsely represent to any police officer or animal control officer his or her address, nonownership of impounded dogs or other required information. (Ord. No. 3431, § 16, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-37. Disposition of dangerous dogs.
Whenever it shall reasonably appear to an officer, attempting to impound a dog under the provisions of this article, that such dog is dangerous to other persons and if capture cannot be effected safely and promptly, said officer is authorized to destroy the dog. (Ord. No. 3431, § 17, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-38. Notice of impounding.
Not later than forty-eight (48) hours after the impounding of any dog, the owner, keeper or lawful custodian of the dog, if known, shall be notified in person of said impoundment. After notice, the owners, keeper or lawful custodian of the dog shall have four (4) days to redeem or file a notice of appeal for said dog, describing the animal and the place and time of taking. If the said dog is unclaimed, or an appeal is not filed after notice is given, the dog will be subject to the provisions of section 8-40, disposition of unclaimed dogs. If the owner, keeper or lawful custodian of the dog is unknown, written notice describing said dog shall be posted for not less than five (5) calendar days at the animal shelter. Notice shall include whether the dog has been declared dangerous and the level of dangerousness assigned. (Ord. No. 3431, § 18, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 3927, § 17, 11-17-88; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-39. Redemption of impounded dogs.
The owner, keeper or lawful custodian of any dog impounded under the provisions of this article may reclaim such dog within six (6) days, or, if the dog is under quarantine restrictions, ten (10) days; provided that said dog shall be released to the owner or custodian only upon payment of the dog license fee, if unpaid, and all impoundment charges and costs of maintaining said dog, which charges shall be as follows:

Within any Twelve-Month Period

Licensed Dog

Unlicensed Dog

First impoundment

$ 15.00

$ 30.00

Second impoundment

50.00

65.00

Third impoundment

75.00

95.00

Fourth impoundment

100.00

115.00

Fifth impoundment

125.00

140.00

In addition to the above impoundment charges, the owner, keeper or custodian reclaiming a dog shall pay all kennel and board fees and any veterinarian fees incurred by the animal shelter. (Ord. No. 3431, § 19, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 3927, § 18, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-40. Disposition of unclaimed dogs.
All impounded dogs, if unclaimed, shall be kept six (6) days. If, at the expiration of such time, such animal shall not have been reclaimed, the animal may be placed in a suitable home or be humanely euthanized. Except in the case of dangerous or diseased dogs and untreated dogs infected with fleas, ticks, lice, or mange, dogs not reclaimed after the expiration of six (6) days may be released to any person desiring to take the dog and provide it with shelter and veterinary care, upon obtaining a license, as provided by this article, and the payment of fees and charges. If the dog is released to any person other than the owner, the person to whom the dog is released shall be deemed a purchaser of such dog; and all rights and interest of the former owner in said dog shall terminate. (Ord. No. 3431, § 20, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 3927, § 19, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-41. Quarantine.
Any dog which bites and breaks the skin of any person shall be quarantined for ten (10) days at the Lewis Clark Animal Shelter or a veterinary clinic or hospital. The owner shall be responsible for all costs of quarantine. Such dog shall be securely confined within an enclosure from which it cannot escape and which is not accessible to the public. The animal control officer shall maintain a record of every animal which bites a person without provocation. (Ord. No. 3431, § 21, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 3927, § 20, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 3994, § 8, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-42. Destruction of dangerous or diseased dogs.
Any dangerous dog impounded under the provisions of this article, or any animal which has bitten any person and, after examination by a veterinarian, is found to have rabies or other disease rendering said animal dangerous to persons, shall be destroyed. (Ord. No. 3431, § 22, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 3927, § 21, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-43. Offenses; civil infractions and misdemeanors; penalties.
(a) Any person or entity which violates the provisions of sections:

8-2, Running at large;

8-7, Driving herds through city;

8-27, Dog license required;

8-28, License tag – Prohibited acts;

8-29, License tag – Transfer of ownership;

8-31, Dogs at large;

8-32(2) – (6), Acts prohibited;
shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction and for each violation shall be fined not to exceed the sum of forty-five dollars ($45.00). In lieu of a court appearance any person or entity charged with having committed a civil infraction prohibited by the provisions set forth in this subsection may forfeit to the Nez Perce County Court a penalty in the sum of forty-five dollars ($45.00).

(b) The violation by any person or entity of the following sections shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00), or imprisonment for not to exceed six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment:

8-9, Cruelty, killing and otherwise mistreating animals;

8-12, Wild or dangerous animals;

8-32(1), Dangerous dog;

8-33, Prohibited acts;

8-34, Kennel license required;

8-36, Interference with impoundment;

8-45, Dangerous dog registration;

8-47(a), Other acts prohibited;

8-47(b), Abandonment of animal.

 

Minimum

Maximum

First offense

$ 150.00

$ 300.00

Second offense

200.00

300.00

Third offense

250.00

300.00

Fourth and subsequent offenses

300.00

300.00

(Ord. No. 3431, § 23, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 3927, § 22, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-44. Additional remedies.
Any violation of this article which continues for more than twenty-four (24) hours is hereby declared to be a public nuisance; and, in addition to any other civil or criminal remedies, the city may cause such condition to be abated in the manner provided by law. (Ord. No. 3431, § 24, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-45. Dangerous dog registration.
(a) No owner may keep a dangerous dog, except a dog used by law enforcement officers for police work, without a certificate of registration issued under this chapter. The certificate of registration shall be acquired within fourteen (14) days from the incident giving rise to the classification or within fourteen (14) days of termination of any criminal action.

(b) No dog which has been declared or determined a dangerous dog or has exhibited level 2 behavior (see definition of “dangerous dog” in section 8-22) outside the Lewiston city boundaries shall be retained within the city limits without a dangerous dog certificate of registration. Official records from appropriate enforcement agencies may be used to establish the character of any dog being brought within the boundaries of the city.

(c) The animal control authority of the city shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog upon payment of the fee set forth in section 8-25 if the owner presents to the authority sufficient evidence of:

(1) A proper enclosure to confine a dangerous dog; and

(2) The posting of the premises with a clearly visible warning sign that there is a dangerous dog on the property, and a sign with a warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a dangerous dog; and

(3) A surety bond issued by a surety insurer, qualified under the Idaho Code, in a form acceptable to the animal control authority, in the sum of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog; or

(4) A policy of liability insurance, such as homeowner’s insurance, issued by an insurer, qualified under the Idaho Code, in the amount of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog. (Ord. No. 3927, § 23, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 3994, § 9, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-46. Appeal.
(a) The owner of a dog declared to be dangerous shall have three (3) days (excluding weekends and holidays) to file a written appeal of the declaration with the chief of police for termination of criminal action. The chief of police (or designee) shall have the power to order an investigation pertaining to the harboring of any dangerous dog and shall have the power to order the destruction of any dog. The chief, or his designee, may cause the dangerous dog to be taken into custody for destruction, which action shall set the basis for the determination that the dog is dangerous. Notice of this decision shall be given to the owner, keeper or lawful custodian in writing, as provided for in section 8-38. The owner of the dog shall then have two (2) days (excluding weekends and holidays) to file a written appeal of the decision with the chief of police. The appeal shall be heard by a three-member commission selected by the police department from a nine-person pool for a two-year term within five (5) days (excluding weekends and holidays) of the appeal. Such appeal shall be a de novo hearing and the appellant shall have due process rights similar to those available in city personnel hearings.

(b) In determining whether a dog is dangerous, the fact finder shall consider past incidents, provocation for the bite, whether the attack occurred on the premises where the dog resided, the legal status of the victim on the premises and any other fact or allegation which might have justified the attack.

(c) The written decision of the city manager (or other officer) on appeal shall be final (unless stayed by court action) and shall be implemented, unless the decision is appealed to the local district court within two (2) days (excluding weekends and holidays).

(d) Any impoundment fees incurred during this period shall be paid for by the owner of the dog, except when said dog is found not dangerous on appeal or by a competent court. (Ord. No. 3927, § 24, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 3994, § 10, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-47. Other acts prohibited under articles I and II of this chapter.
(a) No person shall willfully open any door or gate on any private premises or unleash or coax away any dog or animal for the purpose of enticing or enabling any dog or other animal to leave such private premises and be at large as defined in section 8-22.

(b) No persons shall abandon any dog, cat or other animal by dropping off or leaving such animal on any public street, alley, sidewalk or in any city park or playground, or other public place or building, or on the premises of another. (Ord. No. 3927, § 25, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 4-4-94)

Sec. 8-48. Dog parks.
(a) This section applies to all dog parks located within the city limits that are operated by the city of Lewiston.

(b) All dog parks shall be open during daylight hours, from sunrise to sunset.

(c) Use of the dog parks shall be at each individual’s own risk. Dog owners and handlers shall be responsible for the actions and behavior of dogs under their care and control and shall be liable for any damage or injury inflicted by dogs under their care and control. The city of Lewiston shall not be liable or responsible for any damage or injury that occurs in a dog park. Dog park users assume all risk associated with use of a dog park and shall hold the city of Lewiston, its officers, agents, and employees harmless for any injury or damage caused by dogs or humans while accessing or using a dog park.

(d) The following rules apply to all dog parks operated by the city of Lewiston:

(1) All dogs must be on a leash and collar while entering and exiting the dog park. Dogs are not required to be on a leash while in the fenced area of the dog park.

(2) Dogs must be under the control of the owner or handler at all times. Dog owners and handlers must be physically capable of controlling their dogs and must prevent aggressive behavior, biting, fighting, and aggressive biting.

(3) Dogs showing any aggression must be leashed and immediately removed from the dog park. Dogs with a known history of aggressive or dangerous behavior are prohibited from the dog park.

(4) Each person aged thirteen (13) years and older may have up to a maximum of two (2) dogs in the dog park at any given time.

(5) Dog owners and handlers shall carry one (1) leash per dog under their control.

(6) No dog may be left unattended in the dog park. Dogs must be within view and voice control of the owner or handler at all times.

(7) Dogs under six (6) months of age are not allowed in the dog park.

(8) Dogs must have current vaccinations and license.

(9) Dogs must be healthy and free of contagious diseases and parasites.

(10) Appropriate dog toys are allowed, but dog toys that are edible, such as rawhides and bones, are not allowed in the dog park.

(11) Dogs in heat are not allowed in the dog park.

(12) Dog owners and handlers shall pick up and dispose of their dog’s waste.

(13) Dog owners and handlers shall repair any damage caused by their dog, such as holes dug by their dog.

(14) Animals other than dogs are not allowed in the dog park.

(15) The small dog enclosure is only for dogs weighing less than thirty (30) pounds. No large dogs are permitted in the small dog enclosure.

(16) The large dog enclosure is for dogs weighing thirty (30) pounds or more. Small dogs are allowed in the large dog enclosure at their own risk.

(17) All children twelve (12) years of age and younger must be accompanied and supervised by an adult aged eighteen (18) years or older at all times while in the dog park.

(18) The dog park is subject to closure upon determination by the city that there is a reason deemed to be in the public’s interest or safety, or for maintenance purposes.

(19) Any person who violates these rules may be removed from the dog park and/or prohibited from returning to or using the dog park. (Ord. No. 4639, § 1, 11-30-15)

1
Cross reference – Animals on airport property, § 5-64.

State law reference – Powers of cities, Idaho Code, § 50-319.


2
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3431, § 25, enacted March 20, 1978, repealed former Art. II, relative to dogs. Sections 1 – 24 of said ordinance are included herein as a new Art. II, §§ 8-21 – 8-44. Former Art. II was derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 5-14 – 5-16.1, 5-18 – 5-24.1, 5-26 – 5-35; Ord. No. 3216, § 1, adopted June 17, 1974; Ord. No. 3353, § 1, adopted March 14, 1977; and Ord. No. 3368, §§ 6 – 14, adopted May 23, 1977.


Chapter 9
BOATS AND PLEASURE CRAFT1
1
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4027, § 1, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed Ch. 9, boats and pleasure craft, in its entirety. Former §§ 9-1, 9-2, 9-16 – 9-34, derived from Ch. 30A of the 1960 Code as amended by Ord. No. 2342.


Chapter 10
BUILDINGS AND GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS1
Sec. 10-1. Code adoption.
(a) The approved editions of the following codes as adopted by the state of Idaho, together with any amendments or revisions to the following codes as made by the state of Idaho through the negotiated rulemaking process, are adopted as the building codes for the city of Lewiston, except as provided in the section amendments:

(1) 2015 International Building Code (IBC).

(2) 2015 International Energy Conservation Code (IECC).

(3) 2012 International Mechanical Code (IMC).

(4) 2012 International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC).

(5) 2015 Idaho State Plumbing Code (ISPC) as published in 2017.

(6) 2017 National Electrical Code (NEC).

(7) 2015 International Existing Building Code (IEBC).

(8) 2012 International Residential Code (IRC).

(9) 2015 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC).

(10) 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC).

(b) The adopted versions of the foregoing codes shall be deemed superseded by successive versions of such codes as they are adopted or approved by the state of Idaho, effective on the date any such codes are made effective by Idaho Code, Title 39, Chapter 41.

(c) IBC Section 113, as amended by the city of Lewiston, pertaining to the code board of appeals, shall apply to the foregoing codes.

(d) IBC Section 104, pertaining to authority having jurisdiction, shall apply to the foregoing codes.

(e) IBC Section 114.4, as amended by the city of Lewiston, pertaining to violations and penalties, shall apply to the foregoing codes.

(f) IBC Section 109.4, as amended by the city of Lewiston, pertaining to work commencing before permit issuance, shall apply to the foregoing codes.

(g) Definitions not otherwise identified in corresponding code shall be defined by the latest version of the Merriam-Webster dictionary.

(h) The following methods for serving notice shall apply to the adopted versions of the foregoing codes:

(1) Personal delivery; such notice shall be deemed delivered immediately; or

(2) Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; such notice shall be deemed delivered forty-eight (48) hours after depositing the same in the U.S. mail.

(3) If notice is returned undelivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice, and such notice shall be deemed delivered twenty-four (24) hours after such notice is posted. (Ord. No. 4557, § 2, 12-13-10; Ord. No. 4592, § 1, 1-14-13; Ord. No. 4602, § 1, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4620, § 1, 2-23-15; Ord. No. 4707, § 2, 11-27-17)

Sec. 10-2. International Building Code (IBC) – Amendments.
The IBC, compiled by the International Code Council, adopted by section 10-1 of this code, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) Chapter 1, Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lewiston.

(2) Chapter 1, Section 101.4.3, Plumbing, is amended to the Idaho State Plumbing Code (ISPC); the referenced International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be deleted and repealed in its entirety.

(3) Chapter 1, Section 103.1, Creation of enforcement agency, is hereby amended to read as follows:

103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The division of building safety is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official.

(4) Chapter 1, Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit, is hereby amended by adding new Section 105.2.14 as follows:

14. Permits shall not be required for replacement of siding. It remains the owner and contractor’s responsibility to ensure all code requirements are met. Inspection of siding may be requested and shall be charged at the hourly rate for special inspections.

(5) Chapter 1, Section 109.2, is hereby amended by adding new Section 109.2.1 as follows:

109.2.1 Building fees.

All building fees shall be set by resolution of the Lewiston City Council.

(6) Chapter 1, Section 109.2.2, Plan review fee, is hereby amended to read as follows:

109.2.2 Plan review fee.

When submittal documents are required by Section 107.1, a plan review fee shall be paid upon application for a permit. Said plan review fee shall be sixty-five (65) percent of the building permit fee as set by resolution of the Lewiston City Council. Plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 109.2.1 and are in addition to the permit fees. When submitted documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittals items as defined in Section 107.3.4.1 or 107.4, an additional plan review fee shall be charged as set by resolution of the Lewiston City Council.

(7) Chapter 1, Section 109.3, Building permit valuations, is adopted in its entirety and amended with the addition of a second paragraph as follows:

In order to establish a building permit valuation the division of building safety shall use square foot construction cost figures listed in the annual August/September building valuation data table printed in the Building Safety Journal published by the International Code Council. Square foot cost figures shall be used for all occupancy classifications and type of construction included in the published table. For types of work not included in the published table the valuation shall be determined by the building official.

(8) Chapter 1, Section 109.4, Work commencing before permit issuance, is hereby amended by adding the following:

Any person who allows and/or commences any work on a building, structure, fire system, electrical system, gas system, mechanical system, or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permit(s) as required in the International Building Code, International Fire Code, or applicable referenced codes shall be subject to a special investigation. A special investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be two (2) times the amount of the permit fee set by resolution of the Lewiston City Council for the first offense in any twelve (12) month period. For the second offense in any twelve (12) month period, the investigation fee shall be three (3) times the amount of the permit fee set by resolution of the Lewiston City Council. For the third offense in any twelve (12) month period, the investigation fee shall be four (4) times the amount of the permit fee set by resolution of the Lewiston City Council. Subsequent offenses shall be referred to prosecution, as set forth in Section 114.4 Violation Penalties.

(9) Chapter 1, Section 109.7, is hereby amended by adding the following:

109.7 Special accessibility fees, such as for removing barriers in existing buildings and installing energy efficiency upgrades, shall be set by resolution of the Lewiston City Council.

(10) Chapter 1, Section 113, is hereby amended to read as follows:

(1) In order to hear and decide appeals of written orders or decisions made by the building official relative to the application of this code and the other codes adopted by the city, as set forth in section 10-1 of the Lewiston City Code, or written orders or decisions made by the fire marshal relative to the application of the International Fire Code, as adopted by the city, there shall be and is hereby created a code board of appeals.

Members of the code board of appeals shall be appointed in accordance with Chapter 2, Article XIII of the Lewiston City Code. A majority of the appointed members of the code board of appeals shall constitute a quorum for all meetings of the code board of appeals. The building official shall act as secretary of the code board of appeals.

The code board of appeals shall consist of seven (7) members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction, hazards of fire, explosions, hazardous conditions, and/or fire protection systems. Employees of the city shall not be appointed members of the code board of appeals. The fire marshal shall be ex officio member of the code board of appeals, but shall not be a voting member.

(2) The code board of appeals shall have no authority relative to the interpretation of the administrative provisions of the codes under its jurisdiction, nor shall the code board of appeals be empowered to waive the requirements of any code, nor shall the code board of appeals supersede authority specifically granted or assigned to the fire chief.

(3) Notwithstanding paragraph (2) above, on an appeal brought to the code board of appeals, the code board of appeals may exercise any and all discretionary powers in consideration of alternate methods of compliance when that discretion is specifically granted to the building official by the codes adopted by the city.

(4) A person aggrieved by a written order or decision made by the building official or the fire marshal may appeal such written order or decision to the code board of appeals by filing a written notice of appeal with the building official or the fire marshal, as applicable within thirty (30) days of receipt of the building official’s or fire marshal’s written order or decision. A notice of appeal of the building official’s or fire marshal’s written order or decision shall be made on a form prescribed by the building official or fire marshal, as applicable. Such forms may be obtained from the Community Development Department or Lewiston Fire Department.

The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for appeal. An application for appeal of the fire marshal’s or building official’s written order or decision shall be based on a claim that the intent of the applicable code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the applicable code do not fully apply, or an equivalent method of construction, protection, or safety is proposed.

The code board of appeals shall hold a hearing on the appeal within twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal. The appellant shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel at the hearing and rebut any evidence that is submitted. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The code board of appeals shall issue a written decision on the appeal within fifteen (15) calendar days after the hearing, and such decision shall be final.

An appeal (other than an appeal of an emergency order) shall stay the enforcement of the written order until the appeal is heard and a decision is rendered.

A person aggrieved by a final decision of the code board of appeals is entitled to judicial review only as provided by law.

(11) Chapter 1, Section 114.4, Violation, penalties, is hereby amended to read as follows:

114.4 Violation, penalties. Any person who violates a provision of the applicable code, or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1-7 of the Lewiston City Code.

(12) Chapter 16, Section 1612.3. Insert: “City of Lewiston” and “July 20, 1981.”

(13) Chapter 17, Section 1705.17, is hereby amended to read as follows:

1705.17 Fire-resistant penetrations and joints. In high-rise buildings, in buildings with more than four (4) dwelling units, in buildings with mixed occupancy containing dwelling units, or in buildings assigned to Risk Category III or IV, special inspections for through-penetrations, membrane penetration firestops, fire-resistant joint systems, and perimeter fire barrier systems that are tested and listed in accordance with Sections 714.3.1.2, 714.4.2, 715.3, and 715.4 shall be in accordance with Section 1705.17.1 or 1705.17.2.

(Ord. No. 4557, § 2, 12-13-10; Ord. No. 4592, § 1, 1-14-13; Ord. No. 4602, § 1, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4620, § 2, 2-23-15; Ord. No. 4684, § 1, 9-11-17; Ord. No. 4707, § 3, 11-27-17)

Sec. 10-3. International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) – Amendments.
The IECC, compiled by the International Code Council, adopted by section 10-1 of this code, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) Chapter 1, Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lewiston.

(2) Chapter 1, Section C109, is deleted and repealed in its entirety. (Ord. No. 4557, § 2, 12-13-10; Ord. No. 4602, § 1, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4620, § 3, 2-23-15; Ord. No. 4707, § 4, 11-27-17)

Sec. 10-4. International Mechanical Code (IMC) – Amendments.
The IMC, compiled by the International Code Council, adopted by section 10-1 of this code, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) Chapter 1, Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lewiston.

(2) Chapter 1, Section 106.5.1, is deleted and repealed in its entirety and replaced with IBC Section 109.4 (Work commencing before permit issuance).

(3) Chapter 1, Section 106.5.2. Insert:

Permit fees. A fee for each permit shall be paid as required, as set by resolution of the Lewiston City Council.

(4) Chapter 1, Section 106.5.3.2. Insert: 80.

(5) Chapter 1, Section 106.5.3.3. Insert: 80.

(6) Chapter 1, Section 109, is deleted and repealed in its entirety. (Ord. No. 4557, § 2, 12-13-10; Ord. No. 4602, § 1, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4620, § 4, 2-23-15; Ord. No. 4684, § 2, 9-11-17; Ord. No. 4707, § 5, 11-27-17)

Sec. 10-5. International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC) – Amendments.
The IFGC, compiled by the International Code Council, adopted by section 10-1 of this code, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) Chapter 1, Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lewiston.

(2) Chapter 1, Section 106.6.1, is deleted and repealed in its entirety and replaced with IBC Section 109.4 (Work commencing before permit issuance).

(3) Chapter 1, Section 106.5.2. Insert:

Permit fees. A fee for each permit shall be paid as required, as set by resolution of the Lewiston City Council.

(4) Chapter 1, Section 106.6.3.2. Insert: 80.

(5) Chapter 1, Section 106.6.3.3. Insert: 80.

(6) Chapter 1, Section 109, is deleted and repealed in its entirety. (Ord. No. 4557, § 2, 12-13-10; Ord. No. 4602, § 1, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4620, § 5, 2-23-15; Ord. No. 4684, § 3, 9-11-17; Ord. No. 4707, § 6, 11-27-17)

Sec. 10-6. Idaho State Plumbing Code (ISPC) – Amendments.
The ISPC, compiled by International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), adopted by section 10-1 of this code, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) Section 104.5, Fees, of the ISPC is hereby amended to read as follows:

Permit fees. A fee for each permit shall be paid as required, as set by resolution of the Lewiston City Council.

(2) Section 104.5.2 is deleted and repealed in its entirety and replaced with IBC Section 109.4 (Work commencing before permit issuance). (Ord. No. 4557, § 2, 12-13-10; Ord. No. 4592, § 1, 1-14-13; Ord. No. 4602, § 1, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4620, § 6, 2-23-15; Ord. No. 4684, § 4, 9-11-17; Ord. No. 4707, § 7, 11-27-17)

Sec. 10-7. National Electrical Code (NEC) – Amendments.
The NEC and Annex H, compiled by the NFPA, adopted by section 10-1 of this code, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) Annex H, Section 80.15, is deleted and repealed in its entirety.

(2) Annex H, Section 80.23, is deleted and repealed in its entirety.

(3) Annex H, Section 80.27, is deleted and repealed in its entirety and replaced with Idaho Code, Title 54, Chapter 10. (Ord. No. 4557, § 2, 12-13-10; Ord. No. 4592, § 1, 1-14-13; Ord. No. 4602, § 1, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4620, § 7, 2-23-15; Ord. No. 4707, § 8, 11-27-17)

Sec. 10-8. International Existing Building Code (IEBC) – Amendments.
The IEBC, compiled by the International Code Council, adopted by section 10-1 of this code, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lewiston.

(2) Chapter 1, Section 112, is deleted and repealed in its entirety.

(3) Chapter 14, Section 1401.2. Insert: April 22, 1935. (Ord. No. 4557, § 2, 12-13-10; Ord. No. 4592, § 1, 1-14-13; Ord. No. 4602, § 1, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4620, § 8, 2-23-15; Ord. No. 4707, § 9, 11-27-17)

Sec. 10-9. International Residential Code – Amendments.
The International Residential Code, compiled by the International Code Council, adopted by section 10-1 of this code, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lewiston.

(2) Chapter 1, Section R105.2, Work exempt from permit, is hereby amended by adding new Section R105.2.11 as follows:

11. Permits shall not be required for replacement of siding, roof coverings or residential doors. It remains the owner and contractor’s responsibility to ensure all code requirements are met. Inspection of siding, roof coverings and residential doors may be requested and shall be charged at the hourly rate for inspections.

(3) Chapter 1, Section R108, is hereby amended by adding a new section to be designated as Section R108.2.1 to read as follows:

R108.2.1 Plan review fee.

1. When submittal documents are required by Section 106.1, a plan review fee shall be paid upon application for a permit. Said plan review fee shall be sixty-five (65) percent of the building permit fee as set by resolution of the Lewiston City Council. Plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 108.2 and are in addition to the permit fees. When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review an additional plan review fee shall be charged as set by resolution of the Lewiston City Council.

2. Where duplicate plans are submitted for work which has been previously reviewed and approved by the City Building Official, and plans remain unchanged, with the exception of a site plan, the plans may be considered as standard plans requiring payment of a plan review fee equal to one-half (1/2) of the full plan review fee. However, the full plan review fee shall be required for any standard plan which is changed or altered or upon adoption of a more current edition of the International Building Code.

(4) Chapter 1, Section R108.3, Building permit valuations, is adopted in its entirety and amended with the addition of a second paragraph as follows:

In order to establish a building permit valuation the division of building safety shall use square foot construction cost figures listed in the annual August/September building valuation data table printed in the Building Safety Journal published by the International Code Council. Square foot cost figures shall be used for all occupancy classifications and type of construction included in the published table. For types of work not included in the published table the valuation shall be determined by the building official.

(5) Chapter 1, Section R112.1, General, is deleted and repealed in its entirety.

(6) Chapter 1, Section R112.3, Qualifications, is deleted and repealed in its entirety.

(7) Chapter 3, Table R301.2(1), is amended as follows:

“Ground Snow Load is 30 psf” to be annotated with “Roof Snow Load is 25 psf.”

“Wind Speed” to be annotated with “115.”

“Seismic Design Category” to be annotated with “B.”

“Weathering” to be annotated with “Severe.”

“Frost line depth” to be annotated with “24 inches.”

“Termite” to be annotated with “S to M.”

“Decay” to be annotated with “None to Slight.”

“Winter Design Temp” to be annotated with “6 degrees Fahrenheit.”

“Ice Shield Underlayment Required” to be annotated with “No.”

Table block titled, “Flood Hazards” to be annotated with “Floodplain Ordinance 4579 effective 09-10-2012, and FIRM maps as currently adopted.”

“Air Freezing Index” to be annotated with “800.”

“Mean Annual Temp” to be annotated with “53 degrees Fahrenheit.” (Ord. No. 4557, § 2, 12-13-10; Ord. No. 4592, § 1, 1-14-13; Ord. No. 4602, § 1, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4620, § 9, 2-23-15; Ord. No. 4684, § 5, 9-11-17; Ord. No. 4707, § 10, 11-27-17)

Sec. 10-10. International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) – Amendments.
The IPMC, compiled by the International Code Council including Appendix A, adopted by section 10-1 of this code, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lewiston.

(2) Section 102.3 of the IPMC is hereby amended to read as follows:

102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the International Building Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, Idaho State Plumbing Code and NFPA 70. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the City of Lewiston Zoning Code.

(3) Section 103.2, Appointment, is deleted and repealed in its entirety.

(4) Section 106.4, Violation penalties, is deleted and repealed in its entirety.

(5) Section 107.3, Method of service, is deleted and repealed in its entirety.

(6) Delete from the IPMC all references of the word “clean.”

(7) Section 302.3, Sidewalks and driveways, is deleted and repealed in its entirety.

(8) Section 302.4, Weeds, is deleted and repealed in its entirety.

(9) Section 302.8, Motor vehicles, is deleted and repealed in its entirety.

(10) Section 303.2 of the IPMC is hereby amended to read as follows:

303.2 Enclosures. Shall comply with the IBC or IRC as required.

(11) Section 304.14, Insect screens, is deleted and repealed in its entirety.

(12) Section 502.5 of the IPMC is hereby amended to read as follows:

502.5 Public toilet facilities. Public toilet facilities shall be maintained in a safe sanitary and working condition in accordance with the Idaho State Plumbing Code. Except for periodic maintenance or cleaning, public access and use shall be provided to the toilet facilities at all times during occupancy of the premises.

(13) Section 505.1 of the IPMC is hereby amended to read as follows:

505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the Idaho State Plumbing Code.

(14) Section 602.2 of the IPMC is hereby amended to read as follows:

602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section.

Exception: In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.

(15) Section 602.3 of the IPMC is hereby amended to read as follows:

602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.

(16) Section 602.4 of the IPMC is hereby amended to read as follows:

602.4 Occupiable workspaces. Indoor occupiable workspaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.

(Ord. No. 4557, § 2, 12-13-10; Ord. No. 4592, § 1, 1-14-13; Ord. No. 4602, § 1, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4620, § 10, 2-23-15; Ord. No. 4707, § 11, 11-27-17)

Sec. 10-11. International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) – Amendments.
The ISPSC, compiled by the International Code Council, adopted by section 10-1 of this code, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) Chapter 1, Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lewiston.

(2) Chapter 1, Section 105.5.1. Delete the word “Approved” and replace with “Reviewed for code compliance.”

(3) Chapter 1, Section 105.6.2. Insert:

Permit fees. A fee for each permit shall be paid as required, as set by resolution of the Lewiston City Council.

(4) Chapter 1, Section 105.6.3.2. Insert: 80.

(5) Chapter 1, Section 105.6.3.3. Insert: 80.

(6) Chapter 1, Section 107.4, is deleted and repealed in its entirety and replaced with IBC Section 114.4, pertaining to violations and penalties, and IBC Section 109.4, pertaining to work commencing before permit issuance.

(7) Chapter 1, Section 107.5, is amended to read as follows:

107.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official, work on any system that is being performed contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner’s authorized agent, or to the person performing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in IBC Section 114.4 and Lewiston City Code Section 1-7.

(8) Chapter 1, Section 108, is deleted and repealed in its entirety.

(Ord. No. 4707, § 12, 11-27-17)

Sec. 10-12. Reinspections.
A fee may be assessed for each stop work order inspection, requested/miscellaneous inspection, or reinspection when such portion of work for which an inspection is requested is not completed or when corrections called for are not made.

To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file an application on a form furnished by the city of Lewiston for that purpose and pay the reinspection fee, as set by resolution of the Lewiston city council. (Ord. No. 4557, § 2, 12-13-10; Ord. No. 4592, § 1, 1-14-13; Ord. No. 4602, § 1, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4620, § 11, 2-23-15; Ord. No. 4684, § 6, 9-11-17; Ord. No. 4707, § 13, 11-27-17)

1
Cross references – Fire protection and prevention, Ch. 15; abatement of unsanitary buildings, § 19-1; manufactured homes, manufactured home parks and tourist facilities, Ch. 23; signs, Ch. 30; public right-of-way, Ch. 31; subdivisions, Ch. 32; water and sewers, Ch. 36; zoning, Ch. 37.

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4557, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, repealed former §§ 10-1 – 10-15 and replaced them with §§ 10-1 – 10-11. The deleted sections contained provisions relating to building codes and general building regulations. These sections derived from Ord. No. 4323, § 2, adopted Dec. 9, 2002; Ord. No. 4333, § 1, adopted Aug. 25, 2003; Ord. No. 4397, §§ 1, 3, 5 – 9, adopted Mar. 28, 2005; Ord. No. 4494, § 1, adopted Jan. 7, 2008; Ord. No. 4506, § 2, adopted May 12, 2008. Ord. No. 4323, § 1, adopted Dec. 9, 2002, repealed former §§ 10-1 – 10-30 and replaced them with §§ 10-1 – 10-14. The deleted sections contained provisions relating to building codes and general building regulations. These sections derived from 1960 Code §§ 6-3, 6-4; 6-4.2; Ord. No. 2113, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 3106, §§ 1 – 7, adopted Aug. 14, 1972; Ord. No. 3107, §§ 1 – 7, adopted Aug. 14, 1972; Ord. No. 3341, §§ 2, 3, 4, adopted Dec. 20, 1976; Ord. No. 3512, §§ 1, 2, 3, adopted June 16, 1980; Ord. No. 3551, § 1, adopted Nov. 10, 1980; Ord. No. 3591, § 1, adopted Sept. 14, 1981; Ord. No. 3610, §§ 1 – 4, adopted Dec. 14, 1981; Ord. No. 3638, §§ 1, 2, adopted Apr. 26, 1982; Ord. No. 3678, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 1983; Ord. No. 3679, § 1, adopted Jan. 31, 1983; Ord. No. 3724, §§ 2 – 15, adopted Apr. 2, 1984; Ord. No. 3786, §§ 1, 3, 4, adopted Aug. 26, 1985; Ord. No. 3795, § 1, adopted Sept. 30, 1985; Ord. No. 3826, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 7, 1986; Ord. No. 3896, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 1, 1988; Ord. No. 3898, §§ 1 – 4, adopted Jan. 4, 1988; Ord. No. 3935, § 1, adopted Oct. 17, 1988; Ord. No. 3941, § 1, adopted Mar. 20, 1989; Ord. No. 3944,§ § 1 – 4, adopted July 24, 1989; Ord. No. 3963, § 1, adopted Feb. 26, 1990; Ord. No. 3981, § 1, adopted Sept. 10, 1990; Ord. No. 3997, § 1, adopted Apr. 15, 1991; Ord. No. 4085, § 1, adopted May 9, 1994; Ord. No. 4046, § 1, adopted Sept. 14, 1992; Ord. No. 4053, § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 1992; Ord. No. 4054, § 1, adopted Nov. 2, 1992; Ord. No. 4082, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 20, 1993; Ord. No. 4154, § 1, adopted 26, 1996; Ord. No. 4175, § 2, adopted Dec. 16, 1996; Ord. No. 4211, § 3, adopted June 15, 1998; Ord. No. 4231, §§ 1, 3, 5 – 11, adopted June 21, 1999; Ord. No. 4281, § 1, adopted Mar. 12, 2001.


Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

ARTICLE I. GENERAL
Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

ARTICLE II. INTERMENT AND DISINTERMENT
Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

ARTICLE III. MEMORIALS
Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

ARTICLE V. FISCAL MATTERS
Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 11
CEMETERIES1
Art. I.    General, §§ 11-1 – 11-15

Art. II.    Interment and Disinterment, §§ 11-16 – 11-20

Art. III.    Memorials, §§ 11-21 – 11-24

Art. IV.    Maintenance and Care, §§ 11-25 – 11-27

Art. V.    Fiscal Matters, §§ 11-28 – 11-30

Chapter 12
CIVIL DEFENSE1
Sec. 12-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

Administrator means the mayor who shall be the administrator of civil defense for the city.

Civil defense means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters.

Deputy director means the deputy director of civil defense of the city.

Director means the director of civil defense of the city.

Disaster means actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other similar public calamity, but not any condition relating to a labor controversy. (Code 1960, § 7-1; Ord. No. 2204, § 2)

Sec. 12-2. Purposes.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparations and carrying out of plans for the civil defense of persons and property within this city in the event of a disaster and to provide for the coordination of civil defense functions of this city with all other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and organizations. (Code 1960, § 7-2; Ord. No. 2204, § 1)

Sec. 12-3. Expenditures deemed for protection of inhabitants and property.
Any expenditures made in connections with civil defense activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Code 1960, § 7-3; Ord. No. 2204, § 1)

Sec. 12-4. Organizational plan.
The organizational plan prepared by the director of civil defense, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, is adopted as the official organization plan for civil defense of the city. (Code 1960, § 7-4; Ord. No. 2204, § 3)

Sec. 12-5. Office of civil defense – Created.
The office of civil defense is hereby created. (Code 1960, § 7-5; Ord. No. 2204, § 1)

Sec. 12-6. Same – Composition.
The office of civil defense shall consist of:

(1) The administrator, who shall be the administrative head of civil defense for the city.

(2) The director, who shall be appointed by the administrator and who shall develop civil defense and disaster plans and organize the civil defense and disaster program of this city and shall have such other duties as may be assigned to him by the administrator.

(3) The deputy director, who shall be appointed by the director, subject to the approval of the administrator, and who shall perform such functions as the director shall prescribe and shall act for and exercise the powers and perform the duties of the director during his absence or disability. (Code 1960, § 7-6; Ord. No. 2204, § 4)

Sec. 12-7. Powers and duties of director – Generally.
The director of civil defense is hereby empowered:

(1) To request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a disaster and the termination thereof, if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session, subject to confirmation by the city council at the earliest practicable time;

(2) To request the governor to proclaim a state of extreme emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the resources of the area or region are inadequate to cope with the disaster;

(3) To control and direct the effort of the civil defense organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

(4) To direct coordination and cooperation between the divisions, services and staff of the office of civil defense of this city and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

(5) To represent the civil defense organization of this city in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to civil defense and disaster;

(6) To recommend, for adoption by the city council, civil defense and disaster and mutual aid plans and agreements. (Code 1960, § 7-7; Ord. No. 2204, § 5)

Sec. 12-8. Same – In event of proclamation of disaster.
In the event of the proclamation of a disaster as provided in the preceding section or the proclamation of a state of extreme emergency by the governor or the state director of civil defense, the director is hereby empowered:

(1) To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such disaster; provided, however, that such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council;

(2) To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

(3) To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of extreme emergency by the governor in the region in which this city is located, to command the aid of as many citizens of this city as he thinks necessary to the execution of his duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered civil defense worker volunteers;

(4) To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency;

(5) To execute all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter and all powers conferred upon him by any statute agreement approved by the city council or by any lawful authority. (Code 1960, § 7-8; Ord. No. 2204, § 6)

Sec. 12-9. Organization.
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during a disaster, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons commandeered under the provisions of the preceding section, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such disaster, shall constitute the civil defense organization of the city. (Code 1960, § 7-9; Ord. No. 2204, § 7)

Sec. 12-10. Functions and duties of departments and employees.
The city council hereby assigns to the various departments and to the officers and employees thereof the functions, duties and powers set forth in the organizational plan adopted by section 12-4. (Code 1960, § 7-10; Ord. No. 2204, § 8)

Sec. 12-11. Loyalty oath.
All persons employed or associated in any capacity with the civil defense organization of the city shall take the oath prescribed by the Idaho Disaster Relief and Civil Defense Act of 1955. (Code 1960, § 7-11; Ord. No. 2204, § 10)

Sec. 12-12. Acceptance of equipment, supplies, etc., from federal government.
(a) The mayor or any other officer delegated or appointed by the mayor is hereby authorized to accept, on behalf of this city, all equipment, supplies and materials and money offered by the federal government to enable this city to carry out any program, act or activity necessary to the proper functioning of defense activities in this city.

(b) The mayor is hereby authorized to execute such agreements or documents and to agree to such reasonable terms and conditions as may be required by the federal government for the grant, loan, lease or other use or possession of such equipment, supplies, materials or money. (Code 1960, § 7-12; Ord. No. 2202, § 1)

Sec. 12-13. Orders, rules and regulations – Authority of mayor, etc.
(a) In order to protect life and property in the city from enemy action, the mayor or an authorized local civil defense official is authorized and directed to carry out blackouts and air raid protection measures in the city at such times and for such periods as are authorized or ordered by the army or navy, and to promulgate such orders, rules and regulations as may be necessary to insure the success of the blackouts and air raid protection measures and to protect life and property during such periods.

(b) Such orders, rules and regulations shall include traffic movements of emergency or other vehicles, evacuation of residents, congregation of persons on public streets, sidewalks and in public places or buildings, but this enumeration shall not be taken as a limitation on the power to promulgate orders, rules and regulations governing any other subject, persons or property which must be regulated in order to insure the proper carrying out of any duly authorized blackout or air raid protection measure. (Code 1960, § 7-13; Ord. No. 2203, § 1)

Sec. 12-14. Same – To be in writing.
All orders, rules and regulations authorized by this chapter for the conduct of the general public shall be in writing and shall be available for public inspection at the place and during the hours fixed by the mayor or an authorized local civil defense official. (Code 1960, § 7-14; Ord. No. 2203, § 2)

Sec. 12-15. Same – Effective until repealed.
Any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the authority conferred by this chapter shall be in force and effect from the time of promulgation until amended or repealed by the mayor or an authorized local civil defense official or until repealed by the council. (Code 1960, § 7-15; Ord. No. 2203, § 3)

Sec. 12-16. Practice blackouts and air raid drills.
Practice blackouts and air raid drills may be carried out at such times and for such periods as the mayor or an authorized local civil defense official shall, in his discretion, deem appropriate or necessary, but subject always to the orders and directions of the army or navy and the orders, rules and regulations authorized by this chapter. (Code 1960, § 7-16; Ord. No. 2203, § 1)

Sec. 12-17. Special police – Authorized.
The mayor may appoint, for a specified time, as many special police, without pay, from among residents of the city as may be deemed advisable for service in connection with any blackout or air raid protection measure. (Code 1960, § 7-17; Ord. No. 2203, § 4)

Sec. 12-18. Same – Powers and duties.
During the term of service of the special police authorized by this chapter, such special police shall possess all the powers and privileges and perform all the duties of privates in the standing police force of the city. (Code 1960, § 7-18; Ord. No. 2203, § 4)

Sec. 12-19. Same – Identifying emblem to be worn.
(a) Special police authorized by this chapter shall wear such identifying emblem as may be prescribed by the mayor.

(b) No special policeman shall attempt to carry out any order, rule or regulation promulgated under the authority conferred by this chapter when he is not wearing such identifying emblem. (Code 1960, § 7-19; Ord. No. 2203, § 4)

Sec. 12-20. Unauthorized use of sirens or other warning devices.
No unauthorized person shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a blackout signal or air raid or the termination of a blackout or air raid. (Code 1960, § 7-20; Ord. No. 2203, § 5)

Sec. 12-21. Unlawful acts.
No person, during a disaster, shall:

(1) Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the civil defense organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter;

(2) Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

(3) Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the civil defense and disaster agency of the state. (Code 1960, § 7-21; Ord. No. 2204, § 11)

Sec. 12-22. Liability of private persons.
No person owning, maintaining or controlling any building or premises, who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use, in whole or any part of such building or premises, for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, mock or practice attack, or their successors in interest or the agents or employees of any of them, shall be subject to liability for injuries sustained by any person while in or upon such building or premises as a result of any act or omission in connection with the upkeep or maintenance thereof, except a willful act of misconduct, when such person has entered or gone into or upon such building or premises for the purpose of seeking refuge therein during destructive operations or attacks by enemies of the United States or during a mock or practice attack or test ordered by lawful authorities. (Code 1960, § 7-22; Ord. No. 2204, § 9)

Sec. 12-23. Liability of city.
(a) This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety.

(b) Neither the city, its agents and representatives or any person or any of the agents thereof in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to person or property as the result of such activity. (Code 1960, § 7-23; Ord. No. 2203, § 6)

Sec. 12-24. Lights during blackout declared public nuisance; abatement.
Any light displayed contrary to any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance, and when deemed necessary in order to protect life or property during a blackout or air raid, the police or the special police authorized herein are authorized and directed to enter upon any premises within the city, using reasonable force, and extinguish lights or take other necessary action to make effective any order, rule or regulation promulgated under the authority conferred by this chapter. (Code 1960, § 7-24; Ord. No. 2203, § 7)

1
Cross reference – Floodplain management, § 37-133 et seq.

State law reference – Disaster preparedness, Idaho Code, Chapter 10 of Title 46.


Chapter 13
ELECTIONS1
Art. I.    Initiative and Referendum, §§ 13-1 – 13-23

Art. II.    Administration of Municipal Elections, §§ 13-24 – 13-28

Art. III.    Replacement for Resigned Councilpersons, §§ 13-29 – 13-31

ARTICLE I. INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM2
Sec. 13-1. Right of people.
The people of this city shall have the right to enact ordinances through the initiative process, and to repeal ordinances through the referendum process, according to the procedures set forth herein and as provided by Idaho Code, Section 50-501, as currently constituted or as may be hereafter amended. (Ord. No. 3390, § 2, 8-1-77; Ord. No. 4030, § 1, 3-23-92)

Secs. 13-2 – 13-12. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4030, § 2, adopted March 23, 1992, repealed §§ 13-2 – 13-12 in their entirety. Former §§ 13-2 – 13-12 were concerned with initiatives and referendum, and derived from Ord. No. 3390.

Secs. 13-13 – 13-23. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION OF MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS3
Sec. 13-24. Municipal elections.
Municipal elections shall be conducted in accordance with Title 34 (Elections) and Title 50, Chapter 4 (Municipal Elections) of the Idaho Code, as amended from time to time. (Ord. No. 3382, § 2, 7-11-77; Ord. No. 3501, § 1, 9-4-79; Ord. No. 3791, § 1, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 3879, § 1, 8-31-87; Ord. No. 4538, § 1, 9-14-09; Ord. No. 4646, § 1, 10-26-15)

Secs. 13-25 – 13-28. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4646, § 1, enacted Oct. 26, 2015, repealed §§ 13-25 – 13-28 of Art. II, which sections designated election precinct boundaries, polling times and places, and election dates and procedures, and were derived from the 1960 Code, § 8-13; Ord. No. 3382, §§ 3, 4, adopted July 11, 1977; Ord. No. 3501, § 2, adopted Sep. 4, 1979; Ord. No. 3791, §§ 2, 3, adopted Aug. 19, 1985; Ord. No. 3879, § 2, adopted Aug. 31, 1987; Ord. No. 3883, § 1, adopted Aug. 31, 1987; and Ord. No. 4030, § 3, adopted March 23, 1992.

ARTICLE III. REPLACEMENT FOR RESIGNED COUNCILPERSONS4
Sec. 13-29. Filling of vacancy by appointment.
Whenever a vacancy occurs in the council, the vacancy may be filled until the next city election by appointment of the city council. Such appointee shall serve only until the next general city election, at which time, such vacancy shall be filled for the balance of the original term by the election process. (Ord. No. 3504, § 1, 9-4-79)

Sec. 13-30. Separate position to be established on ballot when necessary to fill remainder of original terms by election.
When necessary to fill the remainder of original terms by the election process, a separate position shall be established on the general municipal election ballot apart from other council positions. The ballot shall specify that the term of office for the separate position shall be for two (2) years, and until his successor is elected and qualified. (Ord. No. 3504, § 1, 9-4-79)

Sec. 13-31. Candidates to specify term for which they are seeking election.
Candidates shall specify if they are candidates for the two-year term of office and candidates for the two-year term shall not be candidates for any four-year term on the ballot. The person elected to fill the remaining two-year term shall take office at the first council meeting following the general city election. (Ord. No. 3504, § 1, 9-4-79)

1
State law reference – General and special elections in cities, Idaho Code, Chapter 4 of Title 50.


2
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3390, § 1, adopted Aug. 1, 1977, repealed former Art. I, §§ 13-1 – 13-13, relative to initiative and referendum, derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 2-78 – 2-90, and Ord. No. 3014, §§ 1 – 13, adopted Aug. 9, 1971. Sections 2 – 13 of said Ord. No. 3390 are included herein as a new Art. I, §§ 13-1 – 13-12.


3
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3382, § 1, enacted July 11, 1977, repealed §§ 13-24, 13-25 and 13-27 of Art. II which sections designated election precincts and boundaries and specified polling places, and were derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 8-1, 8-2; Ord. No. 3052, §§ 1 – 3, adopted Sep. 13, 1971; Ord. No. 3166, adopted Sep. 17, 1973; and Ord. No. 3291, §§ 1 – 3, adopted Sep. 22, 1975. Section 2 of said Ord. No. 3382 is included herein as new § 13-24.


4
State law reference – Filling of vacancies on city council, Idaho Code, §§ 50-703, 50-704.


Chapter 14
ELECTRICITY1
1
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4557, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, repealed Ch. 14, electricity, in its entirety. Former §§ 14-1 – 14-15 derived from Ord. No. 4233 § 2, adopted June 21, 1999, and Ord. No. 4456 §§ 1 and 2, adopted Jan. 8, 2007. Ord. No. 4233, § 1, adopted June 21, 1999, repealed former §§ 14-1 – 14-28 and replaced them with §§ 14-1 – 14-15. The deleted sections contained electrical system regulations currently covered under the provisions of the adopted electrical code. These sections derived from 1960 Code Chapter 9, as amended by Ord. No. 2031, §§ 1 – 4, 6, 8, 9, 12 and 13, Ord. No. 2831, § 1, adopted Nov. 9, 1970, Ord. No. 2855, § 1, Ord. No. 3003, § 1, adopted Nov. 16, 1970, Ord. No. 3028, §§ 1 and 2, adopted July 12, 1971, Ord. No. 3037, § 2, adopted July 6, 1971, Ord. No. 3074, § 1, adopted March 27, 1972, Ord. No. 3075, § 1, adopted April 10, 1972, Ord. No. 3593, § 1, adopted Oct. 26, 1981, Ord. No. 3663, § 1, adopted Aug. 2, 1982, Ord. No. 3786, §§ 5 and 8, adopted Aug. 26, 1985, Ord. No. 3840, § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 1986, Ord. No. 3889, § 5, adopted Dec. 7, 1987, Ord. No. 3898 §§ 5 – 10 and 12, adopted Jan. 4, 1988, Ord. No. 3946, §§ 1, 2 and 4, adopted July 24, 1989, Ord. No. 3959, § 1, adopted Jan. 15, 1990, Ord. No. 4087, § 1, adopted Jan. 3, 1994, and Ord. No. 4176, §§ 2, 3 and 4, adopted Dec. 2, 1996.


Chapter 15
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 15-1 – 15-16

Art. II.    Reserved, §§ 15-17 – 15-29

Art. III.    Reserved, §§ 15-30 – 15-35

ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL2
Sec. 15-1. International Fire Code adopted; filed copies; enforcement by fire marshal; violation.
(a) There is hereby adopted, as the minimum standards for the protection of life and property from fire or explosion, the 2015 International Fire Code, as adopted by the state of Idaho, as amended hereafter, including all appendices thereto, except Appendices A and J, published and recommended by the International Code Council, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as though fully set forth at length herein.

(b) The city clerk shall maintain not less than one (1) duly certified copy of the 2015 International Fire Code at the office of the city clerk for use and examination by the public during normal business hours, in accordance with Idaho Code, Section 50-901.

(c) The International Fire Code shall be enforced by the fire marshal under the direction of the fire chief. The fire marshal shall be appointed by the fire chief with the consent of the city manager. The fire marshal shall be the chief of the bureau of fire prevention. The fire marshal shall investigate and recommend to the fire chief and the city manager such additional ordinances or amendments to the International Fire Code as he/she may deem necessary for safeguarding life and property against fire and explosion. He/she may use discretion to order any violation to be abated: (1) immediately; (2) within twenty-four (24) hours; or (3) within another appropriate timeframe, as based on the urgency of the violation. The fire marshal, his/her assistant, or any member of the fire department may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises within his/her jurisdiction for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation which, under the provisions of this section, he/she deems necessary.

(d) Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of the International Fire Code adopted hereby, or who shall fail to obey any lawful order of the fire marshal or his/her assistant, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-7 of this code. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which a violation of this chapter or the International Fire Code occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. The fire marshal and his/her assistants are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of the International Fire Code.

(e) Any violation of this section, or of the International Fire Code adopted hereby, which is not abated within the timeframe ordered by the fire marshal or his/her assistant is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and/or unsafe condition, abatable in accordance with the International Fire Code, Lewiston City Code, and/or laws of the state of Idaho. (Ord. No. 3229, §§ 3 – 7, 8-12-74; Ord. No. 3391, § 1, 8-29-77; Ord. No. 3508, § 1, 10-22-79; Ord. No. 3700, § 1, 7-18-83; Ord. No. 3840, § 2, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 3855, § 5, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 3970, § 1, 7-9-90; Ord. No. 4088, § 1, 11-22-93; Ord. No. 4185, § 1, 4-7-97; Ord. No. 4230, § 1, 4-12-99; Ord. No. 4324, § 1, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4396, § 1, 3-28-05; Ord. No. 4493, § 1, 1-7-08; Ord. No. 4555, § 1, 1-10-11; Ord. No. 4601, § 1, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4712, § 2, 11-27-17)

Sec. 15-1.1. International Fire Code – Amendments
The 2015 International Fire Code, compiled by the International Code Council, adopted by section 15-1 of this code is hereby amended as follows:

(1) Chapter 1, Sections 102.1 and 103.2, are hereby adopted as written in the International Fire Code.

(2) Chapter 1, Section 102.3, is hereby amended to read as follows:

102.3 Change of use or occupancy. Changes shall not be made in the use or occupancy of any structure that would place the structure in a different division of the same group or occupancy or in a different group of occupancies, unless such structure is made to comply with the requirements of this code and the International Building Code. Subject to the approval of the fire code official, the use or occupancy of an existing structure shall be allowed to be changed and the structure is allowed to be occupied for purposes in other groups without conforming to all of the requirements of this code and the International Building Code for those groups, provided the new or proposed use is less hazardous, based on life and fire risk, than the existing use. Existing buildings undergoing repair, alterations, additions or change of occupancy shall be permitted to comply with the International Existing Building Code as adopted by the City of Lewiston.

(3) Chapter 1, Section 102.5, is hereby amended to add the following:

3. Minimum requirements for unsprinklered single family homes and multiple family dwellings up to two (2) units as identified by the State of Idaho action (Idaho Code 39-4116(3)) shall be as provided for in the 2006 IFC/IRC/IBC for wall ratings and egress components.

(4) Chapter 1, Section 102.6, is hereby amended to read as follows:

102.6 Historic buildings. The provisions of this code relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of existing buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings where such buildings or structures do not constitute a distinct hazard to life or property and such buildings or structures shall be in accordance with the provisions of the International Existing Building Code as adopted by the City of Lewiston. Fire protection in designated historic buildings shall be provided with an approved fire protection plan as required in Section 1103.1.1 of this code.

(5) Chapter 1, Section 102.7, is hereby amended to read as follows:

102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be the most recent editions of those that are listed in Chapter 80, and such codes and standards shall be considered to be part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections 102.7.1 and 102.7.2.

(6) Chapter 1, Section 104.1, is hereby amended to add the following:

104.1.1 Fire Chief’s Authority. The fire chief is authorized to administer and enforce this code. Under the chief’s direction, the fire department is authorized to enforce all ordinances of the jurisdiction pertaining to:

a. The prevention of fires;

b. The suppression or extinguishment of dangerous or hazardous fires;

c. The storage, use and handling of hazardous materials;

d. The installation and maintenance of automatic, manual and other private fire alarm systems and fire-extinguishing equipment;

e. The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes;

f. The maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire hazards on land and in buildings, and other property, including those under construction;

g. The maintenance of means of egress; and

h. The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fire and unauthorized releases of hazardous materials, for authority related to control and investigation of emergency scenes, see Section 104.11.

(7) Chapter 1, Section 105.1.1, is hereby amended to read as follows:

105.1.1 Permits required. A property owner or owner’s authorized agent who intends to conduct an operation or business, or install or modify systems and equipment that are regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be performed, shall first make application to the fire code official and obtain a permit if required by the authority having jurisdiction.

(8) Chapter 1, Section 108, is hereby amended to read as follows:

Sections 10-1(c) and 10-2(10) of the Lewiston City Code pertaining to the code board of appeals shall apply to the International Fire Code.

(9) Chapter 1, Section 109.3.1, is hereby amended to read as follows:

109.3.1 Service. A notice of violation issued pursuant to this code shall be served upon the owner, the owner’s authorized agent, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the condition or violation either by: (a) personal service; (b) certified or first-class mail, addressed to the last known address; or (c) delivering the same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the premises. If notice is hand-delivered, such notice shall be deemed delivered immediately. If notice is sent by certified or first-class mail, such notice shall be deemed delivered forty-eight (48) hours after depositing the same in the U.S. mail. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises, and such notice shall be deemed delivered twenty-four (24) hours after such notice is posted, and the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested or a certificate of mailing to the last known address of the owner, the owner’s authorized agent, or occupant.

(10) Chapter 1, Section 109.4, is hereby amended to read as follows:

109.4 Violation penalties. In addition to the penalties set forth in Lewiston City Code § 10-2(8) pertaining to work commencing before permit issuance, persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire marshal, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Section 1-7 of the Lewiston City Code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.

(11) Chapter 1, Section 111.4, is hereby amended to read as follows:

111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Lewiston City Code section 1-7.

(12) Chapter 2, Section 202, is hereby adopted as written in the International Fire Code and amended to add the following:

202 General Definitions.

Bedroom. See sleeping room.

Sleeping Room. A room with a closet shall be considered a sleeping room regardless of its intended use by the current owner (i.e. den, office, study, media, sewing or exercise room, etc.). All sleeping rooms shall be provided with emergency escape and rescue openings and smoke alarms as required.

(13) Chapter 3, Section 308.1.6.3, is hereby adopted as written in the International Fire Code.

(14) Chapter 3, Section 312, is hereby amended to read as follows:

312.1 General. Vehicle impact protection required by this code shall be provided by posts that comply with Section 312.2 or by other approved physical barriers that comply with Section 312.3.

312.2 Posts. Guard posts shall comply with all of the following requirements:

1. Constructed of steel not less than four inches (4”) in diameter and concrete filled.

2. Spaced not more than four feet (4’) between posts on center.

3. Set not less than three feet (3’) deep in a concrete footing of not less than a fifteen inch (15”) diameter.

4. Set with the top of the posts not less than three feet (3’) above ground.

5. Located not less than three feet (3’) from the protected object.

312.3 Other Barriers. Physical barriers shall be a minimum of thirty-six inches (36”) in height and shall resist a force of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds applied thirty-six inches (36”) above the adjacent ground surface. Barriers, other than posts specified in Section 312.2, that are designed to resist, deflect or visually deter vehicular impact commensurate with an anticipated impact scenario shall be permitted where approved.

(15) Chapter 3, Section 315.3.4, is hereby amended to read as follows:

315.3.4 Attic, under-floor, concealed spaces and basements. Attic, under-floor, concealed spaces, and basements used for storage of combustible materials shall be protected on the storage side as required for one (1) hour fire-resistance-rated construction. Openings shall be protected by assemblies that are self-closing and are of noncombustible construction or solid wood core not less than one and three quarter (1.75) inches in thickness. Storage shall not be placed on exposed joists.

Exceptions:

1. Areas protected by approved automatic sprinkler systems.

2. Group R-3 and Group U occupancies.

(16) Chapter 5 is adopted as written in the International Fire Code with the exception of Section 506.1, which is hereby amended to add the following:

506.1.3 Where required. Key boxes shall be installed to provide access to all buildings with fire sprinkler systems, fire alarm systems and/or elevators.

(17) Chapter 9, Section 901.6.2, is hereby amended to add the following:

901.6.2 Records. Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the referenced standards and this code shall be maintained. Fixed-fire protection systems inspection, testing and maintenance records noted throughout the International Fire Code and referenced standards shall be submitted to the Lewiston Fire Department in the manner and frequency determined by the fire code official.

(18) Chapter 9, Section 901.7, is hereby amended to read as follows:

901.7 Systems out of service. Where a fire protection system is out of service, the fire department and the fire code official shall be notified immediately and, where required by the fire code official, the building shall be either evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shutdown until the fire protection system has been returned to service.

Where utilized, fire watches shall be provided with not less than one (1) approved means for notification of the fire department and their only duty shall be to perform constant patrols of the protected premises and keep watch for fires.

A fire watch may be required twenty-four hours per day for seven days per week (24/7) at the fire chief’s discretion.

(19) Chapter 9, Section 903.1.2, is hereby amended to add the following:

903.1.2 Residential systems. Unless specifically allowed by this code or the International Building Code, residential sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13D or NFPA 13R shall not be recognized for the purposes of exceptions or reductions permitted by other requirements of this code.

(20) Chapter 9, Section 903.2, is hereby amended to read as follows:

903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12.

An approved automatic fire extinguishing system (NFPA 13 system) shall be installed in all new construction, or change of occupancy, where the fire-flow calculation area as defined in Appendix B, and type of construction requires a fire flow of three thousand (3,000) gallons per minute or more and in the occupancies and locations as set forth in section 903.

Exceptions:

1. Unless otherwise required, installation of an automatic fire-extinguishing system in the existing portion of a structure shall not be required, where the addition to the structure is separated by two-hour fire wall with protected openings, and the addition is protected by a monitored automatic fire-extinguishing system. Protection of openings shall be initiated by heat and smoke.

2. Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 and are separated from the remainder of the building by not less than one (1)-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the International Building Code or not less than two (2)-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the International Building Code, or both.

(21) Chapter 9, Section 903.4.3, is hereby amended to read as follows:

903.4.3 Floor control valves. Where an NFPA 13 fire sprinkler system is required, an approved supervised indicating control valve, flow switch and drain shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor in multi-story buildings, either in the riser room, in an interior stairwell, or as otherwise required by the fire code official.

(22) Chapter 9, Sections 904.1.1 and 906.2.1, are hereby adopted as written in the International Fire Code.

(23) Chapter 9, Section 907.1, is hereby amended to read as follows:

907.1 General. This section covers the application, installation, performance and maintenance of fire alarm systems and their components in new and existing buildings and structures. The requirements of Section 907.2 are applicable to new buildings and structures. The requirements of Section 907.9 are applicable to existing buildings and structures.

Notification Devices. When fire alarm systems not required by the International Fire Code are installed, the notification devices shall meet the minimum design and installation requirements for systems that are required by this code. Intent: Non-required fire alarm systems shall provide the same level of occupant notification that required systems provide.

(24) Chapter 9, Section 907.2.1, Exception, is hereby deleted and repealed in its entirety.

(25) Chapter 9, Section 912.2.3, is hereby amended to add the following:

912.2.3 Separate FDC. Every building provided with a fire sprinkler system, standpipe, standpipe system, or other system providing water for fire extinguishment shall be equipped with a fire department connection. Each building shall be provided with a separate fire department connection.

(26) Chapter 11, Section 1101.1, is hereby amended to read as follows:

1101.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to existing buildings constructed prior to the adoption of this code, only, if in the opinion of the fire code official, they constitute a distinct hazard to life and property.

(27) Chapter 56 is adopted as written in the International Fire Code.

(28) Chapter 57, Section 5704.2.13.1.3, is hereby amended to read as follows:

5704.2.13.1.3 Out of service for one year. Underground tanks that have been out of service for a period of one (1) year shall be removed from the ground in accordance with Section 5704.2.14 or abandoned in place in accordance with Section 5704.2.13.1.4.

Upon approval of the Fire Chief, underground tanks that comply with the performance standards for new or upgraded underground tanks set forth in Title 40, Section 280.20 or 280.21 of the Code of Federal Regulations may remain out of service indefinitely so long as they remain in compliance with the operation, maintenance and release detection requirements of the federal rule.

(29) Chapter 80 is adopted as written in the International Fire Code, as amended by Section 102.7 in this adoption.

(30) Appendix B, Section B105.1, is hereby amended to read as follows:

B105.1 One and two family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 buildings and townhouses. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration requirement for one (1) and two (2) family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 buildings and townhouses having a fire-flow calculation area which does not exceed three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet (344.5 m2) shall be five hundred (500) gallons per minute for two (2) hours. Fire-flows and flow durations for dwellings having a fire-flow calculation area in excess of three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet (344.5 m2) shall not be less than one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute for two (2) hours.

(31) Appendix B, Section B105.2, is hereby amended to read as follows:

B105.2 Buildings other than one and two family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 buildings and townhouses. The minimum fire flow and flow duration for buildings other than one (1) and two (2) family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 buildings and townhouses shall be as specified in Table B105.1(2).

Exception: A reduction in required fire flow of up to seventy-five (75%) percent, as approved by the fire chief, is allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. The resulting fire-flow shall not be less than one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute for the prescribed duration as specified in Table B105.1(2).

A twenty-five (25%) percent reduction in required fire flow is allowed when the building is provided with an approved monitored automatic fire alarm system. The resulting fire flow shall not be less than one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute for the prescribed duration as specified in Table B105.1(2). This reduction shall not be used to eliminate an automatic fire extinguishing system as required by Section 903.2 of this adoption.

When an automatic fire extinguishing system is required by Section 903.2 of this adoption, the twenty-five (25%) percent reduction allowed by this exception shall not apply to eliminate the requirement for that system.

(32) Appendix B, Table B105.1(1) and Table B105.2, are hereby deleted in their entirety.

(33) Appendix C, Section C103.2, is hereby amended to read as follows:

C103.2 Average spacing. The average spacing between fire hydrants shall be in accordance with Table C102.1.

Exceptions:

1. The average spacing shall be permitted to be increased by ten percent (10%) where existing fire hydrants provide all or a portion of the required number of fire hydrants.

2. The fire chief is authorized to accept a deficiency of up to one hundred sixty (160') feet where existing fire hydrants provide all or a portion of the required fire hydrant service for single family residential units and structures housing no more than two residential units (duplex).

Regardless of the average spacing, fire hydrants shall be located such that all points on streets and access roads adjacent to a building are within the distances listed in Table C102.1.

Exceptions:

1. The fire chief is authorized to accept a deficiency of up to one hundred (100') feet where existing fire hydrants provide all or a portion of the required fire hydrant service for single family residential units and structures housing no more than two (2) residential units (duplex).

2. The fire chief is authorized to accept a deficiency of up to ten (10%) percent where existing fire hydrants provide all or a portion of the required fire hydrant service for occupancies other than A, E, I and H.

3. The fire chief is authorized to accept a deficiency of up to one hundred (100') feet where existing fire hydrants provide all or a portion of the required fire hydrant service for all occupancies other than A, E, I and H where the property is located on a street corner with public street or road frontage on two (2) sides of the property.

(34) Appendix D, Section D101.1, is hereby adopted as written in the International Fire Code.

(35) Appendix D, Section D101.2, is hereby amended to add the following:

D101.2 Dead-end fire apparatus access road turnaround. Figure D103.1 is replaced with Lewiston Fire Department document titled Fire Apparatus Access Roads.

(36) Appendix D, Section D102.1, is hereby amended to read as follows:

D102.1 Access and loading. Facilities, buildings or portions of buildings hereafter constructed shall be accessible to fire department apparatus by way of an approved fire apparatus access road designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of the responding fire apparatus and shall be surfaced so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities and in accordance with Lewiston Fire Department document titled Fire Apparatus Access Roads.

(37) Appendix D, Section D103.2, is hereby amended to read as follows:

D103.2 Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed eleven (11%) percent in grade.

Exception: Grades steeper than eleven (11%) percent as approved by the fire chief.

(Ord. No. 4555, § 3, 1-10-11; Ord. No. 4601, § 2, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4712, § 3, 11-27-17)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4555, §§ 2 and 3, adopted Jan. 10, 2011, repealed and replaced § 15-1.1. Said section pertained to amendments of the International Fire Code, and was derived from Ord. No. 4324, § 3, adopted Dec. 9, 2002; Ord. No. 4396, § 2, adopted March 28, 2005; and Ord. No. 4493, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2008. Ord. No. 4324, §§ 2 and 3, adopted Dec. 9, 2002, repealed and replaced § 15-1.1. Said section pertained to amendments of the Uniform Fire Code, and was derived from

Ord. No. 3625, § 2, adopted Feb. 8, 1982; Ord. No. 3700, 2, adopted July 18, 1983; Ord. No. 3840, § 3, adopted Nov. 3, 1986; Ord. No. 3970, § 2, adopted July 9, 1990; Ord. No. 4022, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1992; Ord. No. 4088, § 3, adopted Nov. 22, 1993; Ord. No. 4185, § 2, adopted April 7, 1997; and Ord. No. 4230, § 2, adopted April 12, 1999.

Sec. 15-2. Use of explosives.
(a) Scope. The provisions of this section regulating the use of explosives are to be observed in addition to the requirements of the adopted edition of the International Fire Code. Where requirements conflict the provisions of this section apply.

(b) Permit required. A blasting permit shall be required prior to the use of any explosive within the city. Permits shall be issued by the bureau of fire prevention after compliance with the requirements of this section and with the approval of the fire chief.

(c) Site plan required. When applying for a blasting permit the applicant shall submit a site plan of the proposed blasting operation which identifies any and all utilities and structures within a one-hundred-foot radius of each explosive blast. The site plan shall also identify the proposed location of all seismographic sensing devices.

(d) Insurance required. Before a permit for the use of explosives is issued as provided in the current edition of the International Fire Code, the applicant shall file with the city a liability insurance policy on an occurrence from basis in the principal amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000) combined single limit for the purpose of the payment of all damages to persons or property which arise from or are caused by the conduct of any act authorized by the permit. The city of Lewiston shall be named as an additional insured for any liability resulting from the issuance of said permit. Such insurance policy shall be certified by the maker or underwriter to be unencumbered by claims or legal proceedings which may reduce available coverage below the one-million-dollar limit. The fire chief may require a greater or lesser amount when, in his opinion, conditions at the location of use indicate a greater or lesser amount is required. Public agencies and utilities shall be exempt from this insurance requirement.

(e) Release of liability. Before any permit shall issue the applicant for said permit shall agree in writing to indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all liability resulting from the issuance of the blasting permit and any blasting activity associated with the permit. The applicant shall also agree in writing to defend the city in any court against any and all claims arising from the issuance of the permit or any blasting activity associated with the permit.

(f) Demonstration of alternate method. Prior to consideration of a blasting permit the applicant must demonstrate to the director of public works that excavation cannot be accomplished by use of suitable power excavation equipment. Suitable power excavation equipment is defined as a single-tooth ripper pulled by a crawler-type tractor having a flywheel rating of not less than three hundred (300) horsepower. When, in the opinion of the director of public works, the circumstances of the proposed blasting of such demonstration is impractical, this subsection may be waived.

(g) Permit fee. A blasting permit fee shall be assessed each blasting permit application. A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed for multiple detonation blasting and a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be assessed for single detonation blasting. Said fee shall be paid when the application is made and shall be nonrefundable.

(h) Notification required. Whenever blasting is being conducted in the vicinity of gas, electric, water, sewer, fire alarm, telephone, telegraph or steam utilities or any structure, the blaster shall notify the appropriate representative of such utility and owner of the closest structure and such additional persons identified by the fire chief at least twenty-four (24) hours and no more than ten (10) days in advance of blasting. Said notification shall specify the location and intended time of such blasting. Documentation of notification must be filed with and approved by the fire chief prior to each blasting event. In an emergency, or in the event all the requirements of this chapter have been met, this time limit may be waived or reduced in the discretion of the fire chief.

At the time of notification the blaster shall offer to perform and agree to a date and time to conduct a pre-blast survey of the closest structures and property identified by the fire chief to establish all pre-blast damage, including cracks in walls, floors, ceilings and around windows, loose bricks and other defects inside and outside the structures. The blaster must make a minimum of six (6) attempts to contact property owners. Four (4) attempts shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and two (2) attempts between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. If attempts are unsuccessful, a notarized statement detailing the address, dates and time of the attempts or the name of the person making the attempts to contact shall be submitted to the fire chief for approval to proceed with blasting activity.

(i) Seismographic equipment required. Seismographic equipment, approved by the fire chief and of a type that measures and records seismographic information resulting from blasting activities must be placed in approved locations during all blasting events. Copies of all seismic activity recorded during each blasting event shall be submitted to the fire chief immediately following each day of blasting. Professional assistance may be required by the fire chief to interpret and certify recorded data at the expense of the blasting contractor. Requirements of this section may be waived by the fire chief for approved single charged detonations. The following formula shall be used in the determination of charge size relative to distance from exposure for single charged detonations:

(j) Blasting operations. The permit holder shall provide sufficient personnel to maintain visual contact with all areas surrounding the blasting site to control vehicular and pedestrian access to the entire blasting area. A method, approved by the fire chief, of signaling or communication between these personnel and the blaster must be provided.

Blasting that produces peak particle velocities in excess of 0.5 inches per second at the foundation of any structure is prohibited regardless of the frequency of ground vibration.

(k) Revocation of permit. Failure to provide required information or conform to the requirements of this section may cause the permit for the proposed blasting to be canceled and revoked at the discretion of the fire chief. Any person who willfully continues with a blasting event after a permit has been denied, canceled or revoked shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in section 1-7 of this code. (Ord. No. 4088, § 4, 11-22-93; Ord. No. 4555, § 4, 1-10-11)

Editor’s note – See the editor’s note at § 15-2.1 for a history of § 15-2 prior to Ord. No. 4088, adopted November 22, 1993.

Sec. 15-2.1. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3987, § 2, adopted Jan. 21, 1991, amended the code by deleting provisions contained in §§ 15-2 and 15-2.1. Said provisions pertained to the Life Safety Code and amendments thereto, and derived from Ord. No. 3239, §§ 1 – 7, adopted Nov. 18, 1974; Ord. No. 3394, § 1, adopted Sep. 6, 1977; Ord. No. 3701, § 1, adopted July 18, 1983; Ord. No. 3840, §§ 4, 5, adopted Nov. 3, 1986.

Sec. 15-3. Fire zones established.
The entire city is hereby declared to be and is hereby established as a fire district. Said fire district shall be known and designated as fire zones one, two, and three, each of which shall include the following territory:

(1) Fire Zone One shall include all C-4 and C-5 Zones, as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of the city of Lewiston, Idaho, in the downtown Lewiston area, bounded on the west by the Snake River, on the north by the Clearwater River, on the east by Twenty-first Street, and on the south by the R-4 Zone; except Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 of the Plat of Lots in Thompson’s Addition to the city of Lewiston, recorded at page 7 of Town Plat Book 1, Records of Nez Perce County, Idaho, and except Lots 4 and 5 and that portion of Lots 9 and 10 lying south of the Camas Prairie Railroad tracks, Mill Lot Addition, all situate in Section 31, Township 36 North, Range 5 West Boise Meridian, in Lewiston, Nez Perce County, Idaho, all of which property shall be included in Fire Zone Two.

(2) Fire Zone Two shall include all other commercial (C) zones, all manufacturing (M) zones, and the port (P) zone, as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city.

(3) Fire Zone Three shall include the Airport (AP) zone and all other zones within the city, as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city, not included in fire zones one and two above. (Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 10-22-73)

Secs. 15-4 – 15-16. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4555, § 2, adopted Jan. 10, 2011, repealed §§ 15-4 – 15-6. Said sections pertained to investigation of fires, fire drills, and alarms, and were derived from §§ 10-10, 10-11 and 10-17 of the 1960 Code and Ord. No. 3229, § 2, adopted Aug. 12, 1974. Ord. No. 4712, § 4, adopted Nov. 27, 2017, repealed § 15-7, pertaining to alarm system wires, derived from § 10-12 of the 1960 Code. See editor’s note to Art. I.

ARTICLE II. RESERVED3
Secs. 15-17 – 15-29. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. RESERVED4
Secs. 15-30 – 15-35. Reserved.
1
Cross references – Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 10; electricity, Ch. 14; garbage, rubbish and weeds, Ch. 17; gas, Ch. 18; subdivisions, Ch. 32; zoning, Ch. 37.


2
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3229, § 1, adopted Aug. 12, 1974, repealed §§ 10-1, 10-1.2, 10-4 – 10-9, 10-13 – 10-16, 10-18 – 10-20 of the 1960 Code which had been codified herein as §§ 15-1, 15-2, 15-4 – 15-9, 15-17 – 15-20, 15-22 – 15-24. Said former sections had pertained to the Fire Prevention Code, inspections and the bureau of fire prevention. In addition to the above listed derivation, §§ 15-1, 15-2, 15-19 had been amended by Ord. No. 2320, § 1; Ord. No. 2360, § 1; Ord. No. 2365, §§ 1, 3; Ord. No. 2641, § 1 and Ord. No. 3040, § 1, adopted July 12, 1971.

Section 2 of Ord. No. 3229 amended § 10-17 of the 1960 Code which had been codified herein as § 15-21. In order to maintain the numbering format and continuity, said section has been redesignated as § 15-4. Similarly, former §§ 15-10 – 15-12 have been redesignated as §§ 15-5 – 15-7, respectively.

Section 3 of Ord. No. 3229 did not specifically amend the code. Codification herein as § 15-1 was at the discretion of the editor.


3
Note – See editor’s note to Art. I.


4
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4022, § 2, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, repealed §§ 15-30 – 15-35 in their entirety. Former § 15-30 – 15-35, concerning private alarm systems, derived from the 1960 Code; Ord. No. 2659 and Ord. No. 3229.


Chapter 16
FLOOD INSURANCE1
1
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4027, § 2, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed §§ 16-1 – 16-3 which comprised former Ch. 16. The aforesaid sections were concerned with flood insurance and derived from Ord. No. 3221, adopted July 1, 1974.

Cross references – Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 10; civil defense, Ch. 12; mobile homes and tourist facilities, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 32; zoning, Ch. 37.


Chapter 17
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND WEEDS1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 17-1 – 17-15

Art. II.    Collection of Garbage and Rubbish, §§ 17-16 – 17-33.2

Art. III.    Weeds, §§ 17-34 – 17-48

Art. IV.    Litter, §§ 17-49 – 17-74

ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 17-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the following meanings:

Ashes: The residue from the burning of wood, coal or other combustible materials.

City: The city of Lewiston, Idaho.

Construction materials: Materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures and including but not limited to dirt, mud, sand and rock and all landscaping materials and fill materials and other items used in construction.

Construction or demolition debris: All material from commercial, residential or any other type of construction or demolition activity with or without a city-issued permit including, but not limited to, sheet rock, lumber, roofing, siding, shingles, concrete or concrete block, asphalt, brick, pallets, wood fence posts, railroad ties and stumps.

Contractor: The person or entity authorized by the city to operate, conduct and maintain a contract(s) for the services specified in the contract.

County: The county of Nez Perce, state of Idaho.

Debris: All dirt, mud, sand, rock and the remains, fragments, pieces or parts of anything broken, damaged or destroyed.

Garbage: All putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food. Any accumulation of animal, vegetable or other organic matter, liquid or solid, that is produced, received or accumulated from kitchens, residences, restaurants or businesses, including, but not limited to, putrid or unsound meat, fish and decayed or unsound vegetables and fruits. It shall not include sewage.

Hazardous material: Any solid waste that is, by itself or in combination with other solid waste, infectious, explosive, poisonous, highly flammable, caustic or otherwise dangerous or injurious to human, plant or animal life.

Litter: All garbage, refuse, rubbish, construction materials and debris, as defined in this section and all junk and waste or discarded materials and substances, including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, bottles, glass, crockery, tacks, hoops, cans, wire, both barbed and otherwise, building materials and fixtures, electrical materials and electrical fixtures, water and gas materials and fixtures, demolition materials and all concrete, roofing and siding materials and automobile parts and components and tires, waste oil and appliances.

Noxious weed: Any vegetation designated by the Director of the Idaho State Department of Agriculture as a noxious weed pursuant to Title 22, Chapter 24, of the Idaho Code.

Ornamental grass: Grass planted primarily for its decorative value or for screening purposes.

Park: Any park, playground, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted primarily to recreation.

Person: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

Planned unit development (PUD): Zoning designation for an area of land with a variety of residential, commercial, and industrial uses wherein private roadways may exist.

Premises: Land and all buildings and structures thereon, including, but not limited to, single or multifamily dwellings, rooming houses, apartment houses, hospitals, nursing and convalescent homes, hotels, motels, restaurants, drive-in establishments, schools, kindergartens and any other place of habitation, office, shop or establishment or place of conducting a business, trade, profession or occupation.

Private premises: Any nonpublicly owned property, whether used for residential, commercial, industrial or professional purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, including but not limited to, all yards, grounds, walks, driveways, porches, steps and mailboxes situated upon any privately owned property.

Public place: All streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys and any and all other public ways and public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, easements and buildings.

Recyclable materials: Products, including paper, cardboard, metal, glass or other substance capable of being reprocessed into consumer materials, which have served the purpose for which they were originally manufactured or produced and have passed through their end usage as consumer items, and which have been discarded or placed for collection by their owner, whether or not such products have monetary value.

Refuse: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body waste, including garbage, trash, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, junk and solid market, garbage, rubbish, street cleanings and industrial waste.

Resident or owner: Every person, including lessees and occupants, in possession, charge, custody or control of any premises, residential or commercial, where solid waste is created or accumulated.

Residential units: Every type of dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, houses, apartments and mobile homes.

Right-of-way: Means the same as defined in Chapter 31 of this code.

Rubbish: Any nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible or noncombustible waste and including, but not limited to, yard clippings, leaves, wood, tree trimmings, paper, cardboard, tin cans, wood, bedding, crockery, plastic, metal and other similar materials.

Sewage: Water-carried wastes from residences, commercial or industrial establishments, business buildings and other premises containing polluted matter subject to treatment at the sewage treatment plant.

Solid waste: Any ashes, garbage, refuse or rubbish, or any combination thereof.

Solid waste division: A division of the public works department of the city of Lewiston.

Tree: Any plant materials commonly referred to as trees which at maturity would exceed a height of more than thirty (30) inches.

Vegetation: Any plant materials including but not limited to those commonly referred to as grass, weeds, volunteer shrubs, volunteer trees, shrubs and trees.

Vehicle: Any device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon the street, except devices moved solely by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

Yard waste: Any recyclable material consisting of grass clippings, leaves, tree and shrub trimmings, garden waste, Christmas trees, and lawn or garden bark. Yard waste shall not include grass-covered surface soil or dirt otherwise known as sod, tree or shrub roots with soil or dirt, or limbs, trunks and stumps larger than six (6) inches in diameter and/or six (6) feet in length. (Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4718, § 1, 4-9-18)

Secs. 17-2 – 17-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH2
Sec. 17-16. Authority and purpose.
All phases of the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste materials and recyclable materials are hereby declared to affect the public health, safety and welfare of the city of Lewiston and the inhabitants thereof and to be subject to the exclusive regulation and control of the city of Lewiston pursuant to its powers under Article 12, Section 2, of the Constitution of the State of Idaho. (Ord. No. 3270, § 1, 8-15-75; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-17. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as “the solid waste ordinance of the city of Lewiston.” (Ord. No. 3270, § 2, 8-15-75; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-18. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4603, adopted Sept. 23, 2013, repealed § 17-18, pertaining to definitions, derived from Ord. No. 3270, § 3; Ord. No. 4005, § 1; Ord. No. 4075, § 1; Ord. No. 4145, § 4; Ord. No. 4471, § 1; Ord. No. 4574, § 1.

Sec. 17-19. Ownership.
(a) All solid waste and recyclable materials are hereby declared to be the exclusive property of the city from the time they are discarded, placed in the receptacle for disposal, or placed out of doors for collection by the generator thereof unless otherwise provided in the contracts for the collection and disposal of those materials.

(b) Nothing shall prohibit the city from using the collected materials for energy recovery and/or resource recovery. (Ord. No. 3270, § 4, 8-15-75; Ord. No. 3790, § 1, 8-12-85; Ord. No. 4005, § 2, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-20. Sanitary receptacles.
(a) A mobile cart is the approved refuse receptacle for residential single-unit and multi-unit dwellings, except those on container service. A mobile cart shall mean a light-weight, wheeled, polyethylene plastic container made with the latest manufacturing processes and meeting the minimum specifications as provided in the contracts for the collection and disposal of solid waste and recyclable materials. The mobile cart shall be provided by the contractor and shall remain the property of the contractor. The mobile cart shall at minimum meet specifications as herein specified:

(1) Ninety (90) to ninety-six (96) gallon capacity with a minimum net load weight of one hundred eighty (180) pounds, provided the gross weight of the cart and contents shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) pounds.

(2) Sixty (60) to sixty-five (65) gallon capacity with a minimum net load weight of one hundred fifty (150) pounds, provided the gross weight of the cart and contents shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) pounds.

(3) Thirty (30) to thirty-five (35) gallon capacity with a minimum net load weight of one hundred twelve (112) pounds, provided the gross weight of the cart and contents shall not exceed sixty (60) pounds.

(4) All carts shall be embossed with a sequenced serial number.

(5) All carts shall be manufactured with a minimum of fifteen (15) percent post-consumer recycled resin.

(b) Approved refuse receptacles for commercial accounts shall include any of the following:

(1) Disposable paper bags. Disposable (nonreturnable) paper bags, which shall be fifty (50) pounds wet-strength extensible kraft paper.

(2) Disposable plastic bags. Disposable (nonreturnable) plastic bags which may be manufactured from polyethylene or ethylene copolymer resin, with gauge of not less than one and four-tenths (1.4) mils, with a gross weight not to exceed thirty-five (35) pounds.

(3) Containers.

a. Water-tight dumpsters of one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), six (6) and eight (8) cubic yard capacity;

b. Drop box/roll-off containers of ten (10), twenty (20), twenty-five (25), or thirty (30) cubic yard capacity;

c. Roll-off compaction containers of ten (10) to forty (40) cubic yard capacity. Compaction containers shall be owned and maintained by the commercial business. All commercial containers shall be compatible with existing contractor collection equipment.

(4) Mobile carts. Mobile carts as defined in this article shall be approved receptacles, under the following conditions and specifications:

a. Approval shall be required by the contractor and the public works director or designee prior to providing mobile cart service where requested by a commercial account.

b. A commercial account may purchase a mobile cart from the contractor, or provide their own mobile cart if the cart is compatible with the contractor’s equipment and meets the minimum specifications as provided in the contracts for the collection and disposal of solid waste and recyclable materials, provided any commercial account that purchases their own cart shall be charged the same rate as that charged for the equivalent contractor-supplied cart. In addition, a commercial account shall be responsible for all maintenance, repairs, and cleaning of the cart.

(c) It shall be the duty of the resident or owner of any premises at all times to keep, or cause to be kept, approved receptacles, as defined above, and to deposit or cause to be deposited therein all solid waste, except as otherwise herein provided.

(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain the temporary use of solid waste collection services of another person by disposing of their solid waste in another person’s approved receptacle without the consent of the other person, as provided in Idaho Code, Section 18-2408.

(e) All approved receptacles shall be water-tight; equipped with close-fitting lids, covers, or securely tied; or otherwise closed to prevent the contents thereof from being carried, blown, scattered, spilled, tracked or otherwise deposited upon any street, alley, or other public or private property located within the city of Lewiston.

(f) Solid waste shall not be compacted in an approved receptacle to the extent of obstructing free and easy removal from the receptacles. Residents and owners shall restrain their animals from spreading solid waste or recyclable materials left for collection or from interfering with pickup personnel during collection. (Ord. No. 3270, § 5, 8-15-75; Ord. No. 3509, § 1, 10-29-79; Ord. No. 3716, § 2, 11-28-83; Ord. No. 3790, § 2, 8-12-85; Ord. No. 3831, § 1, 9-8-86; Ord. No. 4005, § 3, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 4169, § 1, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 4471, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-21. Solid waste/yard waste/recyclable materials; receptacle placement; upkeep and accessibility.
(a) All receptacles shall be placed for collection outside of all buildings at ground level and placed: (1) on the sidewalk adjacent to the curb, while maintaining unobstructed sidewalk access of at least forty-eight (48) inches in width; (2) adjacent to the travelway where curb does not exist or if at least forty-eight (48) inches in width of unobstructed sidewalk access cannot be maintained; (3) in the alley adjoining such premises; or (4) other convenient places easily accessible to the contractor. If no alley is conveniently available, receptacles may be placed within the public right-of-way or at such places as the solid waste division may direct. All collection points shall be curbside except commercial containers and alley pickups. All residential receptacles shall be placed out for service by 7:00 a.m. on collection day.

(b) The contractor shall not permit receptacles to be thrown from the truck to the pavement or parkway nor in any other way permit damage to occur by rough or improper handling thereof. Space, private ground, public streets, alleys or the area around the receptacles and the collection truck shall be left free from solid waste spilled during collection. The contractor shall be responsible for removal of such spillage, but shall not be responsible for cleaning up conditions created by the resident around such receptacles.

(c) Receptacles stored in enclosures will be collected only if the enclosures are unlocked and the receptacles are accessible to the contractor. Enclosures, except those for commercial containers, shall be immediately adjacent to the street or alley from which collection is to be made.

(d) Containers shall be placed outside of all buildings and structures so as to provide adequate access for collection vehicles. It shall be the responsibility of the user, not the city or the contractor, to provide adequate access.

(e) Other than commercial container pickup, all receptacles shall be removed from the collection point within twenty-four (24) hours of service. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste or recyclable materials on any premises or failure to remove the receptacle as provided heretofore is hereby prohibited and declared to be a public nuisance and a misdemeanor. (Ord. No. 3270, § 6, 8-15-75; Ord. No. 3790, § 3, 8-12-85; Ord. No. 4005, § 4, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 4171, § 1, 11-18-96; Ord. No. 4471, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 4574, § 1, 2-13-12; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4717, § 1, 4-9-18)

Sec. 17-22. Frequency of collection.
(a) Solid waste collection for residential single-unit and multi-unit dwellings using mobile cart service shall be one (1) time per week, with the service day corresponding to the contractor-approved residential collection route plan.

(b) Solid waste accumulated at the premises of commercial and business places, particularly where large accumulations of such solid waste regularly occur, shall be collected at least once each week except as provided herein for roll-off container service.

(c) If a residential or commercial user desires a greater frequency of collection, such residential or commercial user may pay an additional fee, rate or charge as set by resolution of the city council.

(d) If a user desires to change service level following the initial delivery of a residential or commercial cart, such user may change service level one (1) time free of charge; however, subsequent changes will be assessed a fee as set by resolution of the city council.

(e) Collection of drop box/roll-off containers and roll-off compaction containers shall be on call with 24-hour notification to the contractor, with minimum monthly service. Food service establishments or generators of food waste or putrescible solid waste using drop box/roll-off containers shall be collected a minimum of one (1) time per week.

Provided, however, that wherever the user requests and can show the absence of any nuisance or unsanitary condition, as defined by applicable city codes, the frequency of collection may be an interval of fourteen (14) days.

Nothing herein shall prohibit the solid waste division from requiring greater frequency of collection or immediate collection to abate any nuisance or unsanitary condition, including if the user regularly is unable to place all solid waste in the receptacle with the lid closed prior to placing for collection. Charges for such abatement shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. No. 3270, § 7, 8-15-75; Ord. No. 3509, § 2, 10-29-79; Ord. No. 3716, § 3, 11-28-83; Ord. No. 3790, § 4, 8-12-85; Ord. No. 4005, § 5, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 4471, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 4574, § 1, 2-13-12; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-23. Precollection practices.
(a) Before being placed or deposited in approved receptacles for collection, all solid waste shall be drained of all liquids and may be wrapped and placed in paper or plastic bags.

(b) No gasoline, solvent, oil, paint or other hazardous waste or prohibited material shall be placed in the receptacles.

(c) No tires shall be placed in approved receptacles.

(d) No yard waste, sod or roots shall be placed in approved receptacles.

(e) Small quantities of construction debris, except concrete, concrete block, asphalt, brick and rock, may be deposited in the mobile cart approved for solid waste collection; provided, that the lid of the mobile cart can still be closed; and provided, that the weight of the mobile cart, with all enclosed solid waste, does not exceed the weight limit established in this article.

(f) At premises where large accumulations of solid waste occur, the resident or owner of such premises may place sanitary containers in an enclosure specifically designed for containers. All enclosures shall be cleaned by the owner of such refuse enclosures on a regular basis and so constructed as to provide adequate ingress and egress.

(g) All materials stored in refuse enclosures will be presumed to be refuse for disposal and will be removed by the contractor unless the collection of such materials is prohibited in this code. Claims for such materials will not be recognized.

(h) Container storage locations shall be designed to comply with appropriate A.N.S.I. safety requirements and any city standards relating to these locations.

(i) Before being placed or deposited in approved receptacles for collection all Styrofoam packing “peanuts” shall be placed in a plastic bag and securely bound. Receptacles containing loose Styrofoam packing “peanuts” will not be emptied. (Ord. No. 3270, § 8, 8-15-75; Ord. No. 3790, § 5, 8-12-85; Ord. No. 4005, § 6, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 4075, § 3, 6-28-93; Ord. No. 4145, § 1, 9-25-95; Ord. No. 4364, § 1, 9-13-04; Ord. No. 4471, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-24. Special services.
(a) The city reserves the right to, and may at its option, require the separation of garbage, rubbish or other components of solid waste, require the deposit thereof in separate containers, and prescribe the method of disposal thereof. The city also reserves the right to issue further regulations for the placement and disposal of materials for resource and/or energy recovery.

(b) All demolition agreements signed with the city that specify the primary types of demolition materials, including, but not limited to, lumber and wood products, concrete products, metal, and plastics, may be subject to the requirements above. (Ord. No. 3270, § 9, 8-15-75; Ord. No. 3790, § 6, 8-12-85; Ord. No. 4471, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-25. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4603, § 2, adopted Sept. 23, 2013, repealed § 17-25, pertaining to rates, fees and charges, derived from Ord. No. 3270, § 10; Ord. No. 3302, § 1; Ord. No. 3340, § 1; Ord. No. 3553, § 2; Ord. No. 3790, § 7; Ord. No. 3933, § 1; Ord. No. 4169, § 2; Ord. No. 4274, § 1; Ord. No. 4312, § 1; Ord. No. 4338, § 1; Ord. No. 4364, § 2; Ord. No. 4431, § 1; Ord. No. 4464, § 1; Ord. No. 4471, § 2.

Sec. 17-26. License required; restrictions on operations.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste or recyclable materials accumulated within the city over any of the streets, alleys or public ways of the city unless such person has received a license, contract or franchise therefor from the city.

(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of transporting any solid waste upon Interstate Bridge or the other streets and alleys of the city except to the city solid waste transfer station established pursuant to this article, with the following exceptions:

(1) An employee or contractor of the city or Nez Perce County who is specifically authorized to transport solid waste from the transfer station to the landfill site.

(2) Persons transporting solid waste items such as hazardous materials and prohibited items which are not acceptable at the transfer station but transported to another site designated by the city for receiving such materials.

(3) Nothing herein shall be deemed as prohibiting any resident or owner from transporting their own solid waste to another site designated by the city for receiving such materials.

(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, or to cause, the accumulation in or about any premises or upon any street, alley or public way of the city adjacent to such premises, owned or occupied by him, solid waste or recyclable materials in an amount or manner as to constitute a health hazard or a nuisance as defined by applicable litter codes.

(d) It shall be unlawful to place, deposit or leave, or to permit to remain anywhere in the city, any solid waste or recyclable materials except as provided in this article.

(e) It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any solid waste or recyclable materials in such a manner that they can be blown away by the wind or cause littering of public or private premises, streets, alleys and public ways of the city.

(f) It shall be unlawful to burn any solid waste or recyclable materials outside of any building at any time in the city unless a permit has been obtained from the city therefor.

(g) Nothing herein shall be deemed as prohibiting any person from hauling solid waste or recyclable materials without compensation; provided, that no person shall haul solid waste or recyclable materials except to a site designated by the city for receiving such materials; and provided further, that such person shall not thereby be relieved of payment of any fees or charges set forth in Chapter 36.5 of this code.

(h) A willful violation of any of the foregoing provisions shall be a misdemeanor. A continuing violation of any such provision is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. No. 3270, § 11, 8-15-75; Ord. No. 4471, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-27. Hazardous wastes and prohibited materials.
(a) The contractor shall not collect or transport to the disposal site or transfer station any hazardous wastes such as poisons, acids, caustics and explosives, wearing apparel and bedding or other solid waste from any place such as hospitals or any premises where a highly infectious contagious disease has prevailed. All requests for collection of any hazardous wastes shall be referred directly to the North Central District Health Department or the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality by the contractor.

(b) Every residential account and commercial account shall be responsible to determine whether or not its volumes of waste contain hazardous waste, and to ensure that all hazardous waste is properly disposed of according to federal, state and local requirements.

(c) Except as provided in this article, the contractor shall not be required to collect waste building materials from construction, alteration, repair, moving or demolition of buildings or structures, nor large objects, such as tree stumps, tree trunks, large limbs or logs, automobile or truck bodies and tires, couches, refrigerators, carpets, water heaters, industrial or agricultural refuse, hot ashes, animal feces, or dead animals.

If a residential or commercial user desires collection of waste building materials and large objects, such residential or commercial users may contract for those collection services with another person licensed to perform such services.

(d) Disposal of hazardous waste at the transfer station that exhibits one (1) or more of the characteristics identified in the Code of Federal Regulations (40 CFR Part 261), or hazardous waste that appears on any of four (4) specific lists issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, is prohibited and shall be a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment of up to one (1) year or both.

(e) Disposal of hazardous wastes commonly referred to as “universal wastes” may be accepted subject to limitation at the moderate risk waste facility described in section 17-28 of this code.

(f) In addition to the criminal penalties provided in subsection (d) of this section, the person that generated the hazardous waste shall be responsible for any cleanup costs associated with the proper disposal of the hazardous waste, and the person may be fined up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in addition to the costs associated with the proper disposal of the hazardous wastes. (Ord. No. 3270, § 12, 8-15-75; Ord. No. 3814, § 1, 4-28-86; Ord. No. 4145, § 2, 9-25-95; Ord. No. 4471, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-28. Solid waste transfer station and household moderate risk waste facility.
(a) For the protection and preservation of the safety, health, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, there is hereby established at such places and locations as the city council may from time to time designate a place for depositing solid waste and recyclable materials, to be known as the city solid waste transfer station.

(b) The rates, fees or charges for depositing solid waste at the transfer station shall be as set forth by resolution of the city council.

(c) All charges for depositing solid waste at the transfer station shall be recorded against the service address identified on the current utility bill from which the solid waste was generated.

(d) The city may make and enforce rules and regulations governing the operation and maintenance of the transfer station in addition to the following specifications and conditions for the receiving and transporting of solid waste and recyclable materials:

(1) Any person depositing waste material at the transfer station shall produce a copy of their current city utility bill, or county tax assessment, showing the service address from which the waste material was generated, prior to depositing the material.

(2) No burning shall be permitted.

(3) The transfer station shall be adequately operated to prevent unauthorized dumping. The city shall provide adequate fencing and site development including earth barriers to control littering, and the contractor shall make every effort for adequate litter control at the transfer station and on the approach roads.

(4) The city or its employees shall be responsible for maintaining the transfer station free of rats and other nuisances.

(5) Any person transporting solid waste, recyclable materials, construction or demolition debris to the city transfer station shall deposit the same at the places designated by the transfer station employees.

(e) Liquid wastes shall not be disposed of at the transfer station.

(f) All pesticide containers and hazardous waste containers shall be drained, triple-rinsed and punctured prior to disposal. Each residential and commercial user must declare that all pesticide containers and hazardous waste containers have been drained, triple-rinsed and punctured prior to disposal.

(g) All nonhazardous waste containers of five (5) gallons or more shall be completely drained, rinsed and punctured.

(h) Final disposal of solid waste, recyclable material, and moderate-risk waste at the transfer station shall be the responsibility of the city.

(i) Construction or demolition debris will only be accepted from residential, self-haul users. No commercial or self-dumping loads of construction or demolition debris will be accepted at the transfer station.

(j) Yard waste will not be accepted at the transfer station from any person or residential account or commercial account.

(k) To encourage recycling and proper disposal of some common hazardous wastes referred to as “universal wastes” by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, there is hereby established the household moderate-risk waste facility located at the city Transfer Station.

(l) The city may make and enforce rules and regulations governing the operation and maintenance of the household moderate-risk waste facility in addition to the following specifications and conditions for the receiving of moderate-risk waste from residential accounts:

(1) Latex-based paint in quantities of five (5) gallons or less, maximum five (5) gallons per day accepted.

(2) Anti-freeze in quantities of five (5) gallons or less, more than five (5) gallons per day accepted.

(3) Motor oil in quantities of five (5) gallons or less, more than five (5) gallons per day accepted.

(4) Batteries in single or bulk quantities.

(5) Each residential account must declare its volumes of universal waste prior to disposal. (Ord. No. 3270, § 13, 8-15-75; Ord. No. 3814, § 2, 4-28-86; Ord. No. 4145, § 3, 9-25-95; Ord. No. 4299, § 1, 2-25-02; Ord. No. 4471, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-29. Solid waste division.
There is hereby created the solid waste division of the public works department of the city. Said division shall be responsible for the administration of contracts between the city and contractors for the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste including recyclable materials, and, if applicable, moderate-risk hazardous waste. (Ord. No. 3270, § 14, 8-15-75; Ord. No. 3814, § 3, 4-28-86; Ord. No. 4005, § 7, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 4471, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 4574, § 1, 2-13-12; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-30. Contract authorization.
The city may contract for the collection, removal, transportation and disposal of solid waste, recyclable materials, hazardous waste or yard waste, operation and maintenance of the transfer station, or any combination thereof. All contracts shall be authorized and let solely in the manner provided by Idaho Statutes, Title 50-344. (Ord. No. 3270, § 15, 8-15-75; Ord. No. 4471, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-31. Home occupations.
Home occupations as authorized by Lewiston City Code may be permitted to combine residential service and commercial service into one (1) account under the residential rate structure where requested by the owner. A sufficient number of approved receptacles as determined by the solid waste division shall be provided for the collection of all refuse. (Ord. No. 3790, § 8, 8-12-85; Ord. No. 4471, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 4574, § 1, 2-13-12; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-32. Exemption from curb or alley service.
Residents who because of physical constraints cannot bring their solid waste, yard waste or recyclable materials to the curb or alley in an approved receptacle may be granted an exemption from doing so upon written representation from the resident to the city that there is no able-bodied person residing at the service address who can place the approved receptacle out for collection. The city shall notify the contractor to make the necessary arrangements for collections. (Ord. No. 3790, § 9, 8-12-85; Ord. No. 4005, § 8, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 4471, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-33. Mobile cart service.
(a) Damaged carts. Mobile carts shall be provided by the contractor. All mobile carts shall remain the property of the contractor. Mobile carts are provided and assigned to residences and businesses for the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the occupants. The occupant shall be responsible for keeping the cart clean. Carts which are damaged, destroyed, or stolen through abuse, neglect or improper use by the owner or occupant shall be replaced, at the discretion of the solid waste division, by the contractor at the expense of the owner of the residence or owner of the business. Carts which are damaged in the course of normal and reasonable usage or which are damaged, destroyed, or stolen through no abuse, neglect, or improper use by the owner or occupant shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor at no charge to the owner. The carts shall not be damaged, destroyed, the lid removed, or the cart removed from the residence or business by any person; markings and identification devices on the carts, except as placed or specifically permitted by the contractor and the city, are expressly prohibited and shall be regarded as damage to the carts.

Where the solid waste division determines that an owner shall not receive a replacement cart, the owner or occupant shall use owner- or occupant-supplied approved receptacles for residential and commercial service. Where such receptacles are in use, the owner shall be charged the same rate for the same residential or commercial service.

(b) Resident-provided cart. Residential owners may purchase a mobile cart from the contractor, or provide their own mobile cart. The residential owner-supplied cart must be compatible with the contractor’s equipment and meet the minimum specifications identified in the contracts for the collection and disposal of solid waste and recyclable materials. Residential owners who purchase their own cart shall be charged the same rate as that charged for the equivalent contractor-supplied cart. In addition, residential owners shall be responsible for all maintenance, repairs, and cleaning of their carts.

(c) Additional service. A sufficient number of mobile carts shall be in use by residential and commercial users, if applicable, to contain all refuse placed for collection. All refuse shall be placed in the mobile cart except as provided for the collection of additional garbage units. Additional garbage units for residential and commercial shall be collected at the rate set by resolution of the city council. The residential or commercial user shall notify the contractor a minimum of one (1) day prior to collection day to collect the specified number of additional garbage units. Failure to notify the contractor one (1) day prior to collection day may result in noncollection of additional garbage units on collection day placed outside the mobile cart.

Acceptable garbage units for residential accounts shall be plastic bags not to exceed a gross weight of thirty-five (35) pounds, with a gauge of not less than one and four-tenths (1.4) mils. Acceptable garbage units for commercial accounts are provided in this article. (Ord. No. 3790, § 10, 8-12-85; Ord. No. 4005, § 9, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 4169, § 3, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 4471, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 4574, § 1, 2-13-12; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-33.1. Yard waste collection.
(a) Collection hours and days. Collection of yard waste shall be made between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Collection shall occur as follows:

(1) Weekly service beginning the last full week of March and continuing through November.

(2) Monthly service during the first (1st) through the seventh (7th) calendar day on regular garbage day of each month December through March.

(b) Approved receptacles. All yard waste as defined herein shall be placed in approved receptacles and collected without limitation to volume.

Approved receptacles for yard waste collection shall include the following:

(1) Cans. Watertight, metal or plastic cans of not less than 20-gallon capacity, nor more than 32-gallon capacity. The total combined weight of the can and yard waste shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds. A can shall be equipped with handles and a close-fitting, detachable cover.

Where refuse cans are approved receptacles for use, the contractor shall not be required to empty cans with deteriorated bottoms or cans worn out to the extent they no longer meet the requirements for approved receptacles. The collector shall tag such cans indicating the reason for nonservice.

The contractor shall remove and dispose of deteriorated refuse cans placed out for service upon the direction of the solid waste division or where the owner-occupant posts on the can(s) a signed request to remove.

(2) Bags.

a. Disposable (nonreturnable) paper bags, which shall be fifty (50) pounds wet strength kraft paper, the gross weight of which shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds.

b. Disposable (nonreturnable) plastic bags with a gauge of not less than one and four-tenths (1.4) mils; provided, that plastic bags shall only be allowed for curbside yard waste collection during the months of November, December, January, February, and March. The gross weight of the plastic bag and contents shall not exceed thirty-five (35) pounds.

(3) Bundles. Tree trimmings of securely tied bundles shall not exceed four (4) feet in length and two (2) feet in diameter. Bundles may be tied with string or twine. Plastic or wire ties are not acceptable.

(c) Non-approved receptacles. Mobile garbage carts are for refuse disposal only and shall not be approved receptacles for yard waste. Non-approved receptacles containing yard waste, or approved receptacles containing yard waste contaminated with refuse or recyclable materials, will not be collected.

(d) Placement of yard waste. Yard waste shall be placed at the curb or edge of travelway where no curb exists.

For alley service, yard waste shall not be placed beyond any fence, structure, or other obstruction which limits access, except as provided in section 17-32 of this code.

(e) Destination. All yard waste collected by the contractor and all yard waste transported by residents, lawn care operations, or other self-haul operations shall be delivered to the city-contracted compost facility, or such site approved and designated by the city.

(f) Residential self-haulers may deposit yard waste free of charge at the city-contracted compost facility with a copy of their current city utility bill, or county tax assessment, showing the service address from which the yard waste material was generated.

(g) Commercial self-haulers shall be responsible for all rates, fees or charges incurred by them depositing yard waste at the city-contracted compost facility, and shall be eligible for the same unit tonnage rate for the city-designated contract hauler and city collection vehicles. (Ord. No. 4005, § 10, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 4075, § 2, 6-28-93; Ord. No. 4169, § 4, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 4471, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 4574, § 1, 2-13-12; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-33.2. Recyclable materials – Curbside collection, processing and marketing.
(a) The curbside collection, processing and marketing of recyclable materials shall be done in accordance to the provisions and specifications set forth in the curbside collection contract between the city and the contractor providing for such service.

(b) Recyclable materials placed out by the generator at curbside using contractor-provided carts for collection by the contractor and shall be removed by the contractor or his designated agent only. Unauthorized collection of recyclable materials from contractor-provided carts shall be prohibited and declared to be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in the Lewiston City Code. (Ord. No. 4171, § 2, 11-18-96; Ord. No. 4471, § 2, 4-9-07; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

ARTICLE III. WEEDS
Sec. 17-34. Declared nuisance.
The city hereby declares that overgrown and/or uncontrolled vegetation within the city is a public nuisance. Such vegetation can cause a blighting effect on neighborhoods and provide a refuge for vermin and insects. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the residents and property owners of the city. (Code 1960, § 12-13; Ord. No. 3996, § 1, 4-8-91; Ord. No. 4071, § 1, 6-14-93; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4718, § 2, 4-9-18)

Sec. 17-35. Abatement.
No property owner within the city shall:

(1) Allow or permit grass and/or weeds, excluding ornamental grass, to grow more than twelve (12) inches in height upon such property or upon any areas adjacent to such property, from the edge of the adjacent street paving, centerline of adjacent alley travelways, or centerline of adjacent undeveloped right-of-way;

(2) Allow or permit any vegetation or tree growth to overhang below nine (9) feet above the right-of-way area, from the edge of the travelway to the property line of the adjacent property, or rest upon the sidewalk and/or sidewalk space adjacent to such property so as to interfere in any manner with the full, free, and unobstructed use of such sidewalk or sidewalk space;

(3) Allow or permit any vegetation growth within the right-of-way, from the edge of the travelway to the property line of the adjacent property, that would obstruct the clear vision area, as defined in Chapter 31 of this code, of an intersection, driveway, or other area as determined by the public works director or designee.

This subsection shall not apply to trees placed on the right-of-way and maintained pursuant to the urban forestry program and/or pursuant to the authority of the public works director;

(4) Allow or permit any vegetation or tree growth to overhang below fourteen (14) feet above any public travelway designated for motor vehicle traffic. Measurements shall be determined from the centerline elevation of the adjacent travelway;

(5) Allow or permit any vegetation upon such property or upon any areas adjacent to such property, from the edge of the adjacent street paving, centerline of adjacent alley travelways, or centerline of adjacent undeveloped right-of-way, to the extent that it creates a fire hazard as determined by the Lewiston fire department;

(6) Allow or permit any tree infested with disease or insects to remain standing without application of proper treatment(s) to correct and/or eliminate the disease or infestation. If said tree is determined by the city forester to be dying or dead, the tree shall be removed within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice from the code enforcement officer or designee. (Code 1960, § 12-14; Ord. No. 2491, § 1; Ord. No. 3996, § 2, 4-8-91; Ord. No. 4071, § 2, 6-14-93; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4718, § 3, 4-9-18)

Cross reference – Fire code, § 15-1.

Sec. 17-36. Abatement of violation – By city.
(a) Notice to abate violation(s). If any property located within the city is in violation of this article, the code enforcement officer or designee shall serve notice upon the owner, occupant, or person in control of said property describing the violation(s) and requiring the violation(s) to be abated within seven (7) calendar days from the date such notice is delivered, except that the code enforcement officer or designee may require the violation(s) to be abated immediately if a fire hazard exists. Service of such notice shall be made by: (1) personal delivery, and such notice shall be deemed delivered immediately; (2) posting such notice on the property, which posting may be made by placing a door hanger in a conspicuous place on the property, and such notice shall be deemed delivered twenty-four (24) hours after posting; or (3) mailing such notice via certified mail to the last known address of the owner, occupant, or person in control of the property, and such notice shall be deemed delivered seventy-two (72) hours after depositing the same in the U.S. mail.

If the violation(s) is not abated within the time frame set forth in such notice, and if such notice did not include mailed notice to the property owner, then the code enforcement officer or designee shall mail an additional notice to the property owner, via certified mail to the property owner’s last known address, describing the violation(s) and requiring the property owner to abate the violation(s) within seven (7) calendar days from the date such notice is delivered, except that the code enforcement officer or designee may require the property owner to abate the violation(s) immediately if a fire hazard exists. Such notice shall be deemed delivered seventy-two (72) hours after depositing the same in the U.S. mail.

(b) Failure to comply. If the property owner fails to comply with such notice to abate, then the code enforcement officer or designee shall be authorized to cause the violation(s) to be abated and/or issue citation(s) as set forth in section 17-38 of this code.

(c) Recovery of abatement costs. If the code enforcement officer or designee causes a violation of this article to be abated, then, within thirty (30) calendar days of abatement of the violation, the city shall mail to the property owner a billing statement requiring payment to the city for the actual cost of abatement plus an administrative fee, which administrative fee shall be set by resolution of the Lewiston city council.

Such billing statement shall state: (1) the address and parcel number of the subject property; (2) the date of abatement; (3) the amount of abatement costs, including the administrative fee; (4) if such costs and fee are not paid in full within thirty (30) calendar days of mailing of the billing statement, then the city may attempt to recover such costs and fee through city bill collection procedures and/or levy a special assessment against the subject property pursuant to Idaho Code, Sections 50-334 and 50-1008; and (5) if such special assessment is not paid within thirty (30) calendar days, then such special assessment shall be placed on the property tax roll and become a lien against such property.

(d) Nonpayment of abatement costs. If full payment is not made to the city within thirty (30) calendar days of mailing of the billing statement, then the city may:

(1) Attempt to recover such amount through city bill collection procedures; and/or

(2) Levy a special assessment against the subject property pursuant to Idaho Code, Sections 50-334 and 50-1008 and/or any subsequently adopted or otherwise applicable laws. If payment to the city treasurer is not made within thirty (30) calendar days after the property owner is notified pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, then such special assessment may be declared delinquent and be certified to the tax collector of Nez Perce County by the city clerk not later than August 1st of each year. Upon such certification, such special assessment shall be placed upon the tax roll and thereafter become a lien against the property described in the notice and shall be collected in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as other city taxes. Upon payment of such special assessment and administrative fee, in full, the city clerk shall file a release of lien with the Nez Perce County assessor. (Ord. No. 3213, § 2, 6-17-74; Ord. No. 3996, § 3, 4-8-91; Ord. No. 4071, § 3, 6-14-93; Ord. No. 4243, § 1, 9-13-99; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4718, § 4, 4-9-18)

Sec. 17-37. Noxious weeds.
The code enforcement officer or designee may notify Nez Perce County of the presence of any noxious weeds within the city. (Ord. No. 4718, § 5, 4-9-18)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4603, § 2, adopted Sept. 23, 2013, repealed former § 17-37, pertaining to definitions, derived from Ord. No. 3996, § 4; Ord. No. 4071, § 4.

Sec. 17-38. Penalty for violation.
Any person or entity who owns property found to be in violation of this article shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction and shall be fined a sum not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00).

In the event said person or entity pleads guilty to such civil infraction, is found guilty of such civil infraction, or default judgment is entered for such civil infraction, and the same person or entity is subsequently found to be in violation of this article again within a 36-month period from the date said person or entity pleaded guilty to such civil infraction, was found guilty of such civil infraction, or default judgment was entered for such civil infraction, then said person or entity shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor, subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the Nez Perce County jail for not more than six (6) months, or both.

Each day that the property remains in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 4243, § 2, 9-13-99; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4718, § 6, 4-9-18)

Secs. 17-39 – 17-48. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. LITTER3
Sec. 17-49. Definitions.
Refuse: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body waste, including garbage, trash, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, junk and solid market and industrial waste.

Rubbish: Any nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible or noncombustible waste and including, but not limited to, yard clippings, leaves, wood, tree trimmings, and other similar materials.

Vehicle: Any device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon the street, except devices moved solely by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 3996, § 5, 4-8-91; Ord. No. 4289, § 1, 9-10-01; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-50. Littering.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally throw or deposit any litter or rubbish within the corporate limits of the city of Lewiston, Idaho.

(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to cause any litter to be carried, blown, scattered or deposited in any manner upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place, river, canal, public waterway, drain, sewer or any receiving basin within the corporate limits of the city of Lewiston, Idaho. (Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 3996, § 6, 4-8-91; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-51. Placement of receptacles to prevent littering.
(a) All persons placing litter in public receptacles or authorized private receptacles as established by the provisions of the solid waste ordinance of the city of Lewiston, Idaho, or its successor ordinance, shall do so in such a manner as to prevent the litter from being carried, blown, scattered, or otherwise deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or public place or upon any private property within the city limits of Lewiston, Idaho.

(b) All receptacles for litter placement shall be equipped with close-fitting lids or covers or shall be otherwise securely enclosed in such a manner that the contents of the receptacle cannot be carried, blown, scattered or otherwise deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or public place or upon any private property within the city limits of Lewiston, Idaho. (Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-52. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep into or deposit upon or place in any gutter, sidewalk, street or other public place in the city of Lewiston, Idaho, any accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in the front of their premises free from such litter. (Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-53. Merchant’s duty to keep sidewalks clean.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit or place upon any gutter, street or other public place within the city any accumulation of litter from any building or lot or any public place or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free from such litter. (Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-54. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3996, § 11, adopted April 8, 1991, amended the code by deleting provisions contained in § 17-54. Said provisions pertained to litter thrown by persons in vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 3527, § 1, adopted Aug. 25, 1980.

Sec. 17-55. Vehicle loads causing litter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any truck, pickup, trailer or other vehicle within the city to haul or transport any kind of litter or rubbish unless such truck or vehicle is designed, constructed and properly covered so as to prevent any load or the contents thereof from being carried, blown, scattered, spilled, tracked or otherwise deposited upon any street, alley or other public or private property located within the city of Lewiston, Idaho. Construction materials such as rock, sand and dirt not susceptible to shifting, blowing, spilling or leakage must be covered only when necessary to prevent spillage. (Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 3996, § 7, 4-8-91; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-56. Proper load covering.
(a) Proper covering for loads shall be of the following type:

(1) Fabric, canvas or plastic tarp of durable strength.

(2) Metal mesh screen.

(3) Fabric mesh screens or nets.

(4) Loads of tree limbs or brush shall be securely tied or may be covered by any of the methods heretofore described in this section.

(b) The loss of any load or the contents thereof from any vehicle shall be prima facie evidence of improper covering and/or tying within the means of this section. (Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 3996, § 8, 4-8-91; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Secs. 17-57 – 17-60. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3996, § 11, adopted April 8, 1991, amended the code by deleting provisions contained in §§ 17-57 – 17-60. Said provisions pertained to litter in parks, lakes and fountains, dropped from aircraft, and on occupied private property and derived from Ord. No. 3527, § 1, adopted Aug. 25, 1980.

Sec. 17-61. Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the private property free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of such litter as provided elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Secs. 17-62, 17-63. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3996, § 11, adopted April 8, 1991, amended the code by deleting provisions contained in §§ 17-62 and 17-63. Said provisions pertained to litter on vacant lots and construction sites and derived from Ord. No. 3527, § 1, adopted Aug. 25, 1980.

Sec. 17-64. Clearing of litter from private property by city.
(a) Notice to remove. The code enforcement officer of the city of Lewiston is hereby authorized and empowered to serve notice upon the owner, person in control or contract purchaser of any private property located within the city limits of Lewiston, Idaho, describing the violation(s) of this article and directing and requiring said owner, person in control or contract purchaser to promptly remove any litter from said property or from any sidewalks, alleys and parking abutting such private property if such sidewalks, alleys or parking exists. Such notice shall be accomplished by posting said notice on the real property whereon the litter is to be removed and by mail, addressed to said owner at his/her last address of record.

(b) Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, after being notified as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, to properly dispose of and remove all items on said real property within the time period stated in the notice of violation, then the code enforcement officer hereby is authorized and empowered to cause such litter to be removed.

(c) Charges for removal or disposal, special assessments. When the city has caused litter on private property to be removed and/or disposed as provided for hereinabove in this section, then the actual cost for such removal and/or disposal plus accrued interest at the rate of not more than six (6) percent per annum from the date of the completion of such disposal and/or removal shall be chargeable and assessable against the owner of the subject property. If not paid within thirty (30) days to the city treasurer of the city of Lewiston, Idaho, all such charges shall be declared delinquent and may be certified to the tax collector of Nez Perce County by the city clerk and collected in the manner provided for by Idaho Code, Section 50-1008 or any other manner permitted by law. (Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 3996, § 10, 4-8-91; Ord. No. 4289, § 2, 9-10-01; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-65. Unlawful removal.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or to move any receptacle for the placement of litter from any private property or public property in the city. This section shall not apply to any authorized city employee or agent, or to the person owning the property or placing the receptacle thereon. (Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-66. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3996, § 11, adopted April 8, 1991, amended the code by deleting provisions contained in § 17-66. Said provisions pertained to placement of advertising on public property and derived from Ord. No. 3527, § 1, adopted Aug. 25, 1980.

Sec. 17-67. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4289, § 4, adopted Sept. 10, 2001, amended the code by renumbering the provisions of § 17-67, pertaining to placement of advertising upon motor vehicles, to § 3-6. Said provisions derived from Ord. No. 3527, § 1, adopted Aug. 25, 1980.

Sec. 17-68. Violations declared public nuisance.
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-69. Penalties.
Any violation of sections 17-50 through 17-56 of this code shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). A second conviction under any section 17-50 through 17-56 within two (2) years of the commission of the prior offense for which the person was convicted shall constitute an infraction and be punishable by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00). A third conviction under any section 17-50 through 17-56 within three (3) years of the first offense for which the person was convicted shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding thirty (30) days.

Any person or entity who owns or is in control of or is the contract purchaser of real property found to be in violation of this article shall be deemed to have committed a civil infraction and for each violation shall be fined a sum not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day the real property remains in violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 4289, § 3, 9-10-01; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4644, § 2, 10-26-15)

Sec. 17-70. Remedies.
In addition to any other remedy provided for hereinabove in this chapter, the city may institute an injunction, abatement or other appropriate proceedings to enjoin, abate, or remove any condition which constitutes a violation of this article. (Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-71. Accumulation of manure a nuisance.
The accumulation of manure in violation of Lewiston City Code sections 37-195 through 37-199 is hereby declared a nuisance. (Ord. No. 4354, § 6, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-72. Notice to remove.
The code enforcement officer of the city of Lewiston is hereby authorized and empowered to serve notice upon the owner, person in control or contract purchaser of any private property located within the city limits whereon there occurs a nuisance from accumulation of manure. The notice shall describe the violation(s) and shall direct said owner, person in control or contract purchaser to promptly remove any manure from said property. Said notice shall be accomplished by posting said notice on the real property whereon the nuisance accumulation of manure exists and by mail and addressed to the said record owner at his or her last address of record. (Ord. No. 4354, § 6, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-73. Action on noncompliance.
When the owner, person in control or contract purchaser, after proper notice as provided above, and after ten (10) days fails, neglects or refuses to properly dispose of and remove all manure from the real property within the time period stated in the notice of violation, then the code enforcement officer is hereby authorized to cause such manure to be removed. (Ord. No. 4354, § 6, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

Sec. 17-74. Special assessment for costs of removal.
When the code enforcement officer has caused the manure on private property to be removed and disposed of as provided in this article, and then the actual costs of such removal and disposal shall become a special assessment against said real property. All charges, if unpaid after thirty (30) days, shall be declared delinquent and may be certified by the city clerk to the Nez Perce County tax collector and collected in the manner provided for by Idaho Code, Section 50-1008 or any other manner permitted by law. (Ord. No. 4354, § 6, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 4603, § 2, 9-23-13)

1
Cross references – Sanitation at airport, § 5-61, buildings and building regulations, Ch. 10; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 13; health and sanitation, Ch. 19; manufactured homes, manufactured home parks and tourist facilities, Ch. 23.


2
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3270, § 16, adopted Aug. 15, 1975, repealed §§ 12-1 – 12-12 of the 1960 Code, as amended by Ord. No. 2036, § 1; Ord. No. 2606, § 1; Ord. No. 2654, § 1; Ord. No. 2894, § 1, 8-17-70; Ord. No. 3038, § 1, 7-12-71; Ord. No. 3039, § 1, 7-12-71; Ord. No. 3215, § 1, 6-21-74. Said sections, which pertained to the collection of garbage and rubbish, had been codified herein as §§ 17-16 – 17-23.

Sections 1 – 15 of Ord. No. 3270 adopted provisions which were nonamendatory of the code. Inclusion herein as §§ 17-16 – 17-30 was at the discretion of the editor.


3
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3527, § 1, enacted Aug. 25, 1980, repealed former Art. IV, §§ 17-49 – 17-65, relative to litter, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Art. IV, §§ 17-49 – 17-70, as herein set out. Former Art. IV was derived from Ord. No. 3138, §§ 1 – 16, adopted April 23, 1973, and Ord. No. 3165, § 1, adopted Sep. 24, 1973.


Chapter 18
GAS AND OIL1
1
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4557, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, repealed Ch. 18, gas and oil, in its entirety. Former §§ 18-1 – 18-12 derived from Ord. No. 4419 § 2, adopted Oct. 24, 2005.


Chapter 19
HEALTH AND SANITATION1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 19-1 – 19-15

Art. II.    Reserved, §§ 19-16 – 19-42

Art. III.    Reserved, §§ 19-43 – 19-57

Art. IV.    Slaughterhouses and Depositories for Dead Animals, §§ 19-58 – 19-72

Art. V.    Rodent Control, §§ 19-73 – 19-80

ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 19-1. Abatement of unsanitary buildings.
Whenever any building or part thereof shall, from any unsanitary cause, become unfit for human habitation, the health officer may issue an order to be affixed conspicuously to the door or building. A copy of said notice shall be served on the owner, agent, tenant or lessee thereof, requiring all persons to vacate such building or apartment until such time as the health officer shall determine that the unsanitary condition no longer exists. Failure to obey such order shall be a misdemeanor. The continued existence of such sanitary condition for a period of more than twenty-four (24) hours after the issuance and posting of such order shall constitute a public nuisance, abatable as provided by law. (Ord. No. 3320, § 1, 7-19-76)

Cross reference – Building regulations generally, Ch. 10.

Secs. 19-2 – 19-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RESERVED2
Secs. 19-16 – 19-42. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. RESERVED3
Secs. 19-43 – 19-57. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. SLAUGHTERHOUSES AND DEPOSITORIES FOR DEAD ANIMALS
Sec. 19-58. Slaughterhouses and depositories for dead animals.
No person shall carry on the business of slaughtering or rendering of any animal matter into fertilizing material or changing the form thereof in any manner or erect or keep any bone boiling establishment or depository of dead animals or animal matter at any place within the city or within one mile of the city limits at the nearest point, except upon written permission of the health officer. Any permit so granted may be revoked by the health officer whenever, in his judgment, it is necessary; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to forbid the slaughtering of domestic fowl and game birds for the rendering of lard. (Code 1960, § 14-17)

Sec. 19-59. Certain acts declared nuisance; abatement of same.
(a) No person, as owner or occupant, shall permit or suffer on his premises any nuisance, either in carrying on any unwholesome or offensive trade, calling or business, suffer or permit any building, outhouse, sewer, sink, barn or other building or fixture to become filthy, dirty or unhealthful or permit any unsound or putrid meat, flesh, hides, skins, feathers or any unwholesome substance of any kind whatever.

(b) Whenever the health officer shall be informed of the existence of any nuisance he shall examine the premises or cause the same to be examined. If the nuisance is found to exist thereon, he shall immediately give or cause to be given a notice to the owner or occupant of such premises to remove such nuisance. If such nuisance be not removed in twenty-four (24) hours after such notice, the chief of police shall cause the same to be removed. Any police officer or any one by him duly authorized is hereby empowered to remove any obstruction which may be necessary in order to reach and remove such nuisance. The expense of such removal, when performed by the city, shall be paid by the owner or occupant in addition to any penalty that may be imposed for the violation of this chapter. (Code 1960, § 14-18)

Sec. 19-60. Accumulation of manure and offensive substances prohibited.
No pile or deposit of manure, offal, garbage or accumulation of any offensive, nauseous or unsanitary substance shall be made or permitted on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city. All manure vaults attached to stables and all deposits of manure therewith connected shall be so cared for by the owner as in no case shall become a nuisance. (Code 1960, § 14-19; Ord. No. 2237, art. III, § 1)

Secs. 19-61 – 19-72. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. RODENT CONTROL
Sec. 19-73. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless the content clearly requires otherwise:

Health officer means the city sanitarian or any of his duly authorized representatives.

Occupant means the person who uses or occupies any premises for business purposes or any business building or fraction thereof. The owner, agent or custodian of any vacant premises or business building or any vacant portion thereof shall be considered, for the purpose of this article, as the occupant.

Owner means the owner, agent or custodian of a business building. The lessee of any business building shall be considered an owner for the purpose of this article when the lease under which he holds possession requires him to maintain and repair the building.

Premises shall mean any structure of any nature or real estate inside the city limits.

Rat eradication means the elimination or extermination of rats from any premises by any and all methods approved by the health officer.

Rat harborage means any place which provides shelter or protection for the continued existence or multiplication of rats, either in or outside of any business building.

Vent stoppage means a form of construction or repair to prevent the entry of rats into business buildings from the exterior or from one business building to another business building. (Code 1960, § 29-1; Ord. No. 3995, § 2, 3-25-91)

Sec. 19-74. Premises to be in rat-free condition.
All premises in the city shall be maintained in a vent stopped and rat-free condition by the owner or occupant. (Code 1960, § 29-2; Ord. No. 3995, § 3, 3-25-91)

Sec. 19-75. Food to be stored in ratproof containers; exception.
All food for human consumption and all animal feed shall be stored in ratproof containers, compartments or rooms; provided, that such storage shall be unnecessary if the same is kept in a vent stopped building approved by the health officer. (Code 1960, § 29-3)

Sec. 19-76. Garbage to be kept in ratproof containers.
All garbage and other waste material upon which rats may feed shall be placed and kept, until removed from the premises, in covered ratproof containers. (Code 1960, § 29-4)

Sec. 19-77. Premises to be kept free from rat harborages.
(a) All premises, improved or unimproved, and all open lots, areas, streets, sidewalks, alleys and other areas in the city shall be kept clean and free from all rubbish, loose material, lumber, boxes, barrels and loose iron that may serve as a harborage for rats.

(b) Any material that may provide rat harborage shall be placed upon supports in such a manner as to provide no refuge for rats.

(c) Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the keeping of domesticated rats as pets inside any structure within the city. (Code 1960, § 29-5; Ord. No. 3995, § 4, 3-25-91)

Sec. 19-78. Repairs and construction to comply with the provisions of this article.
All improvements, repairs, construction and maintenance of any premises, business building or any equipment or fixtures therein shall comply with the terms of this article. (Code 1960, § 29-6; Ord. No. 3995, § 5, 3-25-91)

Sec. 19-79. Violations to be corrected; notice.
(a) Whenever it shall come to the attention of the health officer that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated or that any business building or premises or portion thereof is infested with rats or has rats therein or thereunder, the health officer shall serve upon the owner or occupant of such business building or premises or both a notice in writing pointing out the specific violation of any or all of the foregoing provisions and requiring such person to comply with the appropriate provision of this chapter. Such notice shall fix a time limit for compliance therewith, which shall in no event be less than fifteen (15) days from the date of the service of such notice.

(b) Any person failing to comply with the directions contained in such notice within the time specified therein shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, however, that if the health officer finds that the time specified in the notice is too short to permit a good faith compliance, he may, in writing, extend the time for compliance. (Code 1960, § 29-7)

Sec. 19-80. Inspections.
The health officer shall make periodic inspections for the purpose of seeing that this chapter is complied with. No owner or occupant of any building or premises shall refuse to permit such inspections; provided, that the same are made at reasonable times. (Code 1960, § 29-8)

1
Cross references – Garbage, rubbish and weeds, Ch. 17; mobile homes, Ch. 23.


2
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3995, § 1, adopted March 25, 1991, amended the code by deleting provisions contained in Art. II, §§ 19-16 – 19-32 in their entirety. Said provisions pertained to food and food establishments and derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 11-8 – 11-19, 11-21 – 11-24; Ord. No. 2219, §§ 1 – 13; Ord. No. 2275, § 1; Ord. No. 2660, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 3001, § 1, adopted Oct. 12, 1970; Ord. No. 3590, § 1, adopted Sep. 8, 1981; Ord. No. 3889, § 7, adopted Dec. 7, 1987.


3
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3995, § 1, adopted March 25, 1991, amended the code by deleting provisions contained in Art. III, §§ 19-43, 19-44 in their entirety. Said provisions pertained to milk and milk products and derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 8-301, 8-302; the 1960 Code, §§ 17-1, 17-2; Ord. No. 2099, § 1; Ord. No. 2664, § 1.


Chapter 19.5
HISTORIC DISTRICTS1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 19.5-1 – 19.5-10

Art. II.    General Historic District Regulations; Lewiston West End Historic District, §§ 19.5-11 – 19.5-28

ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
19.5-1 – 19.5-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. GENERAL HISTORIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS; LEWISTON WEST END HISTORIC DISTRICT2
Sec. 19.5-11. Findings and declarations.
The city council of the city of Lewiston, Idaho, hereby finds and declares that the preservation of the historical, architectural and cultural heritage of the city is an important public purpose. The city council further finds that the protection, preservation and enhancement of buildings, structures, districts and neighborhoods of historical, architectural, and cultural significance, located within the city of Lewiston, will be of cultural, economic and aesthetic benefit to the city and its inhabitants. The purpose of this article is to:

(1) Designate, preserve, protect, enhance and perpetuate the historic buildings, structures, districts and neighborhoods which contribute to the cultural and aesthetic benefit of Lewiston.

(2) Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past.

(3) Stabilize and improve the economic value of certain historic buildings, structures, districts and neighborhoods.

(4) Promote and encourage continued private ownership and utilization of such buildings and other structures now so owned and used, consistent with the objectives listed above. (Ord. No. 3329, § 1, 9-13-76)

Sec. 19.5-12. General definitions.
As used in this article:

Certificate of appropriateness shall mean a certificate issued by the Lewiston historic preservation commission pursuant to section 19.5-21 of this code.

City shall mean the city of Lewiston, Idaho.

City council shall mean the city council of the city of Lewiston, Idaho.

Commission shall mean the Lewiston historic preservation commission created by section 19.5-14 of this article.

District shall mean the Lewiston West End Historic District created by section 19.5-13 of this code, and any other historic district hereafter created by the Lewiston city council pursuant to Chapter 46, Title 67, Idaho Code.

Exterior features shall include the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including the color, the kind and texture of the building materials, and type and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, other appurtenant fixtures, and natural features, such as trees and shrubbery. (Ord. No. 3329, § 2, 9-13-76; Ord. No. 4692, § 3, 10-30-17)

Sec. 19.5-13. Creation of Lewiston West End Historic District.
There is hereby created, pursuant to Idaho Code, Section 67-4607, within the city of Lewiston, the Lewiston West End Historic District (hereafter referred to as the “district”), which district consists of approximately seventy (70) acres of land generally located south of the Clearwater River and east of the Snake River in downtown Lewiston; provided, however, that the district shall not include any property or facility owned by the state of Idaho.

A copy of the legal description of the district shall be kept on file in the city clerk’s office. An illustration of the district’s boundaries is as follows. (Ord. No. 3329, § 3, 9-13-76; Ord. No. 4741, § 1, 7-8-19)



Sec. 19.5-14. The Lewiston historic preservation commission.
To administer said district and any other sites, areas or districts hereinafter designated as, or attached to, historic districts within the city of Lewiston, and to carry out the duties imposed by Chapter 47, Title 67, Idaho Code, there is hereby created a historic preservation commission for the city of Lewiston, to be known as the Lewiston historic preservation commission, which commission shall consist of nine (9) members, appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. Said commission shall be deemed a continuation of the historic commission created by passage of Resolution 75-70 of the Lewiston city council on September 22, 1975, and the terms of the commissioners appointed pursuant to said resolution shall expire at the time set forth therein. Members of the commission shall, to the extent practicable, include persons with backgrounds or interests in the fields of history, architecture, urban planning, archaeology, and law, or any of the foregoing, and property owners or representatives of property owners and of the general public. They shall serve without compensation, but the city council may provide for reimbursement of actual expenses. (Ord. No. 3329, § 4, 9-13-76; Ord. No. 4056, § 1, 11-23-92)

Sec. 19.5-15. Powers of the Lewiston historic preservation commission.
In addition to the powers set forth in Chapter 46, Title 67, Idaho Code, the commission shall have the following powers:

(1) To designate one of its members as chairman and to appoint a secretary, who need not be a member of the commission, and to designate a temporary chairman or temporary secretary from time to time.

(2) To hold regular and special meetings at such times and places, within the city of Lewiston as it shall designate; in the absence of rules of procedure, Robert’s Rules of Order shall apply for the conduct of the meetings.

(3) To receive and act upon applications for certificates of appropriateness, to call witnesses, to conduct public hearings, to make findings of fact, recommendations and determinations, on its own initiative or at the request of the city council, to reduce the same to writing, and to transmit the same to the Lewiston city council as appropriate. (Ord. No. 3329, § 5, 9-13-76; Ord. No. 4056, § 2, 11-23-92)

Sec. 19.5-16. Certificate of appropriateness required.
No exterior portion of any building or other structure, including walls, fences, light fixtures, steps and pavement, or other appurtenant features, nor above-ground utility structures, shall be erected, altered, restored, moved or demolished within the district until after an application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior features has been submitted to and approved by the commission, as provided in section 19.5-21 of this code. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required whether or not a building permit is required. No change in the use of any structure or property within the district which involves a change in design, material, color or outer appearance thereof shall be permitted until an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. (Ord. No. 3329, § 6, 9-13-76; Ord. No. 4056, § 3, 11-23-92; Ord. No. 4692, § 4, 10-30-17)

Sec. 19.5-17. No building permit, variance, conditional use or zone change without certificate of appropriateness.
No building permit, variance, conditional use or zone change or other permit for purposes of constructing or altering structures within the district shall be issued by the city until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued for such construction or alteration by the commission. (Ord. No. 3329, § 7, 9-13-76; Ord. No. 4056, § 4, 11-23-92)

Sec. 19.5-18. Certificate of appropriateness required for zone change.
No variance, conditional use or change in zoning classification for any property within the district shall be granted until a certificate of appropriateness for such variance, conditional use, or change in zoning classification has been issued by the commission. (Ord. No. 3329, § 8, 9-13-76)

Sec. 19.5-19. Ordinary maintenance and repair exempted.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior feature within the district which does not involve a change in design, material, color or outer appearance thereof, nor to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration or demolition of any such feature which the building official shall certify is required by the public safety because of unsafe or dangerous conditions. (Ord. No. 3329, § 9, 9-13-76)

Sec. 19.5-20. Interior arrangement exempted.
The commission shall not consider interior arrangement and shall take no action under this article except for the purpose of preventing the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, moving or demolition of buildings, structures, appurtenant fixtures, or natural features in the district which would be incongruous with the historical, architectural, archaeological or cultural aspects of the district. (Ord. No. 3329, § 10, 9-13-76; Ord. No. 4056, § 5, 11-23-92; Ord. No. 4692, § 5, 10-30-17)

Sec. 19.5-21. Review procedure for certificates of appropriateness.
The following review procedures shall govern the issuance of certificates of appropriateness required by Idaho Code, Section 67-4608, within the historic district:

(1) Procedure for the review of applications within the historic district. Application for a certificate of appropriateness to authorize construction, reconstruction, alteration or maintenance which involves an exterior color change or repair that affects the external appearance or any public or private structure or appurtenance or part thereof within the district shall be made to the commission. Applications shall be submitted to the commission at least twenty (20) working days prior to the regularly scheduled historic preservation meeting. The applicant may be required to post a public notice of the proposed application at least eight (8) days prior to the scheduled meeting. The requirement for posting of the property will be at the discretion of city staff upon the review of the application.

(2) Procedures to be followed by the Lewiston Historic Preservation Commission. Prior to the preparation of workable drawings and specifications or calling for proposals or bids from contractors, prospective property developers, owners, agents may be required to prepare or architects and other interested parties are encouraged to present drawings or specifications to the commission at the earliest possible stage of proposed development. Preliminary scale drawings and outline specifications, including color sample for outside work, for review and informal discussion with the commission shall be submitted. The purpose of this review shall be to acquaint the developer, owner or agent with the standards of appropriateness of design that are required of his proposed development.

(3) Data required. Applicants must submit the following data with the application, if so required by the commission:

a. Drawings required for alterations and/or additions to existing structures or for new construction. The commission may, in its discretion, require every application or review involving:

1. Alterations or additions to existing structures in the district; or

2. The erection of any new structure within the district to be accompanied by drawings of the proposed alterations, additions or changes, and of new construction of buildings or property use. As used herein, drawings shall mean plans and exterior eye-level perspectives drawn to scale with sufficient detail to show, as far as they relate to exterior appearances, the architectural design of buildings, including proposed materials, textures and colors, including samples of materials or color samples, and the plot plan or site layout, including all improvements affecting appearances, such as walls, walks, terraces, plantings, accessory buildings, lights and other elements. Such documents may be required to be filed with the commission chairman for commission review.

b. Photographs required with application for the demolition of existing structures. In the case of application for the demolition of structures within the district, the applicant shall submit clear photographs of all sides of the building under consideration and photographs showing contiguous properties facing on both sides of the same block or square.

c. Photographs required with application for repair, alterations and/or additions to existing structures. In the case of application to repair, alter or make additions to a structure within the district, the application shall be accompanied by clear photographs of all sides of the structure facing on both sides of the same block or square.

d. Photographs required with application for new construction. In the case of application to construct a new building situated within the district, the application shall be accompanied by clear photographs of the adjoining properties, facing on both sides of the same block or square.

(4) Commission meetings. The commission shall hold regular monthly meetings to review applications for certificate of appropriateness received by the commission. All meetings of the commission shall be held pursuant to the Idaho Open Meeting Act. Where the commission deems it necessary or appropriate, it may hold a public hearing upon the application. At least one notice of such hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city at least five (5) days prior to the public hearing, and written notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to all owners or contract purchasers of property within the district. Verbatim recordings or transcripts of commission proceeding shall not be required, but the commission shall cause accurate minutes of all proceedings to be kept. Minutes shall set forth the considerations and the decisions made on an application. All such minutes shall be kept in the community development department office for the period of time required by law, and shall be available at all reasonable times for inspection by the public.

(5) Approval of certificate. If the commission determines that the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration, moving or demolition is appropriate, it shall forthwith approve such application and shall issue to the applicant a certificate of appropriateness, signed by the chairman. The chairman shall also indicate commission approval upon all prints or other documents submitted to the commission.

(6) Disapproval. If the commission determines that a certificate of appropriateness should not be issued, it shall cause its findings and reasons for such determination to be placed upon its records, and shall forthwith notify the applicant of such determination, furnishing him with an attested copy of its reasons therefor and its recommendations. The applicant may modify his application to render it acceptable to the commission and shall have the right to resubmit the application after so doing.

(7) Time limitations. A failure of the commission to approve or disapprove such application following the second regular commission meeting after its receipt, unless otherwise mutually agreed by the applicant and the commission, shall be deemed to constitute approval of the application without regard to the lack of issuance of a certificate of appropriateness.

(8) Hardship. The commission may approve an application in any case where the applicant would suffer extreme hardship, or where the public health, safety or welfare would be adversely affected, unless a certificate of appropriateness is issued forthwith.

(9) Appeal. Any applicant, or any owner or contract purchaser of property within the district, who is dissatisfied by a determination of the commission, may appeal such determination to the city council within fifteen (15) days after the date of the decision by the commission. Appeals shall be made and conducted in the manner provided for appeals from decisions of the planning and zoning commission, and the city council shall have the authority to affirm, reverse or modify any decision, or to remand it to the commission for further proceedings. (Ord. No. 3329, § 11, 9-13-76; Ord. No. 4056, § 6, 11-23-92; Ord. No. 4692, § 6, 10-30-17)

Sec. 19.5-22. Review standards.
In reviewing applications for certificates of appropriateness within the district, the commission shall observe the following standards:

(1) In reviewing an application for reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or repair involving a color change, or affecting the external appearance of any building or structure or part thereof which is within the district, or any appurtenance related thereto, including, but not limited to, stone walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, and paving, the commission shall issue a certificate of appropriateness only if it is satisfied that the historical and architectural character of the building, structure or appurtenance will be properly preserved or restored. It is not the intent of this article to recreate a specific time period.

(2) For the moving of a structure within the district, or for the reconstruction, alteration or maintenance that involves a color change or repair affecting the external appearance of any existing building, structure or appurtenance or part thereof, a determination shall be made as to whether the building or structure, in terms of form, proportion, mass, configuration, building materials, texture, color and the location on the lot of the building or land use, is compatible with other buildings in the district and with squares and places to which it may be visually related.

(3) In considering applications for certificates of appropriateness the commission shall consider any or all of the following factors:

a. Height. As a general rule, new buildings, or modifications to existing buildings, should be to a height not to exceed the height of existing structures in the district.

b. Proportion of buildings’ front facades. Consideration shall be given to the relationship between the width to height of the front elevation of the building.

c. Proportion of openings within the facility. Consideration shall be given to the relationship of width to height of windows and doors.

d. Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. Consideration shall be given to an ordered recurrent alteration of strong and weak architectural elements so as to ensure appropriate rhythm of mass to openings.

e. Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. Consideration shall be given to a rhythm of recurrent building masses to spaces between buildings or structures.

f. Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. Consideration shall be given to entrances to sidewalks so as to provide a rhythm of entrances or porch or other projections.

g. Relationship of materials. Consideration shall be given to the predominant material utilized, such as brick, stone, stucco, wood siding or other material and its relationship to other adjacent structures.

h. Relationship of textures. Consideration shall be given to the predominant textures which may be smooth, such as smooth stucco, or rough, such as brick with tooled joints or horizontal wood siding or other textures.

i. Relationship of color. Consideration shall be given to colors compatible with surrounding structures that may be of a natural material or a patina colored by time, in so far as the mass and details such as trim are concerned.

j. Relationship of architectural details. Consideration shall be given to architectural details and their relationship to the structure in question and adjacent ones, including, but not limited to, cornices, lintels, arches, quoins, balustrades, iron work and chimneys.

k. Relationship of roof shapes. Consideration shall be given so that buildings shall have compatible roof shapes such as gable, mansard, hip, flat roofs, gambrel or other kinds of roof shapes.

l. Walls of continuity. Consideration shall be given to physical ingredients such as brick walls, wrought iron fences, evergreen landscape masses, building facades or combinations of these so that continuous cohesive walls of enclosure are provided along the street.

m. Relationship of landscaping. Consideration shall be given to the predominance of quality and quantity of landscaping. Emphasis shall be on the amounts and continuity of landscaping.

n. Scale. Consideration shall be given to scale so that the size of units of construction and architectural detail relate to the size of man. Consideration shall also be given to building mass and how it relates to open space. The predominant element of scale may be brick or stone units, windows or door openings, porches and balconies, etc.

o. Directional expression of front elevations. Consideration shall be given to structural shape, placing of openings, and architectural detail which may provide a predominantly vertical, horizontal or nondirectional character to the building’s front facades.

p. Exterior lighting. Use of fluorescent tubes shall be prohibited. Lighting shall be in accord with subsection 19.5-23(9), Illumination. (Ord. No. 3329, § 12, 9-13-76; Ord. No. 4056, § 7, 11-23-92; Ord. No. 4692, § 7, 10-30-17)

Sec. 19.5-23. Signs in historic districts.3
Signs in a historic district shall comply with the standards set forth in Chapter 30 of this code. (Ord. No. 4692, § 9, 10-30-17)

Sec. 19.5-24. Maintenance of buildings and structures.
All buildings and structures located within the district shall be maintained to the same standards as are required elsewhere in the city by the housing code, building code or other applicable ordinances. (Ord. No. 3329, § 14, 9-13-76; Ord. No. 4056, § 9, 11-23-92)

Cross reference – Building code, § 10-1 et seq.

Sec. 19.5-25. Willful violation to constitute misdemeanor.
Any possible violation(s) of this article brought to the attention of the commission at a regular meeting by a member of the commission, city staff or members of the general public may be referred by action of the commission to the city staff for review or action as may be determined in the discretion of the commission. A willful violation of any provision of this article shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. No. 3329, § 15, 9-13-7; Ord. No. 4056, § 9, 11-23-92)

Sec. 19.5-26. Continuing violations deemed public nuisance.
Any violation of this article which continues for longer than forty-eight (48) hours shall be deemed to be a public nuisance, abatable in the manner provided by law. (Ord. No. 3329, § 16, 9-13-76)

Sec. 19.5-27. Severability.
Should any word, phrase, sentence, section or portion of this article for any reason be held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed severable from and independent of the remainder of this article, and such partial invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. (Ord. No. 3329, § 17, 9-13-76)

Sec. 19.5-28. Effective date.
This article shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage, approval and publication. (Ord. No. 3329, § 18, 9-13-76)

1
Cross references – Buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 10; signs, Ch. 30; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 31; zoning, Ch. 37.


2
Editor’s note – Article II, §§ 19.5-11 – 19.5-28, is derived from Ord. No. 3329, §§ 1 – 18, enacted Sep. 13, 1976, which ordinance did not expressly amend this code.


3
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4692, § 8, adopted October 30, 2017, repealed § 19.5-23, pertaining to signs, derived from Ord. No. 3329, § 13, 9-13-76; Ord. No. 3435, § 2, 8-28-78; Ord. No. 3673, § 1, 10-25-82; Ord. No. 3690, §§ 1, 2, 10-31-83; Ord. No. 4056, § 8, 11-23-92; and Ord. No. 4091, § 1, 12-20-93.


Chapter 19.75
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT1
1
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4024, § 1, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed former Ch. 19.75 in its entirety. Former Ch. 19.75 was comprised of §§ 19.75-16 – 19.75-26, Industrial Development Corporation, and derived from Ord. No. 3686, adopted March 7, 1983.

Cross references – Administration, Ch. 2; air pollution, Ch. 4; buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 10; licenses, Ch. 21; industrial pretreatment regulations for existing and new sources of pollution, § 36-71 et seq.; zoning, Ch. 37.


Chapter 20
LIBRARY1
Sec. 20-1. Established.
There is hereby established in the city a public library and reading room. (Code 1960, § 2-8; Ord. No. 3021, § 1, 4-26-71)

Sec. 20-2. General powers, terms of library board of trustees.
There shall be five (5) members of the library board of trustees. In addition thereto the mayor shall appoint, subject to the confirmation of the city council, a city councilmember to serve as council liaison to the library board of trustees. Terms of all trustees shall commence on May 1st of the year appointed and shall be for five (5) years. Appointment shall be as provided in Idaho Code, Section 33-2604. The board of trustees of said library and reading room shall have all the powers set forth in Idaho Code, Sections 33-2601 through 33-2611, as currently constituted or as may be hereafter amended, and may utilize existing library buildings, facilities, books and equipment of the city. Title to all such buildings, facilities, books and equipment, and such as may hereafter be acquired, shall remain in the city. (Code 1960, § 2-9; Ord. No. 3021, § 2, 4-26-71; Ord. No. 4031, § 1, 2-10-92; Ord. No. 4724, § 1, 7-9-18)

Sec. 20-3. Employees, administrator; employment, appointment policies.
The employees of said library and reading room, including the library director, shall be employees of the city and subject to all policies and procedures of the city, except as provided herein. The employees of said library, including the library director, shall be subject to the city’s personnel policy; provided, however, the library board of trustees may amend the city’s personnel policy as it applies to employees of the library through its own duly adopted personnel policy. If the library board of trustees chooses to adopt its own personnel policy, such personnel policy shall also be subject to approval by the Lewiston city council. The library director shall be appointed in accordance with Idaho Code, Section 33-2608, as may be amended from time to time. (Code 1960, § 2-11; Ord. No. 3021, § 4, 4-26-71; Ord. No. 3688, § 1, 3-14-83; Ord. No. 4724, § 2, 7-9-18)

Cross reference – Administration generally, Ch. 2; personnel policy, § 2-8.

Sec. 20-4. Library trust fund.
(a) There is hereby created a library trust fund. Said fund shall be a special account within the library fund of the city and shall be maintained separately from all other monies within the library fund. Unused fund balances shall, in the discretion of the finance director, be invested in cash management investment pools or the State Treasurer’s investment pool.

(b) Expenditures of either principal or interest from the library trust fund shall be made by city finance director only upon the approval of the library board of trustees by motion duly approved as evidenced by the official minutes of a library board of trustees meeting.

(c) Expenditures of either principal or interest shall only be allowed for the following purposes:

(1) Construction of new library facilities for the city of Lewiston.

(2) Acquisition of books, supplies, furniture or equipment for libraries within the city of Lewiston library system.

(3) Maintenance of library facilities of the city of Lewiston.

Expenditures for any other purpose shall not be allowed.

(d) The library trust fund shall be comprised of appropriations from the city of Lewiston as authorized by the city council and contributions from any other source designated, in writing, for the library trust fund. (Ord. No. 4062, § 1, 3-22-93)

1
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4031, § 2, adopted February 10, 1992, repealed §§ 20-3, 20-4 and 20-6 of Ch. 20. The aforesaid sections were concerned with the board of trustees, library fund and the return of books, etc., to the library. These sections derived from the 1960 Code; Ord. No. 3021, adopted April 26, 1971; Ord. No. 3073, adopted March 20, 1972; and Ord. No. 3641, adopted May 24, 1982

State law reference – Power to establish libraries, Idaho Code, § 33-2602.


Chapter 21
LICENSES1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 21-1 – 21-15

Art. II.    Wholesale and Retail Occupations and Businesses, §§ 21-16 – 21-54

Art. III.    Temporary Vendors, §§ 21-55 – 21-70

Art. IV.    Going-Out-of-Business and Similar Sales, §§ 21-71 – 21-86

Art. V.    Security Officer Service and Armored Car Delivery Service, §§ 21-87 – 21-112

Art. VI.    Pawnbrokers, Junk Dealers and Secondhand Dealers, §§ 21-113 – 21-130

Art. VII.    Child Care, §§ 21-131 – 21-151

Art. VIII.    Peddlers and Solicitors, §§ 21-152 – 21-174

Art. IX.    Reserved, §§ 21-175 – 21-198

Art. X.    Tree Pruners, §§ 21-199 – 21-205

ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 21-1 – 21-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. WHOLESALE AND RETAIL OCCUPATIONS AND BUSINESSES
Sec. 21-16. Statutory authority; purpose.
The licensing of all wholesale and retail occupations and businesses within the city and the levying of a license fee, uniform to all classes imposed, pursuant to the statutory authority vested in the city by Idaho Code, Section 50-307, is hereby declared to be justified and necessary for the purpose of protecting and providing services to the citizens of the city and the businesses and occupations doing business therein. (Code 1960, § 16-38; Ord. No. 3066, § 1, 2-7-72)

Sec. 21-17. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

(1) Business or occupation means all activities, occupations, callings, trades, pursuits or professions located or engaged in within the city with the object of gain, profit, benefit or advantage. Each business location shall be deemed a separate business, unless it is a specific annex to the main location of the business.

(2) Employee means any person employed at any business location within the city and any person furnishing or performing services within the city. It shall include all persons who are self-employed and shall include part-time employees.

(3) Engaging in business means commencing, conducting or continuing in any business or occupation, the exercise of corporate and franchise powers and the liquidating of a business where the liquidators hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business. Any person shall be deemed to be engaged in doing business when he does one (1) act of:

a. Selling any goods or performing any services;

b. Soliciting business or offering or holding out goods or services for sale or hire;

c. Acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in the city for business purposes;

d. Delivery of any goods, either at wholesale or retail unless licensed under another section of this code;

e. Sponsoring, organizing or promoting an exhibition, fair or market at which five (5) or more vendors will offer goods or services for sale.

(4) Person means any person doing business in the city.

(5) Premises means all lands, structures, places and equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business and, also, any personal property, including any vehicle which is either affixed to or is otherwise used in connection with any such business conducted on said premises.

(6) Year means the calendar year. (Code 1960, § 16-39; Ord. No. 3066, § 2, 2-7-72; Ord. No. 3593, § 4, 10-26-81; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 4339, § 3, 9-22-03)

Sec. 21-18. Fee levied; amount; effect upon other license fee provisions.
There is hereby levied upon and shall be collected from every person engaged in any business or occupation within the city a license fee for the privilege of engaging in business in an amount to be determined by the application of the rates hereinafter set forth. Such license fee shall be determined by the number of employees of each business employed on the first day of December preceding the calendar year in which the license fee is payable. The fee shall be in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city council during the annual budgetary process. The license fee levied hereunder is not intended to repeal any other license fee provision of this code or any ordinance of the city. (Code 1960, § 16-40; Ord. No. 3066, § 3, 2-7-72; Ord. No. 3593, § 5, 10-26-81; Ord. No. 3842, § 1, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 3973, § 2, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 3979, § 1, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 4222, § 2, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 4339, § 3, 9-22-03)

Sec. 21-19. Determination of number of employees.
In determining the number of employees of any person subject to the provisions of this article, only those employees who perform any part of their duties within the city shall be counted. (Code 1960, § 16-41; Ord. No. 3066, § 4, 2-7-72)

Sec. 21-20. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to:

(1) Any agency of the United States government, any state of the United States, any political subdivision of the state of Idaho, including, but not necessarily limited to, counties, school districts, irrigation or sewer districts, or fire districts.

(2) Domestic servants, paper carriers, or casual labor not included as temporary employees of a regularly conducted business. (Code 1960, § 16-42; Ord. No. 3066, § 5, 2-7-72; Ord. No. 3842, § 2, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 3973, § 3, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 3979, § 2, 9-10-90)

Sec. 21-21. Engaging in business without obtaining license prohibited; expiration of license.
No person shall engage in any business or activity in the city for which a license fee is imposed by this article, without first having obtained and being a holder of a valid and subsisting license to do so, to be known as a business and occupation license, issued under the provisions of this article, and without paying the license fee imposed by this article, which license fee shall accompany the application for the license. Such license shall expire one (1) year after the date from which it is issued. (Code 1960, § 16-43; Ord. No. 3066, § 6, 2-7-72; Ord. No. 4374, § 1, 11-22-04)

Sec. 21-22. Application for license; contents; license fee to accompany application.
The application for a license shall be made to the business license representative on a form provided by the city. The application shall set forth the name of the applicant, his residence, place of business, the nature of the business and the license fee prescribed by this article. When an examination of the premises as described in section 21-23 of this code is necessary, the application shall be accompanied by the license fee and inspection fee. Every application shall be personally signed by the applicant or his agent. (Code 1960, § 16-44; Ord. No. 3066, § 7, 2-7-72; Ord. No. 3593, § 6, 10-26-81; Ord. No. 3889, § 8, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 4506, § 1, 5-12-08)

Sec. 21-23. Examination of applications; business premises.
(a) The city shall cause any applicant for a new business license or the transfer of an existing business license to a new business premises to be investigated and examined for compliance with the laws of the state and of the city.

(b) The investigation and examination of the business premises for a new business license or the transfer of an existing license to a new business premises shall be conducted within fifteen (15) working days of the receipt of the complete license application.

(c) If it appears that all conditions requisite to the issuance of the license have been substantially met and that no life safety hazards exist, a provisional license shall issue. The license will be provisional until such time that the applicant is in total compliance with applicable laws. If the inspectors and the city determine that the applicant is not in compliance with applicable laws within the time period set forth and agreed to by the applicant at the time of the initial investigation and examination, the city shall rescind the license and shall notify the applicant of such decision.

(d) In the event any immediate danger to the public health or safety is found, unless the danger is immediately corrected, or the owner or operator of any such business shall have refused to allow inspection of his premises, an inspector or director of public health shall notify the community development director who may summarily order the cessation of the business and closing of the premises by issuing a written notice of suspension.

(e) In addition to the qualifications and requirements set forth in the city’s codes, no license shall be issued or renewed for any of the following reasons:

a. The applicant failed to provide the required identification of all persons having a direct or indirect interest in that which is to be licensed upon the application.

b. That which is to be licensed fails to conform to city codes, including, but not limited to, building, health, fire, and the state of Idaho and federal laws applicable thereto.

(f) No person shall knowingly make a false license application or procure or seek to procure a license for another. (Ord. No. 3182, § 1, 11-19-73; Ord. No. 3593, § 7, 10-26-81; Ord. No. 3889, § 9, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 4435, § 1, 3-13-06; Ord. No. 4470, § 1, 4-9-07)

Sec. 21-24. Appeal procedure.
Any applicant aggrieved by any decision of the city may appeal such decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city within ten (10) days of such decision by the city. However, any applicant, if denied a license by reason of the fire marshal, the building official, the zoning officer or the city sanitarian, shall first exhaust all rights of appeal of such decisions as otherwise provided by the city code. The city shall transmit said notice of appeal to the council, which shall schedule a public hearing on said appeal, to be held at any regular meeting or special meeting of the council, not later than fifteen (15) days after the filing of such notice of appeal with the city. At such hearing, the applicant may appear and speak on his own behalf, be represented by counsel, call witnesses and cross-examine any witnesses of the city. The council shall proceed to determine said appeal; and if it decides in favor of the applicant, it shall pass a motion to that effect; and the city shall, on the next business day thereafter, and upon receipt of the proper fee, issue such license. The council may defer action upon said appeal for not longer than two (2) weeks from the date of the public hearing. (Ord. No. 3182, § 2, 11-19-73; Ord. No. 3593, § 8, 10-26-81; Ord. No. 3889, § 10, 12-7-87)

Sec. 21-25. Contents of license.
Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the following:

(1) The name of the licensee and any other name under which business is to be conducted;

(2) The name and address of each business so licensed;

(3) The amount of license fee therefor;

(4) The dates of issuance and expiration thereof;

(5) Such other information as the city clerk shall determine to be necessary. (Ord. No. 3182, § 3, 11-19-73; Ord. No. 3593, § 9, 10-26-81)

Sec. 21-26. Display of license; operation of business after expiration of license prohibited; transfer of licenses.
Every licensee, under this article, shall display such license in a prominent location upon the licensed premises, and shall refrain from operating the licensed business on such premises after expiration of his license. No licensee shall allow any license to remain posted, displayed, or used after the period for which it was issued has expired, or when it has been suspended or revoked or for any other reason become ineffective. No licensee shall loan, sell, give, or assign to any other person or allow any other person to use or display, or to destroy, damage, or remove, or to have in his possession any license which has been issued to said licensee. (Code 1960, § 16-48; Ord. No. 3066, § 11, 2-7-72)

Sec. 21-27. Change in location or owner of licensed business.
Any change of owner or owners or location shall automatically void an existing license granted under this chapter and shall necessitate application and issuance of a new license. (Code 1960, § 16-49; Ord. No. 3066, § 12, 2-7-72; Ord. No. 3593, § 10, 10-26-81)

Sec. 21-28. Mailing of application forms; effect of failure to file license application.
The city may, but is not required, to mail to persons forms for applications for licenses; but failure of any person to receive any such forms shall not excuse the person from making application for and securing the license required and payment of the license fee when and as due hereunder. If any person fails, neglects or refuses to file his application and to pay any fee as and when required herein, the city will determine the amount of fee payable and by mail to notify such person of the amount so determined. The amount so fixed shall thereupon be immediately due and payable, subject to the person’s right to appear before the council and show cause why his fee should not be altered or reduced. (Code 1960, § 16-50; Ord. No. 3066, § 13, 2-7-72; Ord. No. 3593, § 11, 10-26-81; Ord. No. 3889, § 11, 12-7-87)

Sec. 21-29. When fees due and payable; penalty for late payment.
Each annual license fee herein provided shall become due and payable on the first day after the license expiration date to any business taxable hereunder and in existence on that date. Failure to pay any license fee within forty-five (45) days after the day upon which it is due and payable shall render the person subject to a penalty of fifty (50) percent of the amount of the license fee in addition to other penalties provided herein. (Code 1960, § 16-51; Ord. No. 3066, § 14, 2-7-72; Ord. No. 3889, § 12, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 3979, § 3, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 4374, § 2, 11-22-04)

Sec. 21-30. License fees, penalties thereon to constitute debt to city.
Any license fee, including penalties thereon, shall constitute a debt to the city and may be collected by court proceedings in the same manner as any other debt in like amount. No civil action or judgment shall bar or prevent a criminal prosecution for each and every violation of this article. (Code 1960, § 16-52; Ord. No. 3066, § 15, 2-7-72)

Sec. 21-31. Use of funds.
All funds received by the city under the terms of this article shall be paid into the general fund of the city and budgeted annually for general municipal purposes in the departments of police, fire, building, and health. (Ord. No. 3182, § 4, 11-19-73)

Sec. 21-32. Violation; penalty.
A person who violates any provision of this article or operates any business or occupation for which a license is required by this article without having first obtained a license as herein provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation of this article occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. No. 3182, § 5, 11-19-73)

Sec. 21-33. Suspension or revocation.
(a) Suspension. When the conduct or operation of any business, occupation, activity or establishment, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall constitute a nuisance or present a danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, the city shall summarily order the cessation of the business and the closing of the premises until the nuisance or danger no longer exists.

(b) Notice of suspension. A written notice of suspension shall be sent by certified mail and posted on the premises. The suspension shall become effective when the business owner or operator receives the notice personally or when the notice is posted on the business or residential address as shown on the application. The notice shall contain the grounds for the suspension, the effective period of the suspension, and shall inform the business owner or operator of the provisions for appeal.

(c) Revocation. Any license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the city council for violation of any law of the city, of the state, or of the United States, applicable to the business for which the license was issued.

(d) Notice of revocation. Such revocation must be preceded by notice in writing to the licensee from the city clerk, or designee, informing the licensee that the council has ordered the holding of a public hearing at a date and time certain, not less than ten (10) days from the date of such notice, at which hearing the licensee will be required to appear personally and show cause why the license should not be revoked. At such hearing the licensee may be represented by counsel, may testify personally, may call witnesses, and may cross-examine any witnesses called by the city. Should the council determine that such license should be revoked, it shall pass a motion to that effect, and such license shall thereupon be revoked; provided, however, that no such motion shall be deemed passed without the affirmative vote of one-half (1/2) plus one (1) of the members of the full council.

(e) Business premises posted. One (1) copy of the notice of suspension or revocation shall be posted upon the window of the front entrance door or upon the nearest window to the front entrance in such a manner as to be clearly visible to the general public from the exterior of such establishment. The notice shall contain the grounds for suspension, the effective period of the suspension, and shall inform the business owner or operator of the provisions for appeal. The notice of suspension or revocation shall not be defaced or removed by any person except an authorized representative of the city. (Ord. No. 3182, § 6, 11-19-73; Ord. No. 4470, § 2, 4-9-07)

Sec. 21-34. Operation without license declared a nuisance; injunction.
The operating or conducting of any business or occupation for which a license is required by this article without having a valid license as provided herein is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. In addition to any other remedy provided by this article, the city may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to obtain an order enjoining any person from operating or conducting any business or occupation in violation of this article. (Ord. No. 3182, § 7, 11-19-73)

Secs. 21-35 – 21-54. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. TEMPORARY VENDORS
Sec. 21-55. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meaning indicated:

(1) Building means a structure completely enclosed by walls and covered by a roof, permanently affixed to a foundation and permanently attached to water and sewer utility services.

(2) Temporary vendor means the operation of a business on a vacant lot, outside of an enclosed building in the open air or under a canopy, tent or other membrane structure. This definition does not include those businesses operating in the open air or under a canopy, tent or other membrane structure on the premises of another licensed business, which licensed business is operating in a building as defined herein, or those businesses governed by section 37-127 of this code. (Ord. No. 4346, § 1, 11-17-03)

Sec. 21-56. Business license required.
All temporary vendors shall be required to obtain a temporary vendor’s business license prior to engaging in business within the city. The application process and fees for a temporary vendor’s business license shall be the same as for a standard business license as provided in Article I of this chapter. Temporary vendors are limited to operation in the C-3, C-4, C-5, C-6, M-1 and M-2 zones as defined by the city’s zoning ordinance and may not operate in any other zone within the city. (Ord. No. 4346, § 1, 11-17-03)

Sec. 21-57. Time limits.
Except as provided hereafter, no temporary vendor shall conduct a business for more than sixteen (16) consecutive days and shall not conduct business for more than sixteen (16) days in any three-month period. (Ord. No. 4346, § 1, 11-17-03)

Sec. 21-58. Conditional use permit.
A temporary vendor may operate a business in excess of sixteen (16) consecutive days upon approval of a conditional use permit by the planning and zoning commission following the procedures set forth in Chapter 37 of this code. (Ord. No. 4346, § 1, 11-17-03)

Sec. 21-59. Standards for issuance of conditional use permit.
Standards for the issuance of a conditional use permit for the operation of the temporary vendor business in excess of sixteen (16) days are found in this code at section 37-126.1. (Ord. No. 4346, § 1, 11-17-03)

Sec. 21-60. Violations.
Any person or entity found to be in violation of this article shall be determined to have committed a civil infraction and for each violation shall be assessed a civil penalty a sum not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 4346, § 1, 11-17-03)

Secs. 21-61 – 21-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS AND SIMILAR SALES
Sec. 21-71. Purpose and definitions.
The purpose of this article is to allow legitimate going-out-of-business sales while minimizing the opportunity for a continuous going-out-of-business sale with its potential to mislead the public and negatively impact the city’s business climate.

The following words shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

Going-out-of-business sale is a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including but not limited to the following sales: adjuster’s; adjustment; alteration; assignee’s; bankrupt; benefit of administrators; benefit of creditors; benefit of trustees; building coming down; closing; creditor’s committee; creditor’s; end; executor’s; final days; forced out; forced out of business; insolvents’; last days; lease expires; liquidation; loss of lease; mortgage sale; receiver’s; trustee’s; quitting business.

Goods is meant to include any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder. (Code 1960, § 13A-1; Ord. No. 4526, § 1, 2-9-09)

Sec. 21-72. Notification to city required.
It shall be unlawful to operate, conduct or permit any going-out-of-business sale without notifying the city in writing. Written notification to the city shall be made to the business licensing office. (Code 1960, § 13A-1; Ord. No. 2892, § 2, 9-8-70; Ord. No. 3889, § 14, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 4526, § 1, 2-9-09)

Sec. 21-73. Application of regulations.
(a) Any person holding a valid city of Lewiston business and occupation license may conduct a going-out-of-business sale.

(b) Interval between sales. Any person or authorized agent who has held a sale, as regulated hereunder, at the location stated in the notice within the past twelve (12) months shall not be permitted to advertise to the public a going-out-of-business sale.

(c) Restricted location. Where a person operates more than one (1) place of business, the going-out-of-business sale shall only apply to the store(s) or branch(es) specified in the notice to the city and no other store or branch shall advertise the going-out-of-business sale on the exterior of their business premises and visible to the public. (Code 1960, § 13A-3; Ord. No. 2892, § 3, 9-8-70; Ord. No. 4526, § 1, 2-9-09)

Sec. 21-74. Duties of licensee.
(a) Written notification required. A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this chapter shall notify the city in writing, containing the following information:

(1) The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale;

(2) A description of the place where such sale is to be held;

(3) The dates of the sale to be conducted shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days;

In the absence of any such notification, the city shall use the first date of any advertisement of such sale as the beginning date of the one-hundred-twenty-day period.

(b) End of sale business closure. The end of the one-hundred-twenty-day period shall automatically void the city business and occupation license and any other license issued by the city for the business that is the subject of the sale. All business operations shall cease at the end of the one-hundred-twenty-day period and the business shall close. (Code 1960, § 13A-4; Ord. No. 2892, § 3, 9-8-70; Ord. No. 3889, § 15, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 3973, § 4, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 3979, § 4, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 4222, § 3, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 4339, § 3, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 4526, § 1, 2-9-09)

Sec. 21-75. Violation; penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1960, § 13A-7; Ord. No. 2892, § 6, 9-8-70; Ord. No. 4526, § 3, 2-9-09)

Secs. 21-76 – 21-86. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4526, § 2, adopted Feb. 9, 2009, repealed §§ 21-75 and 21-76, pertaining to going-out-of-business sales, derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 13A-5 and 13A-6; Ord. No. 2892, §§ 4 and 5, adopted September 8, 1970; Ord. No. 3889, § 16, adopted December 7, 1987; and Ord. No. 3973, § 5, adopted August 27, 1990.

ARTICLE V. SECURITY OFFICER SERVICE AND ARMORED CAR DELIVERY SERVICE
Sec. 21-87. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

Armored car delivery service means any person who accepts employment for hire, fee or reward to furnish delivery service of money or other valuables from any business location or private home to any bank or other depository within the city.

Security officer service means any person who accepts employment for hire, fee or reward to protect private property, to furnish protection to private property by checking doors, windows and other exits of private property located within the city or to furnish any other services incidental to and in connection with the protection of private property within the city, except those persons hired directly as security officers by individual businesses and whose full-time duties consist of keeping watch over a single store or single place of business. (Code 1960, § 20-1; Ord. No. 2270, § 1; Ord. No. 3889, § 17, 12-7-87)

Sec. 21-88. License – Required.
No person shall operate as a security officer service or as an armored car delivery service in the city without first obtaining a license from the city. (Code 1960, § 20-2; Ord. No. 2270, § 2; Ord. No. 3889, § 18, 12-7-87)

Sec. 21-89. Same – Application.
Applications for licenses required by this article shall be made by each person acting as a security officer or an armored car delivery service upon forms prepared and made available by the city and shall state:

(1) The full name, age, residence, driver license number, birth date, social security number, present and previous occupation of the applicant.

(2) Whether the person signing the application is a citizen of the United States.

(3) A specific description of the location of the principal place of business of the applicant.

(4) The number of years’ experience the applicant has had as a security officer or as an armored car delivery service or in the related fields.

(5) The length of time the applicant has been a bona fide resident of the state immediately preceding the filing of the application.

(6) Such other information as the city shall find reasonably necessary to effectuate the general purpose of this article and to make a fair determination of whether the terms of this article have been complied with.

(7) Each application shall be accompanied by a full set of fingerprints and a recent photograph of the applicant.

(8) All criminal convictions, other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place convicted. (Code 1960, § 20-3; Ord. No. 2270, § 3; Ord. No. 3889, § 19, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 3973, § 6, 8-27-90)

Sec. 21-90. Same – Fees.
The annual license fee for a security officer service shall be in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city council during the annual budgetary process. Such fees shall accompany the application for the license. (Code 1960, § 20-4; Ord. No. 2270, § 3; Ord. No. 3889, § 20, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 3979, § 5, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 4222, § 4, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 4339, § 3, 9-22-03)

Sec. 21-91. Same – Standards for issuance.
(a) The city shall issue a license required by this article when it is found:

(1) That the applicant has never been convicted of any felony.

(2) That the applicant is a natural born or a fully naturalized citizen of the United States.

(b) All employees of any person having or applying for a license under this article shall meet the standards set forth above and shall be subject to all regulations of this article. (Code 1960, § 20-5; Ord. No. 2270, §§ 5, 6; Ord. No. 3973, § 7, 8-27-90)

Sec. 21-92. Same – Action by city; notice of rejection.
The city shall act upon the application for a security officer service or the application for an armored car delivery service license within thirty (30) days after the filing thereof. If the city disapproves the application, there shall be mailed to the applicant, within thirty (30) days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice stating the reasons for the denial of the permit. (Code 1960, § 20-6; Ord. No. 2270, § 7; Ord. No. 3889, § 21, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 4302, § 1, 4-22-02)

Sec. 21-93. Same – Transferability.
Licenses issued under this article shall not be transferable. (Code 1960, § 20-7; Ord. No. 2270, § 9)

Sec. 21-94. Same – Revocation and suspension.
Licenses issued under this article shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the council for violation of any of the provisions of this article or misconduct by the licensee or his employees, after reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard have been given the licensee. (Code 1960, § 20-8; Ord. No. 2270, § 9; Ord. No. 3889, § 22, 12-7-87)

Sec. 21-95. Same – Renewal.
The city shall issue renewal licenses to all licensees whose licenses have not been suspended at the time such licenses have expired, upon payment of the annual license fee. (Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 2270, § 9; Ord. No. 4302, § 1, 4-22-02)

Sec. 21-96. Same – Term.
All licenses issued under this article shall be for a term of one (1) year; license term beginning from the date which it is issued. (Code 1960, § 20-9; Ord. No. 2270, § 9; Ord. No. 3889, § 23, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 4374, § 3, 11-22-04)

Sec. 21-97. Bond required.
(a) No license shall be issued under this article, unless the applicant files with the city a surety bond, executed by such applicant with a surety company authorized to do business in the state, in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).

(b) Such bond or approved security shall be taken in the name of the people of the city. Every person injured by the negligent, willful, malicious or wrongful act of the principal, his agent, servant or employee in the conduct of the business of security officer service or in the conduct of the business of an armored car delivery service may bring an action on the bond in his own name to recover damages for such negligent, willful, malicious or wrongful act. (Code 1960, § 20-11; Ord. No. 2270, § 10; Ord. No. 3889, § 24, 12-7-87)

Sec. 21-98. Investigation by chief of police.
Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of an application for a license, as required by this article, the chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and his proposed operation. To determine the suitability of prospective applicants for security guard and armored car delivery service, the business licensing office shall require an applicant to provide information and fingerprints necessary to obtain criminal history information from Idaho State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Pursuant to the authority of Idaho Code Section 67-3008, and congressional enactment Public Law 92-544, the city shall submit the applicant’s personal information, fingerprints and required fees to appropriate state and federal agencies, including the Federal Bureau of Investigation, if applicable, for a criminal records check of state and national databases. The submission of fingerprints and information required by this section shall be on forms prescribed by the Idaho State Police. The business licensing office is authorized to receive criminal history information from the Idaho State Police and from the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of applicants for security guard and armored car delivery service. As required by state and federal law, further dissemination or other use of the criminal history information is prohibited. (Code 1960, § 20-12; Ord. No. 2270, § 4; Ord. No. 3889, § 25, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 4302, § 1, 4-22-02; Ord. No. 4330, § 1, 4-28-03)

Sec. 21-99. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Section 42 of Ord. No. 3889, adopted Dec. 7, 1987, repealed § 21-99, concerning fingerprints and photographs and deriving from the 1960 Code, § 20-13; and Ord. No. 2270, § 3.

Sec. 21-100. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3973, § 8, adopted Aug. 27, 1990, repealed former § 21-100, relative to the promulgation of regulations by the chief of police, which derived from the 1960 Code, § 20-14; Ord. No. 2270, § 11; and Ord. No. 3889, § 26, adopted Dec. 7, 1987.

Sec. 21-101. Posting and carrying licenses.
Any licensed company under this article shall cause a certificate of such license to be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place in or on his place of business described in such license. The individual licensee shall carry on his or her person, at all times when performing services as a security officer or as an armored car delivery service, a wallet sized certificate of the license issued under this article. (Code 1960, § 20-15; Ord. No. 2270, § 12; Ord. No. 3889, § 27, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 3973, § 9, 8-27-90)

Sec. 21-102. Impersonation of state police officers.
No security officer or armored car delivery service employee licensed under this article shall impersonate or hold himself out as a peace officer, nor shall he operate or permit to be operated a motor vehicle with a siren, police lighting or any insignia thereon bearing a likeness to the insignia used by peace officers. (Code 1960, § 20-16; Ord. No. 2270, § 12; Ord. No. 3889, § 28, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 3973, § 10, 8-27-90)

Secs. 21-103 – 21-112. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. PAWNBROKERS, JUNK DEALERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS2
Sec. 21-113. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

Junk means worn out or discarded material in general that may be turned to some use.

Junk dealer means every person who shall be engaged buying, selling, keeping, disposing of or collecting junk except as hereinafter provided.

Pawnbroker means every person, other than banks, trust companies or bond brokers who may otherwise be regulated by law and authorized to deal in commercial papers, shares of stock, bonds and other certificates of value, who keeps a loan or pawn office or engages in or carries on the business of receiving jewelry, precious stones, valuables, firearms, clothing, personal property or any other articles in pledge for loans, as security or in pawn for the repayment of moneys and exacts an interest for such loans, except as hereinafter provided.

Recycler means any person or business that buys or collects salvageable material and sells the same, in bulk to manufacturers and not to individuals.

Secondhand goods are any item of personal property offered for sale not as new, including metals in any form except coins that are legal tender and precious metals in a nonidentifiable form, but excluding books, magazines and postage stamps.

Secondhand dealer means any pawnbroker, or any person engaged in the business of purchasing, selling, trading, or otherwise transferring for value secondhand goods.

Reprocessed goods means any item of personal property that is substantially rebuilt or remanufactured. (Ord. No. 3744, § 1, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 3973, § 11, 8-27-90)

Sec. 21-114. License required.
No person shall engage in, carry on, conduct or permit to be carried on, engaged in or conducted within the city the business of any pawnbroker, junk dealer or secondhand dealer, whether it is a separate business or in connection with any other business, or advertise the same by means of signs or notices on buildings or windows, by distribution of printed circulars, by public display or otherwise in any manner whatsoever without first obtaining a business and occupation license therefor, paying a license fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city council during the annual budgetary process and posting or displaying such license in a conspicuous place within the premises covered by such license. (Ord. No. 3744, § 2, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 3973, § 12, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 3979, § 6, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 4222, § 5, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 4339, § 3, 9-22-03)

Sec. 21-115. Applicability of article.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following dealers or transactions:

(1) Dealers in motor vehicles, the owners of which are required by state law to have certificates of title therefor.

(2) Dealers in furniture and household goods which are hereby defined as clothing except furs, beds, bedding, davenports, tables, desks, chairs, stoves, floor coverings, crockery, glassware, kitchen and cooking utensils, refrigerators, ranges, shades, blinds, and curtains, washing machines and power ironers.

(3) Recyclers.

(4) To give an allowance for the trade-in or exchange of used goods on the purchase of other merchandise of the same kind or greater value and to resell the trade-in.

(5) To engage in the business of reprocessing goods or selling reprocessed goods.

(6) For any secured party to dispose of his or her own collateral after default as provided by Idaho state law.

(7) To sell unredeemed or unclaimed goods repaired in the regular course of a repair service in order to satisfy mechanics’ liens.

(8) Garage, yard or similar sales not exceeding three (3) such sales in a calendar year and not exceeding seventy-two (72) hours in duration for each sale. (Ord. No. 3744, § 3, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 3973, § 13, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 4465, § 1, 3-12-07)

Sec. 21-116. Prohibited acts.
It is a misdemeanor for any pawnbroker, junk dealer or secondhand dealer to:

(1) Refuse to allow the inspections as required in this article.

(2) Falsify, obliterate, display, or remove from their place of business any record that is required to be maintained by this article within three (3) years from the date of the transaction.

(3) Fail to comply with the reporting requirements of this article.

(4) Receive any property from any person under eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. No. 3744, § 4, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 3973, § 14, 8-27-90)

Sec. 21-117. Records of transactions – Required to be kept.
Every person managing, maintaining or conducting the business of a pawnbroker, junk dealer or secondhand dealer in the city shall keep or cause to be kept, at the store or place of business, a chronological record of every purchase, pledge, pawn or other transfer of possession to such pawnbroker, junk dealer or secondhand dealer of any article or loan thereon, a description of such article received in such transaction, sufficient to identify the same, including all particular or prominent marks or identification that may be found on the property, the signature, address, age, sex and description of the person receiving, delivering or transferring the property or who is otherwise dealt with, and the date and hour of the transaction. Said record shall be kept in the English language and written in ink. (Ord. No. 3744, § 5, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 3973, § 15, 8-27-90)

Sec. 21-118. Same – Reports to police department.
(a) Every pawnbroker, junk dealer or secondhand dealer shall, each day, excepting holidays, on forms provided by the chief of police, report transactions for that day.

(b) Said report shall be forwarded to the chief of police at least once a week. Report must be received by the police department within seven (7) days of its calendar date.

(c) The chief of police shall, upon receipt of such reports, cause the same to be filed in the office of the police department in accordance with city record keeping policy and the same shall be open for inspection only to the police department of the city or upon an order of the court duly made for that purpose.

(d) Auctioneers who maintain records pursuant to section 21-117 shall be exempt from daily reporting requirements as provided in this section. (Ord. No. 3744, § 6, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 3973, § 16, 8-27-90)

Sec. 21-119. Same – Inspections.
(a) The record of transactions required by this article shall be open for inspection by the police department of the city at any time during business hours.

(b) The police department shall also have the right to thoroughly inspect the premises, store or place where the business so recorded is being conducted at any time in search of any lost or stolen property or to compare the entries kept in such records with articles located on such premises or place of business.

(c) All persons in charge of such business and the agents and employees thereof shall render to the police department such assistance as may be reasonably necessary in such inspection or search. (Ord. No. 3744, § 7, 9-17-84)

Sec. 21-120. Record of sales.
If any article received by any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall be sold within forty-five (45) days from the date that it is so received, such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall, on his copy of the record of its reception, write in ink or indelible pencil the name and address of the person to whom such sale is made and the date of such sale. (Code 1960, § 24-10)

Secs. 21-121 – 21-130. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. CHILD CARE
Sec. 21-131. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

Applicant means any person making application for a license or background study or for the renewal of a license to operate a child care facility or act as a child care employee, volunteer, substitute or resident.

Child care means supervision and non-medical care provided on a regular basis during any twenty-four-hour period for children under the age of thirteen (13) years, not the children or stepchildren of the provider, in return for compensation at a child care facility.

Child care employee or volunteer means a person who is sixteen (16) years or older and is utilized by a child care facility that has direct and regular contact with the children in such facility.

Child care facility means a premises owned and/or operated by a child care provider where child care is provided. There are three (3) classifications of child care facilities:

Family day care – A child care facility that provides care for six (6) or fewer children.

Group day care – A child care facility that provides care for seven (7) to twelve (12) children.

Day care center – A child care facility that provides care for thirteen (13) or more children.

Licensee means a person who holds a current and valid license issued by the city for the operation of a child care or preschool facility.

Person means any individual, partnership, association, corporation, or organization of any kind, and any governmental entity, including the state of Idaho, and every political subdivision thereof.

Preschool facility means a home or place of structured instruction where educational sessions last no longer than four (4) consecutive hours, not governed by the State Board of Education, where learning and knowledge is imparted to children between the ages of three (3) and six (6) years in preparation for public and/or private education, where no meals are served and no sleeping area is provided.

Provider means an adult person who is directly responsible for the supervision and care of the children at a child care or preschool facility.

Resident means any person who resides in a home or place where child care or a preschool is provided.

Substitute means an adult person who intermittently provides a service to a child care or preschool facility who is responsible for the supervision and care of the children at the facility during the absence of the licensee. (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4560, § 1, 12-12-11)

Sec. 21-132. Applicability of article.
The regulations set out in this article shall apply to all child care or preschool facilities and persons entering into or engaged in the business of operating a child care facility or preschool as defined above, within the limits of the city, specifically including private nurseries, preschools, kindergartens or any other private facility caring for children during either the day or night; provided, however, that nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to:

(1) The occasional care of a child or children by neighbors, relatives, or friends not ordinarily engaged in child care;

(2) Private or parochial education facilities in which children kindergarten age or older are taught a curriculum approved by the State Board of Education within facilities with approved certificates of occupancy;

(3) Summer day camps, programs, religious schools and other summer activities operating less than twelve (12) weeks during a calendar year with a documented certification of occupancy;

(4) Licensure shall not be required for child care of up to two (2) hours’ duration while the parent or guardian is on premises, providing the building has a certificate of occupancy;

(5) Any arrangement whereby children receive care in their parents’ or guardians’ home;

(6) Any arrangement for the care of a child, related by blood or marriage to the care provider, whether a niece, nephew, first or second generation cousin, grandchild, brother or sister, son or daughter, unless such care is at the same time being provided to unrelated children or the number of children in care exceeds three (3) children;

(7) The care of a child or siblings of one additional family in addition to the person’s own children, unless the number of children in care exceeds three (3) children. (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4560, § 2, 12-12-11)

Sec. 21-133. License required.
No person shall operate a child care or preschool facility within the city unless a license is first procured, prominently displayed in the place, home, building or location, and is maintained in effect and has not been revoked. (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 21-134. Application.
Each applicant for a child care or preschool license shall complete an application form provided by the city. The application shall include authorizations for a background study for the prospective applicants, their employees, regular volunteers, substitutes, persons living at the facility who are thirteen (13) years of age or older, and any other persons who will have access to or are directly responsible for the care and treatment of children in care. The consent of all persons subject to a background study shall be under oath on forms provided by the city and shall accompany the application. Failure to provide the necessary information or authorizations shall be grounds to deny a license. (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4560, § 3, 12-12-11)

Sec. 21-135. Fees.
The application for a license or a license renewal for the operation of a child care or preschool facility shall be accompanied by a license fee and appropriate fingerprint fee, as determined by the community development department. The fee schedule shall be set by the city council during the annual budgetary process. Renewal fees shall be determined by the community development department from the fee schedule set by the city council.

The fee schedule for fiscal year 2013 for a limited fingerprint based background check shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4590, § 1, ?-?-12)

Sec. 21-136. Issuance.
Licenses shall have subscribed thereon the maximum number of children allowed in the place, home, building or location wherein child care or preschool is provided. Such licenses are premises-specific and may not be used to provide childcare or preschool in any place, home, building or location other than the one named on the license. (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 21-137. Term.
Licenses issued under this chapter shall be issued for a period of one (1) year, term beginning from the date which it is issued and shall be renewed annually. Upon renewal, the provider or employee must present a completed application accompanied by authorizations for background studies and fees, at least thirty (30) days prior to license expiration. (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 21-138. Standards.
All standards applicable to child care or preschool facilities adopted by the state, including, but may not be limited to, Chapter 11, Title 39 of the Idaho Code, as it currently exists and as it may from time to time be amended, shall apply to all child care or preschool facilities licensed herein, unless a more stringent standard is adopted by the city. In addition, the following standards shall apply:

(1) Age and health of provider. The provider must be eighteen (18) years old or older. Persons sixteen (16) to seventeen (17) years of age may provide care if directly supervised by the provider. A provider or child care employee must not work when ill as per Rules and Regulations Governing Idaho Reportable Diseases.

(2) CPR/first aid. At least one (1) adult child care employee shall be on premises at all times who has a current certification in pediatric rescue breathing and first aid treatment from a certified instructor.

(3) Child/staff ratios. Staff engaged in the supervision and care of the children must be within sight and/or hearing of the children at all times and close enough to assist a child in an emergency. For child-to-staff ratio purposes, all children on premises shall be counted. Child-to-staff ratios for each classification shall be a maximum of twelve (12) points per child care employee based upon the following point system:

Family and group classifications:

Age of Child

Points per Child

Child-Staff Ratio

Birth to less than 2 years

3

4:1

2 years to less than 3 years

2

6:1

3 years to less than 7 years

1

12:1

7 years to less than 13 years

0.5

24:1

Children of the provider: when children of the provider reside on the facility premises, points for provider’s children over the age of five (5) years shall equal zero (0) points.

Center and preschool classifications:

Age of Child

Points per Child

Child-Staff Ratio

Birth to less than 2 years

2

6:1

2 years to less than 3 years

1.5

8:1

3 years to less than 7 years

1

12:1

7 years to less than 13 years

0.5

24:1

a. Family child care facility: one (1) adult child care employee or adult volunteer on duty during hours of operation.

Facility may increase from six (6) children up to two (2) additional children to include facility operator’s children and/or before and after school children (first grade and up) without affecting the classification of the facility. The maximum number of children is eight (8), unless restricted by point system or facility’s occupant load as determined by the International Building Code, as it currently exists and as it may from time to time be amended.

When public school is not in session (summer months, teacher in-service days, holiday breaks and early releases), family child care facilities may allow up to a maximum of twelve (12) children, including provider’s own children, without obtaining a city license for a group day care facility if there is at least one (1) additional child care employee or volunteer on duty.

b. Group child care facility: two (2) adult child care employees or adult volunteers on duty during hours of operation.

Facility may increase from twelve (12) children up to four (4) additional children to include facility operator’s children and/or before and after school children (first grade and up) without affecting the classification of the facility. The maximum number of children is sixteen (16), unless restricted by point system or facility’s occupant load as determined by the International Building Code, as it currently exists and as it may from time to time be amended.

c. For the purpose of computing child/staff ratios: Only staff sixteen (16) years of age or older primarily engaged in child care shall be counted as staff.

(4) Emergency and immunization record. Each child enrolled in a child care or preschool facility shall provide to the operator the name of the personal physician of the child, a health history of the child including childhood diseases, allergies and medication taken, an immunization record which shall record the immunizations the child has received, and the name, address and telephone number of a person other than the parent or guardian to contact in case of an emergency involving the child.

(5) Inspection of premises. Each child care or preschool facility premises shall be inspected in accordance with section 21-23 of this code, including a health inspection by the district health department. A safety checklist with the minimum building, fire and health requirements shall be available for each classification.

(6) Outdoor play area. Each child care facility, excluding preschools, shall include a safe and sanitary outdoor play area that meets the following requirements:

a. A fence (minimum of forty-eight (48) inches in height) encloses the play space with two (2) exits and gates that can be secured;

b. Exterior balconies, porches or stairs are stable and space under porches is closed off;

c. Vertical offsets such as outside basement window wells, stairways or retaining walls are provided with guardrails;

d. The area is free of electrical hazards (e.g., unfenced air conditioners, switchboxes, or power lines) and attractive hazards (e.g., vehicles, metal drums, pallets, tools or wood piles);

e. Swimming pools, ponds, wells, tool sheds, and other hazards are fenced or closed off;

f. The area is free of animal feces and debris (e.g., broken glass, paint chips, or trash);

g. There are no poisonous substances such as cleaners, chemicals, gasoline, solvents, poisonous plants, berries or mushrooms;

h. The sandbox or sand play area is covered when not in use;

i. Play equipment is placed at least six (6) feet away from buildings, fences, trees or other play equipment and is in good repair (e.g., free of sharp edges, protruding elements, broken parts, and toxic substances);

j. There are no openings that can trap a child’s head (approximately four (4) to eight (8) inches).

Exception: An indoor play area allowing seventy-five (75) square feet per child may be provided in lieu of an outdoor play area.

(7) Prohibited acts. The following acts by any person, whether directly or indirectly, on the child care or preschool facility premises during hours of operation and while the children being cared for are present, shall be prohibited:

a. Allow indecent, immoral or profane language or indecent, immoral or disorderly conduct;

b. Allow the use or consumption of any alcoholic beverage;

c. Allow the use, possession or consumption of any unlawful drug or narcotic, including marijuana;

d. Allow the use, legal or illegal, of prescription or nonprescription drugs that would impair a person’s ability to supervise or transport children;

e. Perform any work or activities that interfere with the care of the children;

f. Allow smoking in the presence of children or in child care areas during child care hours;

g. Allow any firearm, ammunition or other weapon outside a locked cabinet;

h. Allow any person to provide unsupervised care of the children in care who is under eighteen (18) years of age;

i. Allow the continued presence of any person who has received a disqualifying background study or is known to have a disqualifying background.

(8) Qualifications of substitutes. Except in emergencies, any person left alone with children shall:

a. Be at least eighteen (18) years of age;

b. Hold a current certificate in first aid and pediatric CPR;

c. Have completed a background study;

d. Have spent time with the children before being left in charge;

e. Have a good understanding of the child care routines, children’s special health and nutrition needs including allergies, and emergency procedures.

(9) Transportation. Any person who transports children shall:

a. Possess a valid state issued driver’s license;

b. Have completed a background study;

c. Use a vehicle that is registered and insured according to Idaho State law;

d. Not leave children unattended in the vehicle or unsupervised at any time;

e. Assure proper restraints are used for each child transported. (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4560, § 4, 12-12-11)

Sec. 21-139. Background study.
The background study for persons who are eighteen (18) years of age or older shall include a fingerprint-based criminal history check. For persons under the age of eighteen (18) the background study shall include a check of the juvenile justice records of adjudications of the magistrate division of the district court, county probation services and department of health and welfare records authorized by the minor and the child’s parent or guardian. A background study shall be required annually and a fingerprint-based criminal history check shall be required every three (3) years.

To determine the suitability of prospective applicants for child care providers or employees, the business licensing office shall require each person subject to a background study to provide personal information to obtain local background history, and when necessary, fingerprints to obtain criminal history information from the Idaho State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Pursuant to the authority of Idaho Code, Section 67-3008, and congressional enactment Public Law 92-544, the city shall submit the applicant’s personal information, fingerprints and required fees to appropriate state and federal agencies, including the Federal Bureau of Investigation, if applicable, for a criminal history records check of state and national databases. The submission of fingerprints and information required by this section shall be on forms prescribed by the Idaho State Police. The business licensing office is authorized to receive criminal history information from the Idaho State Police and from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and shall use the information solely for the purpose of evaluating the character, suitability, and competence of applicants, their employees, regular volunteers, substitutes or persons living or working at the facility who will have access to or are directly responsible for the care and treatment of children in care at the facility. As required by state and federal law, further dissemination or other use of the criminal history information is prohibited. (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 21-140. Disqualifying crimes or conduct.
Any individual who is subject to a background study shall be disqualified from access to or direct contact, whether supervised or unsupervised, with children in care upon receipt of information showing, or when a background study completed under this chapter shows any of the following:

(1) The individual provided false or misleading information, refused to disclose any information required on the application form or refused to authorize the police investigation required by this chapter;

(2) A conviction of or admission to one or more of the following crimes, or any substantially similar provision in another jurisdiction, not withstanding the form of judgment(s): Idaho Code Sections 18-1505 (abuse, neglect or exploitation of a vulnerable adult); 18-801 through 18-805 (aggregated, first degree and second degree arson); 18-6605 (crimes against nature); 18-6608 (forcible sexual penetration by use of foreign object); 18-6602 (incest); 18-1501 (injury to a child, felony or misdemeanor); 18-4501 through 18-4503 (kidnapping); 18-1508 (lewd conduct with a minor); 18-5001 (mayhem); 18-4001, 18-4003 (murder in any degree); 18-4006 (voluntary manslaughter); 18-4015 (assault or battery with intent to commit serious felony); 18-4014, 18-5501 (poisoning); 18-1507A (possession of sexually exploitative material); 18-6101 (rape); 18-6501 (robbery); 18-7905 (felony stalking); 18-1511 (sale or barter of a child); 18-1506 and 18-1507 (sexual abuse or exploitation of a child); 18-1509 and 1509A (enticing of children); 18-1513 through 181515 (disseminating obscene material to minors); any felony punishable by death or life imprisonment; 18-306, 18-1701 and 18-205 (attempt, conspiracy, or accessory after the fact);

(3) A conviction of or admission to one or more of the following crimes, or any substantially similar provision in another jurisdiction, not withstanding the form of judgment(s) within seven (7) years of the application: Idaho Code Sections 14-1401 (burglary); 18-2407(1) (grand theft); 18-2403 (theft); 18-3123 and 18-3124 (forgery of and fraudulent use of a financial transaction card); 18-3601 through 18-3620 (forgery and counterfeiting); 41-293 and 41-294 (insurance fraud); 56-227 and 56-227A (public assistance fraud); Chapter 27 , Title 37, Idaho Code (Uniform Controlled Substances Act);

(4) The individual has been committed pursuant to Chapter 3 , Title 66, Idaho Code, or similar provision in another jurisdiction, unless:

a. Such individual has been released from, and no longer under, any form of treatment in relation to such commitment; and

b. Such individual has been examined at his own expense by at least two (2) professionals licensed to evaluate the mental health of individuals, at least one (1) of whom shall be a psychiatrist, and both professionals certify that the individual is no longer mentally ill and presents no threat or danger to any child;

(5) The individual had his or her parental rights affected by a child protection action under Idaho Code, Sections 16-1601 et seq., or child custody termination action under Idaho Code, Sections 16-2001 et seq., excluding 16-2005(4), or similar provision in another jurisdiction;

(6) The individual received a withheld judgment entered for any of the above crimes. (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 21-141. Administrative review.
In the event that the individual’s background study reveals crimes or conduct not designated in section 21-140 or a preponderance of evidence indicating the individual has committed an act or acts that meet the definition of any of the crimes listed, the city shall initiate an administrative review. The administrative review shall be conducted by the director of community development, the chief of police, the city attorney and the city manager, or their designee, and shall consider factors or evidence including, but not limited to, the following in determining the suitability of the individual:

(1) The individual’s attempt or conspiracy to commit any of the offenses listed in section 21-140, as each of these offenses is defined in Idaho Statues, disqualifies the individual;

(2) The severity or nature of the offense or other findings;

(3) The period of time since the incident(s);

(4) The number and pattern of incident(s);

(5) Circumstances surrounding the incident(s) to determine the risk of repetition;

(6) Relationship of the incident(s) to the care of children;

(7) Activities since the incident(s) to determine evidence of rehabilitation;

(8) Granting of a pardon by the Governor or the President; and

(9) The falsification or omission of information on the self-declaration form and other supplemental forms submitted. (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 21-142. Findings.
After evaluating the information immediately available, the city shall consider the following:

(1) Whether the individual poses an imminent risk of harm and shall not be allowed access to or direct contact with children in care;

(2) Whether the individual poses an imminent risk of harm requiring continuous, direct supervision while having access to or direct contact with children in care;

(3) Whether the individual does not pose an imminent risk of harm or a risk of harm, but requires continuous, direct supervision while having access to or direct contact with children in care.

After determining an individual’s risk of harm under this section, the community development department shall issue a notice of decision to the subject of the background study and the applicant or license holder. Reviews conducted under this section may be appealed in accordance with section 21-145 of this article. (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 21-143. Denial, suspension or revocation of a license.
The city may deny, suspend or revoke a license to operate a childcare or preschool facility if an applicant or licensee:

(1) Provided false or misleading information, refused to disclose any information required on the application form or refused to authorize the police investigation required by this chapter;

(2) Has a disqualifying background study under section 21-140 or any other persons residing or working in the facility have a disqualifying background study;

(3) Has been denied a certificate or license to operate a child care or preschool facility in any state, unless the denial was based upon the applicant’s failure to complete the certification or licensing process according to a required time-frame;

(4) Has had a certificate or license to operate a child care or preschool facility revoked or suspended in any state;

(5) Has failed to substantially comply with any provision in this article;

(6) Substantially complies with this article, but refuses to carry out a plan acceptable to the city to eliminate any deficiencies;

(7) Refused to allow entry of a parent or guardian having legal custody of the child or children, or a city inspector or his designee, at any time during the period of care of the child or children;

(8) Has violated this chapter, any ordinance of the city with regard to the premises where the child care or preschool facility is located, or any other ordinance of the city or statute of the state of Idaho or of the United States involving controlled substances, physical or sexual abuse involving children, or a crime of moral turpitude;

(9) Has had a conviction of or admission to any of the crimes listed in section 21-140. In determining whether to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the city shall consider the risk to the health and safety of the children in a facility based on such factors as:

a. Repeated violations of applicable codes or ordinances;

b. A pattern of noncompliance;

c. The type of violation;

d. The severity of each violation; and,

e. The number of violations.

The denial, revocation or suspension of a license shall be accomplished by the director of community development. (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 21-144. Notice; hearing.
(a) Notice. Prior to the revocation of any license or the denial of a license, application for a license or renewal thereof, written notice of reasons for such action shall be given to the applicant or licensee by the city. Such notice shall state that the applicant or licensee may request a hearing on such decision before the city manager within ten (10) days of receiving the notice.

(b) Hearing. Should the applicant or licensee request a hearing within such ten (10) day period, the applicant shall be notified in writing by the city of the time and place of the hearing. Should an emergency exist and the community development director shall certify that there is an immediate danger to the life or health of a child, the license may be summarily revoked pending the notice and hearing provided herein.

The director of community development may deny, suspend or revoke any child care or preschool license for violations of any of the terms of this chapter, or for other cause, after a hearing, upon not less than ten (10) days’ written notice to the licensee, such notice to specify the grounds for the proposed denial, revocation or suspension. (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 21-145. Appeal procedures.
The applicant may appeal the decision of the community development director to the city manager. The community development director shall provide the city manager with findings of fact and conclusions of law. The city manager shall review the findings and conclusions to determine if there has been an abuse of discretion in the decision to deny, suspend or revoke any license. The licensee and the director of community development may submit oral or written argument to the city manager.

Upon hearing the appeal, the city manager shall transmit a decision on appeal and findings of fact and conclusion of law to the applicant or licensee. (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 21-146. Violations; penalties.
(a) The violation of any provision of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate violation.

(b) Any violation of this chapter, which continues for more than twenty-four (24) hours, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance; and, in addition to any other civil or criminal remedies, the city may cause such condition to be abated in any manner provided by law. (Ord. No. 4429, § 2, 1-9-06)

Secs. 21-147 – 21-151. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Sec. 21-152. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following words shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

A canvasser or solicitor means any individual, whether resident of the city or not, either traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property or personal services of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not.

Peddler means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance from place to place offering for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, farm products or provisions. A person who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this article. The word peddler shall include the definition of hawker and huckster. (Code 1960, § 25-1; Ord. No. 3530, § 1, 7-21-80)

Sec. 21-153. License and permit – Required.
No person shall engage in the business of a peddler or canvasser within the city without first obtaining a permit and license therefor as provided herein. Individual vendors who are participating in events or exhibitions sponsored by a person or entity separate and independent from any vendor are not required to obtain a permit or license hereunder to participate in the sponsored event or exhibition. Exhibition organizers shall comply with sections 21-16 through 21-34 of this code. (Code 1960, § 25-2; Ord. No. 3973, § 18, 8-27-90)

Sec. 21-154. Same – Charitable, etc., organizations.
(a) Nonprofit organizations, religious organizations, fraternal organizations or civic organizations and clubs, wishing to canvass for funds or sell from door to door to occupants of residences to raise funds to be used solely for the purpose for which the organization or club is created, and from which no individual receives a profit, shall apply to the city for a permit, which application shall contain the following information:

(1) The name of the organization or club.

(2) The names of individuals who will be soliciting.

(b) The city shall issue such permit to any such organization upon receipt of such application. Solicitation pursuant to such permit shall be conducted only between the hours of 8 a.m. and 8 p.m. Each solicitor shall wear a badge, nameplate or tag, at least two (2) inches by three (3) inches in dimension, clearly stating the name of the organization he or she represents, which badge shall be worn conspicuously on the front of his or her outer garment at all times while the permittee is engaged in soliciting.

(c) Each permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire on December 31st of the year it is issued.

(d) Such permit shall be issued without charge to the applicant.

(e) No person shall solicit for funds or sales for any such organizations or clubs from door to door or from occupants of residences within the city without first having obtained a current permit from the city; nor shall any person solicit during any hours other than those set forth above; nor shall any person solicit without wearing the badge, nameplate or tag set forth above. A violation of any provision of this section shall be a misdemeanor. (Code 1960, § 25-2.1; Ord. No. 3427, § 1, 2-6-78; Ord. No. 3889, § 29, 12-7-87)

Sec. 21-155. Same – Application.
Applicants for permits and licenses under this article must file with the city a sworn application in writing, on a form to be furnished by the city, which shall give the following information:

(1) The name and description of the applicant.

(2) His address, legal and local.

(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold and, in the case of products of farm or orchard, whether produced or grown by the applicant.

(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.

(5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.

(6) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license number or other means of identification.

(7) A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.

(8) Reserved.

(9) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or violation of any provisions of this code or other ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. (Code 1960, § 25-3; Ord. No. 3530, § 2, 7-21-80; Ord. No. 3889, § 30, 12-7-87)

Sec. 21-156. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Section 21-156, relative to bond for certain solicitors, derived from the 1960 Code, § 30B-8, was repealed by Ord. No. 3530, § 3, adopted July 21, 1980.

Sec. 21-157. Same – Investigation; issuance.
(a) Upon receipt of an application for a license and permit required by this article, the original shall be referred to the police department, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant’s business and moral character to be made as deemed necessary for the protection of the public good. Pursuant to the authority of Idaho Code Section 67-3008, and congressional enactment Public Law 92-544, the city shall submit the applicant’s personal information, fingerprints and required fees to appropriate state and federal agencies, including the Federal Bureau of Investigation, if applicable, for a criminal history records check of state and national databases. The submission of fingerprints and information required by this section shall be on forms prescribed by the Idaho State Police. The business licensing office of the city of Lewiston is authorized to receive criminal history information from the Idaho State Police and from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and shall use the information solely for the purpose of evaluating the character of applicants who will be peddling or soliciting door to door within the city. As required by state and federal law, and by the city of Lewiston community development department policy, further dissemination or other use of the criminal history information is prohibited.

(b) If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant’s character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the police department may endorse on such application disapproval and reasons for the same and shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit and license will be issued.

(c) If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant is found to be satisfactory, the police department shall endorse on the application approval. The city, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, shall deliver to the applicant the identification card and issue a license.

(d) Such licenses shall be on a form prepared by the city.

(e) The city shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. (Code 1960, § 25-5; Ord. No. 3889, § 31, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 4302, § 3, 4-22-02; Ord. No. 4571, § 1, 12-12-11)

Sec. 21-158. Same – Fees.
(a) All persons or entities desiring a license required by this article shall pay a fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city council during the annual budgetary process. Said license shall be valid for the calendar year in which it is purchased.

(b) No fee shall be charged a person selling products of the farm or orchard actually produced by the seller.

(c) The annual fees herein provided for shall be assessed on a calendar year basis. (Code 1960, § 25-4; Ord. No. 2879, § 1; Ord. No. 3842, § 3, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 3889, § 32, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 3973, § 19, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 3979, § 7, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 4222, § 7, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 4339, § 3, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 4571, § 1, 12-12-11)

Sec. 21-159. Same – Expiration date.
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire one year from the date when issued. (Code 1960, § 25-6; Ord. No. 3889, § 33, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 4374, § 7, 11-22-04)

Sec. 21-160. Same – Exhibition upon request.
Peddlers or canvassers shall exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen. (Code 1960, § 25-7)

Sec. 21-161. Same – Revocation.
(a) Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the council after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:

(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the application for a license.

(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of carrying on his business as peddler.

(3) Any violation of this article.

(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.

(5) Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.

(b) Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing.

(c) Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing. (Code 1960, § 25-8)

Sec. 21-162. Same – Appeals.
(a) Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit or license, or the action of the council in the assessing of the fee, shall have the right of appeal to the council of the city.

(b) Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person’s last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds of appeal.

(c) The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant.

(d) The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. (Code 1960, § 30B-6; Ord. No. 2386, § 12; Ord. No. 3889, § 34, 12-7-87)

Sec. 21-163. License plates and badges.
The city shall issue a license to each licensee under this article, which license shall be carried with the licensee at all times that he is engaged in the activity or business licensed pursuant to this article and shall be produced and exhibited upon the demand of any person with whom the licensee seeks to do business or upon the demand of a police officer. (Code 1960, § 25-9; Ord. No. 3593, § 13, 10-26-81; Ord. No. 3889, § 35, 12-7-87)

Sec. 21-164. Use of streets, parks, etc.
(a) Peddlers and solicitors may take and conduct sales and solicitations in and upon the sidewalks, streets, parks and public property of the city; provided however, that peddlers and solicitors shall not intentionally impede or inconvenience any member of the general public or interfere with the official duties of any city official or employee. For the purposes of this section, actions which would impede the general public include but are not limited to the following:

(1) All operation of peddlers and solicitors within the parks of the city shall be within the direction and supervision of the director of parks and recreation. Peddlers and solicitors may take and conduct sales and solicitations and otherwise conduct their business only within city parks wherein the city has not contracted for a concessionaire within said park.

(2) No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall any peddler be permitted a stationary location, nor shall he be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public.

(b) For the purpose of this article, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. (Code 1960, § 25-11; Ord. No. 3530, § 4, 7-21-80)

Sec. 21-165. Enforcement of article.
Any police officer of the city shall require any person seen peddling and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed to produce his peddler’s license and enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the same. (Code 1960, § 25-12)

Sec. 21-166. Reports of violations; record of same.
(a) The chief of police shall report to the city clerk all convictions for violation of this article.

(b) The clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of violation therein. (Code 1960, § 25-13)

Secs. 21-167 – 21-174. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. RESERVED3
Secs. 21-175 – 21-198. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. TREE PRUNERS4
Sec. 21-199. Tree pruner’s license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the commercial business, trade or for hire of cutting, trimming, pruning or removing trees located within the public right-of-way without first procuring a tree pruner’s license and complying with the provisions of Chapter 21, Article II of this code. (Ord. No. 3776, § 2, 7-1-85)

Sec. 21-200. License requirements.
Each applicant for a license or renewal of a license shall make application to the city upon a form provided by the city. Such application shall show:

(1) The name, business address, home address of the applicant, if the applicant is an individual or a sole proprietor;

(2) The business address and home address of each person employed in tree pruning, if the applicant be a firm, association or corporation;

(3) A statement of the qualifications of each person to be employed as a tree pruner to include length of time employed as a tree trimmer, training and experience as a tree pruner; and

(4) A certificate of issuance. (Ord. No. 3776, § 2, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 3889, § 40, 12-7-87)

Sec. 21-201. Tree pruner’s examination.
(a) The commercial tree pruner’s application shall be approved and the license issued upon successful completion of the International Society of Arboriculture’s certified arborist exam by the licensee. The licensee shall provide proof to the forester of successful completion of the certified arborist exam and certification by the International Society of Arboriculture before performing any work within the public right-of-way.

(b) In regards to a business that performs tree pruning services, at least one (1) employee of such business is required to be licensed in accordance with this section in order for the business to be authorized to prune trees within the public right-of-way. In all cases, a person licensed in accordance with this section must be physically present at the work site and either perform the pruning work himself/herself, or direct and supervise the pruning work at all times.

(c) Each license shall be issued for a period of three (3) years.

(d) All licensees shall satisfactorily pass the certified arborist exam every three (3) years or maintain their certification through continuing education credits, as required by the International Society of Arboriculture. (Ord. No. 3776, § 2, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 4339, § 3, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 4634, § 1, 7-13-15)

Sec. 21-202. Certificate of liability and property damage insurance.
There shall be on file with the city a certificate of liability and property damage insurance executed by a surety authorized to transact business within the state of Idaho. Minimum limits shall be three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence for property damage or three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) combined single occurrence limits for both bodily injury and property damage. (Ord. No. 3776, § 2, 7-1-85)

Sec. 21-203. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the forester or city in the denial of a license shall have the right to appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such persons’ last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds of appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. No. 3776, § 2, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 3889, § 31, 12-7-87)

Sec. 21-204. Revocation of license.
(a) A tree pruner’s license may be revoked by the council upon recommendation of the forester for any of the following causes:

(1) Improper pruning practices;

(2) Failure to obey direction of forester;

(3) Failure to perform conditions of a permit issued under Chapter 26;

(4) Any violation of this article or Chapter 26.

(b) Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed postage prepaid to the licensee at his last known address at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing. (Ord. No. 3776, § 2, 7-1-85)

Sec. 21-205. Violation made a misdemeanor.
Any violation of the provisions of this article is declared to be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00), imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or both. (Ord. No. 3776, § 2, 7-1-85)

1
State law reference – Power to levy license fees and taxes on businesses and occupations, Idaho Code, § 50-307.

Cross references – Alarm suppliers and alarm systems, Ch. 5.5; beer and wine, § 6-11 et seq.; liquor-by-the-drink, § 6-16 et seq.; dog licenses required, § 8-23 et seq.; gas installation license, § 18-5 et seq.; restaurant permit required, § 19-17; industrial development, Ch. 19.75; license to install oil burning equipment, § 25-6 et seq.; license to erect signs, § 30-30; vehicles for hire, § 34-20 et seq.; taxicab driver’s license, § 34-57 et seq.; operator’s license for other than taxicab, § 34-98 et seq.; license for public carrier, § 34-112 et seq.


2
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3744, enacted Sep. 17, 1984, amended §§ 21-113 – 21-119 of Art. VI to read as herein set out. Prior to such amendment said sections were derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 24-1 – 24-3, 24-6 – 24-9.


3
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3973, § 20, adopted Aug. 27, 1990, repealed former Art. IX, §§ 21-175 – 21-198, relative to massage and massage establishments, which derived from Ord. No. 3243, §§ 1 – 25, adopted Nov. 25, 1974; Ord. No. 3593 §§ 14 – 17, adopted Oct. 26, 1981; and Ord. No. 3889, §§ 36 – 39, adopted Dec. 7, 1987.


4
Cross references – Street trees, § 26-39 et seq.; vegetation, Ch. 35.5; compliance with tree pruning practices, § 35.5-1.


Chapter 22
MINORS1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 22-1 – 22-15

Art. II.    Curfew, §§ 22-16 – 22-22

ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 22-1. Purchases or pledges from minors prohibited.
No person maintaining or conducting the business of pawnbroker or secondhand dealer or any agent or employee thereof shall purchase or take any goods, articles or things offered to him by any minor. (Code 1960, § 24-11)

Secs. 22-2, 22-3. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3533, § 8, enacted Aug. 11, 1980, repealed §§ 22-2 and 22-3 prohibiting the selling or giving of cigarettes to minors and prohibiting minors from frequenting billiard halls or poolrooms. Said sections were derived from Code 1960, §§ 18-1, 18-3.

Sec. 22-4. Leaving children unattended in vehicles.
No person shall leave unattended in a standing or parked motor vehicle a child under the age of ten (10) years. (Code 1960, § 18-4)

Sec. 22-5. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4007, § 1, adopted July 15, 1991, repealed § 22-5 in its entirety. Former § 22-5 was concerned with literature portraying sympathy to crime, etc., and derived from the 1960 Code, § 18-2.

Secs. 22-6 – 22-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CURFEW
Sec. 22-16. Generally.
No minor under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be upon any public place or any private place open to the public between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m., unless such minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person over the age of twenty-one (21) years of age in charge of such minor or with written parental consent. (Code 1960, § 18-5; Ord. No. 2390, § 1; Ord. No. 3533, § 1, 8-11-80; Ord. No. 4007, § 2, 7-15-91)

Secs. 22-17, 22-18. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4007, § 1, adopted July 15, 1991, repealed §§ 22-17, 22-18 and 22-21 in their entirety. The aforesaid sections were concerned with minors attending dances, theaters, shows, etc., and the applicability of this article, and derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 18-6, 18-7 and 18-10; Ord. No. 2390; and Ord. No. 3533, adopted August 11, 1980.

Sec. 22-19. Responsibility of proprietors, clerks, ticket takers, etc.
No owner, proprietor, clerk, person in charge, usher, ticket taker or other employee of the owner, proprietor or person in charge of any public dance, dance hall, theater, picture show or other show or exhibition shall admit any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to any such public dance, dance hall, theater, picture show or other show or exhibition between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. of any day unless such minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person in charge of such minor or with written parental consent. (Code 1960, § 18-8; Ord. No. 2390, § 1; Ord. No. 3533, § 4, 8-11-80; Ord. No. 4007, § 3, 7-15-91)

Sec. 22-20. Responsibility of parents, guardians, etc.
No parent, guardian or other person in charge of any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years shall allow such minor to be upon or present at any place, theater, show, dance or hall contrary to the provisions of this article. (Code 1960, § 18-9; Ord. No. 3533, § 5, 8-11- 80)

Sec. 22-21. Reserved.
Editor’s note – See editor’s note to §§ 22-17 and 22-18.

Sec. 22-22. Penalty.
Violation of this article by a juvenile offender shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (Code 1960, § 18-11; Ord. No. 3533, § 7, 8-11-80; Ord. No. 4644, § 1, 10-26-15)

1
Cross references – Sale of beer to minors, § 6-16; sale of liquor to minors, § 6-46.


Chapter 23
MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS1
Art. I.    Manufactured Home Parks, §§ 23-1 – 23-20

Art. II.    Recreational Vehicle Parks, §§ 23-21 – 23-36

ARTICLE I. MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
Sec. 23-1. Purpose.
The intent of this chapter is to provide standards for the development of manufactured home parks which are consistent with state of Idaho law and which provide quality developments suitable for manufactured housing placement. This chapter applies to manufactured home parks as defined herein and shall not apply to the placement of manufactured homes on individual lots in residential zones where such placement is regulated by Chapter 37 of this code. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the ascribed meanings:

Manufactured home means a structure, constructed after June 15, 1976, in accordance with the HUD manufactured home construction and safety standards, and is transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or is forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein, except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under 42 U.S.C. Sections 5401 et seq. For the purposes of this section, the following classifications of manufactured homes shall apply:

Class A manufactured home: A manufactured home meeting the following standards:

(1) Constructed after June 15, 1976, and certified as meeting the manufactured home construction and safety standards of the Department of Housing and Urban Development;

(2) Shall be multisectional and enclose a space of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet;

(3) Roof pitch shall be not less than a three-foot rise for each twelve (12) feet of horizontal run (3:12) and roof shall have minimum six-inch eave or eave and gutter;

(4) Has roofing materials which are generally acceptable for site-built housing. Any roofing material may be used provided it has the appearance of a nonmetallic shingle, shake or tile roof;

(5) Has siding material which has the appearance of wood, masonry or horizontal metal siding. Reflection from horizontal metal siding shall be no greater than that from siding coated with white gloss enamel;

Class B manufactured home: A manufactured home meeting the manufactured home construction and safety standards of the Department of Housing and Urban Development but not meeting all the criteria (2) through (5) for Class A manufactured homes. Also includes certified rehabilitated mobile homes as provided in Title 44, Chapter 25 of Idaho Code.

Class C manufactured home: A manufactured home which does not meet the manufactured home construction and safety standards of the Department of Housing and Urban Development but which is at least eight (8) feet wide and forty (40) feet in length.

Manufactured home park: A tract of land under unified ownership developed for the purpose of providing individual rental spaces for the placement of manufactured homes within its boundaries.

Accessory parking area: A common area set aside for the parking and storage of vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, motorcycles and other similar items accessory to everyday life owned by residents of the park.

Recreation area: A parcel of ground having recreational equipment and open space to be used for leisure activities of park residents.

Recreational vehicle: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The basic entities are travel trailer, camping trailer, fifth-wheel camper and motor home. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-3. Powers, duties, responsibilities of the community development department.
It is hereby made the duty of the community development department to enforce all provisions of this chapter. For the purpose of securing such enforcement, authorized representatives of the department shall have the right and are hereby empowered to enter upon any manufactured home park property, existing or proposed, and inspect the same and all accommodations connected therewith at any reasonable time. The department is further empowered to issue orders granting, renewing and revoking such permits and licenses as are provided for in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. For the purposes of carrying out this provision, technical reports from duly authorized representatives of the city sanitation office, the fire department, the police department, the public works department and the community development department shall be obtained. Such reports shall contain findings of fact and reference to the Lewiston City Code when standards are not being met or violations have been found. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-4. License – Required; approval of community development department.
(a) No person shall operate or maintain upon any property owned or controlled by him a manufactured home park within the city without having first secured a city business license. Such city business license shall not be granted without the annual approval of the community development department.

(b) For the purposes of carrying out this provision, the department shall obtain technical reports from city departments as specified in section 23-3. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-5. Same – Application.
Application for the license required by the preceding section or for the renewal thereof shall be filed with the community development department on forms furnished by the department and shall include the name and address of the owner and/or an authorized operator and a legal description of the premises upon which the manufactured home park is or is proposed to be located. The application shall be accompanied by two (2) copies of a scaled site plan showing the following, either existing or as proposed:

(1) The extent and area used for park purposes;

(2) Roadways and driveways;

(3) Location of spaces for manufactured homes;

(4) Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including restrooms, laundries and utility rooms to be used by occupants of manufactured homes;

(5) Method and plan of sewage disposal;

(6) Method and plan of garbage removal;

(7) Plan for water supply;

(8) Plan for electrical lighting of lots and spaces;

(9) Provision of parking spaces and accessory vehicle area;

(10) Location and size of recreation area;

(11) Grading and drainage of the property;

(12) Location of fire hydrants within or adjacent to the park. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-6. Same – No rights to build or do plumbing or electrical work granted.
Licenses issued under the terms of this chapter shall convey no right to erect any building, to do any plumbing work or to do any electrical work. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-7. Same – Nontransferable; notice upon sale or transfer of manufactured home park; plot plan.
No manufactured home park license shall be transferable. Every person holding such a license shall give notice in writing to the community development department within five (5) working days after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any manufactured home park. Every license holder shall cause an up-to-date site plan as described in section 23-5 of each existing manufactured home park for which he holds a license to be kept on file at the community development department. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-8. Same – Revocation.
The community development director is hereby authorized (after giving thirty (30) days’ notice) to revoke any license pursuant to the terms of this chapter if, after due investigation, it is determined that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or that any manufactured home park is being maintained in an unsanitary or unsafe manner or is a nuisance. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-9. Same – Hearing.
Any person aggrieved by an order of the community development director granting, denying, renewing or revoking a license for a manufactured home park may file a written request for an appeal before the planning and zoning commission within fifteen (15) days after issuance of such order. Notices of the appeal shall be sent to all adjacent property owners, giving the date and time the commission will hear the appeal. At such hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall determine whether the granting, denial, renewal, or revocation of the license was in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and shall issue a written finding of fact, conclusions of law and an order to carry out its findings and conclusions. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-10. Same – Appeal to council.
Any order either granting, denying, renewing or revoking any license under the provisions of this chapter following public hearing as provided in section 23-9 may be appealed to the city council in the same manner as appeals from any action or ruling by the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-11. Inspection of premises.
Before a business license for a manufactured home park may be issued, the premises shall be inspected and approved by each of the city departments as provided in section 23-3 as complying with all the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances of the city. Such investigation shall be conducted annually and in such a manner as to provide minimum inconvenience to occupants of manufactured home parks. The owner or licensed operator of the manufactured home park shall be contacted in advance of inspection. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-12. Manufactured home park development application.
(a) Application submission. When any person desires to develop a manufactured home park, that person shall file an application for the same with the community development department on forms furnished by the department. A preapplication conference between the developer and city staff as provided in section 23-3 shall be held to discuss the site design, location, public service needs, and related areas of concern for the proposed development.

(b) Contents of application. Each application for development of a manufactured home park shall include at a minimum, the following:

(1) The name and address of the owner or an authorized agent and a legal description of the premises upon which the manufactured home park is proposed to be located;

(2) Four (4) copies of a scaled site plan showing the following:

a. The extent and area used for park purposes;

b. Roadways and driveways;

c. Location of spaces for manufactured homes;

d. Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including restrooms, laundries and utility rooms to be used by occupants of manufactured homes;

e. Method and plan of sewage disposal;

f. Method and plan of garbage removal;

g. Plan for water supply;

h. Plan for electrical lighting of lots and spaces;

i. Provision of parking spaces and accessory vehicle area;

j. Location and size of recreation area;

k. Grading and drainage of the property;

l. Location of fire hydrants within or adjacent to the park. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-13. Same – Review process.
The review of each manufactured home park shall be made in the following manner:

(1) Following the initial preapplication conference, additional preapplication conferences with the developer shall be scheduled as necessary to properly inform the developer of all the requirements for development and to obtain from the developer any and all information, site plans, descriptions, and data necessary for approval by the director of community development.

(2) For manufactured home parks requiring a conditional use permit, the community development director shall schedule the application for the first available public hearing after determining that all the necessary information has been made available to the department. The hearing procedures found in Chapter 37, Article IX shall be used for these applications. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-14. Development standards.
(a) Density.

(1) The minimum area for a manufactured home park is two (2) acres.

(2) R-1 Zone: The maximum density permitted outright is 5.8 units per acre. A density greater than 5.8 units per acre may be approved with a conditional use permit.

(3) R-2A and MXD-NL Zones: The maximum density permitted outright is 8.7 units per acre. A density greater than 8.7 units per acre may be approved with a conditional use permit.

(b) Unit types permitted. Manufactured home parks shall contain a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent Class A manufactured homes. Up to twenty-five (25) percent of a parks total units may be Class B manufactured homes. A conditional use permit must be obtained in order to increase the ratio of Class B manufactured homes. Class C manufactured homes shall not be permitted.

(c) Setbacks and unit spacing.

(1) A minimum front yard setback for a manufactured home park shall be twenty (20) feet from the property line.

(2) No unit within a manufactured home park shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the outer property line of that manufactured home park and shall comply with the setback requirements of that zone if more restrictive.

(3) Each individual unit shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the interior roadway.

(4) Each individual unit shall have yards on each side of a minimum five (5) feet.

(5) Each individual unit shall have a rear yard of ten (10) feet.

(6) No unit shall be closer than fifteen (15) feet to another unit.

(d) Accessory structures. Accessory structures on individual spaces shall be permitted in accordance with the following provisions:

(1) Accessory structures such as carports or decks which are attached to a manufactured home shall be no closer than ten (10) feet to another unit or accessory structure or outer property line.

(2) One (1) detached accessory structure for the purposes of storage and not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet is permitted. Said structure shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from the associated manufactured home or outer property line and ten (10) feet from other units or accessory structures.

(3) Approval for the placement of accessory structures shall be obtained from the community development department.

(e) Parking within manufactured home parks shall conform to the following minimum standards:

(1) A minimum of two (2) spaces shall be provided adjacent to each manufactured home, plus one (1) additional space per bedroom when over two (2) up to a maximum of four (4) spaces. One (1) common guest space shall be provided for every three (3) units.

(2) A minimum of one (1) space per two (2) manufactured home lots shall be required for parking of recreational vehicles, boats, trailers and related items. The parking spaces for recreation vehicles shall be sized appropriately for recreational vehicles and screened from view both within and without of the manufactured home development by a site-obscuring fence. Recreational vehicles shall not be kept on individual lots in manufactured home parks.

(f) Fencing. Fencing is not required around the perimeter of the manufactured home park.

(g) Landscaped areas. A minimum of one-and-one-half-inch caliper shade tree and five (5) one-gallon shrubs shall be placed every thirty-five (35) feet on the perimeter of the manufactured home park. Additional landscaping may be required as specified by the community development director. All required landscaping shall be maintained by the developer on a continual basis.

(h) Recreation area. A recreation area shall be required in each manufactured home park. The recreation area shall be five (5) percent of the total park or a minimum of seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet, whichever is larger. The recreation area shall be clearly designated on the site plan, shall be accessible to all units, and shall not be reduced below the minimum size or developed into lease spaces.

(i) Streets, lighting and utility design. All streets, drives, lighting and utility plans shall be subject to the approval of the city’s director of public works, who shall approve them on the basis of their ability to serve the proposed development. In all manufactured home parks all utilities shall be installed underground.

(j) Public access.

(1) Parks must have frontage on at least one public street with a fifty-foot or wider right-of-way. Secondary access may be provided to public streets with narrower rights-of-way if approved by the public works department.

(2) Interior roadways shall be designed so as to provide access to each individual unit.

(3) Access and circulation shall meet standards set forth by the public works department. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-15. Installation standards.
Installation of manufactured homes shall be in conformance with the current adopted version of the Idaho Manufactured Home Installation Standards, published under the authority of the State of Idaho Division of Building Safety in coordination with the Idaho Manufactured Housing Association. All installations of new manufactured housing units in a park shall obtain a placement permit issued by the community development department. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-16. Skirting.
All manufactured homes within manufactured home parks in the city shall be provided with, at a minimum, a compatible prefinished metal skirting or a solid, opaque skirting compatible with the home’s siding which shall extend from the grade of the ground to the base of the manufactured home. The skirting shall be rodent-proof and shall be maintained in good repair at all times. The skirting shall extend around the entire perimeter without gaps or holes, other than required for ventilation, which shall be screened. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-17. Manufactured home parks existing prior to effective date; additions; filing of site plan.
(a) Manufactured home parks in existence or under development as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be permitted to continue as an established land use regardless of zone but shall be exempt from the standards of section 23-14, except as stated in this section.

(b) Any addition of land area for the purposes of providing additional lease spaces to an existing manufactured home park shall meet the development standards required by this chapter.

(c) Additional lease spaces created within an existing park from undeveloped property or by the rearrangement of manufactured home units shall meet the development standards required by this chapter.

(d) Only manufactured homes meeting the requirements of section 23-14(b) shall be permitted as replacement units in parks developed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Replacement units in manufactured home parks developed prior to the effective date may be Class A or Class B units, except that the mix of Class A and B units existing as of the effective date may not move further from compliance with section 23-14(b).

(e) Placement of manufactured homes on developed, but previously unleased, spaces shall conform to the spacing requirements of Ordinance 3725, adopted April 2, 1984.

(f) Replacement of existing manufactured homes on previously leased spaces shall conform to the spacing requirements of Ordinance 3725, adopted April 2, 1984. Where the previous unit does not meet the spacing requirements of Ordinance 3725, adopted April 2, 1984, the spacing shall not deviate below the spacing provided to, by, or for the previous unit prior to the replacement.

(g) A placement permit obtained from the community development department is required.

(h) Private drive access presently provided to manufactured home units in existing parks shall not be altered so as to decrease the vehicular access area presently provided, unless approved by the public works department, in consultation with the fire department.

(i) The operator of any manufactured home park in existence as of the effective date hereof shall, within ninety (90) days from said effective date, file with the community development department an accurately drawn site plan of the park containing the information required by section 23-5 of this code. Such plan shall clearly show all spaces provided for manufactured homes and the dimensions of all manufactured home units located therein. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-18. Proximity of liquefied petroleum gas tanks.
Liquefied petroleum (LP) gas tanks shall not be located closer to any manufactured home unit than five (5) feet for tanks of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) gallons nor ten (10) feet for tanks of one hundred twenty five (125) gallons or more. Vehicular protection shall be provided as required by the fire department. Each manufactured home unit may have not more than two (2) factory-installed propane tanks of not more than ten-gallon capacity each notwithstanding the foregoing provision. All LP tank installations are required to meet the current adopted fire code and NFPA standards. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-19. Storage beneath a manufactured home prohibited.
The, storage of personal property beneath manufactured home units shall not be permitted. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-20. Structural modifications in compliance with manufacturer’s specifications.
Manufactured homes may be modified, structurally altered or have exterior additions added only in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications. (Ord. No. 4398, § 2, 1-9-06)

ARTICLE II. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
Sec. 23-21. Purpose.
The intent of this chapter is to provide standards for the development of commercial recreational vehicle (RV) parks which are designed and located for a temporary length of stay and consisting of the appropriate amenities for the health, safety, and welfare of the park guests and surrounding property. (Ord. No. 4398, § 3, 1-9-06)

Sec. 23-22. Definitions.
In addition to the definitions listed below, any other word, term, or phrase used herein that is defined in Chapter 37 of this code shall apply hereto.

Accessory parking area means a common area in a recreational vehicle park reserved for the parking of vehicles, boats, trailers, motorcycles, and other similar items commonly associated with and for use by recreational vehicle travelers during their stay in a recreational vehicle park.

Recreation area means a space within a recreational vehicle park having recreational equipment and open space to be used for leisure activities of recreational vehicle park guests.

Recreational vehicle (RV) means a vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, except any park trailer or park model recreational vehicle as defined in Idaho Code, Title 39, Chapter 42. The basic entities are travel trailer, camping trailer, fifth-wheel camper and motor home. For the purposes of this chapter, RVs shall be classified as either dependent, meaning a RV that does not contain toilet and/or bathing facilities, or independent, a RV that contains toilet and/or bathing facilities.

Recreational vehicle park means a tract of land upon which recreational vehicle sites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy as temporary living quarters.

Recreational vehicle site means a space within a recreational vehicle park designated for the parking of one (1) recreational vehicle and intended for temporary occupancy.

Sanitary dumping station means a facility used for removing and disposing of sewage from recreational vehicle sewage holding tanks. (Ord. No. 4398, § 3, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4698, § 1, 10-30-17)

Sec. 23-23. Business license and permits – Required.2
No person shall develop, operate, or maintain upon any property owned or controlled by him a recreational vehicle park within the city without having first secured the necessary city business license, pursuant to Chapter 21 of this code, and building, electrical, and plumbing permits, pursuant to Chapter 10 of this code. (Ord. No. 4398, § 3, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4698, § 3, 10-30-17)

Sec. 23-24. Site plan submittal and approval required.
A recreational vehicle park shall not be developed or otherwise created or established without the property owner first submitting to the community development department, and obtaining approval of, a site plan and other plans, as necessary, showing compliance with the applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. No. 4398, § 3, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4698, § 11, 10-30-17)

Sec. 23-25. Criteria for locating a recreational vehicle park.
(a) Recreational vehicle parks shall be permitted in zones as established in Chapter 37, Zoning, of this code.

(b) The minimum lot area for a recreational vehicle park shall be the minimum lot area that is required by the applicable zoning district.

(c) A recreational vehicle park shall be located on property fronting a street that is improved to city standards and that has a right-of-way width of at least fifty (50) feet. (Ord. No. 4398, § 3, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4698, § 12, 10-30-17)

Sec. 23-26. Development standards for a recreational vehicle park.
(a) Each recreational vehicle site shall include a paved or graveled pad for parking a recreational vehicle, an additional paved or graveled space for parking at least one (1) motor vehicle other than the recreational vehicle, an electric pedestal, a potable water spigot, and space for the use of the recreational vehicle occupants.

(b) Buildings that contain offices, laundry facilities, showers, and are otherwise designed for occupancy shall comply with the setback and height provisions of the applicable zoning district, pursuant to Chapter 37 of this code. Storage buildings shall comply with the setback and height standards as provided in the general provisions for accessory buildings, set forth in Chapter 37 of this code.

(c) Permanent structures, such as carports or decks, shall not be attached to a recreational vehicle while the recreational vehicle is in a recreational vehicle park.

(d) A recreational vehicle shall not be skirted so as to create an enclosed storage space beneath the recreational vehicle.

(e) Vehicle parking within recreational vehicle parks shall conform to the following minimum standards:

(1) In addition to a paved or graveled recreational vehicle parking pad, a minimum of one (1) parking space shall be provided as part of each recreational vehicle site. Such parking space shall be at least nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet deep and may be either paved or graveled.

(2) One (1) common guest parking space shall be provided for every three (3) recreational vehicle sites. If such parking consists of more than four (4) parking spaces total, then it shall comply with the parking lot development requirements set forth in Chapter 37, Article VII of this code and with the dimensional standards established in the city of Lewiston public works department standard drawings for parking lots.

(f) Fencing and landscaping. Individual fencing of recreational vehicle sites shall be prohibited. A sight-obscuring fence or wall six (6) feet in height and a minimum five-foot-wide irrigated landscape space shall be required along the perimeter of a recreational vehicle park. Landscaping shall consist of a minimum of one (1) one-and-one-half-inch caliper shade tree, one (1) one-and-one-half-inch caliper ornamental tree, and five (5) one-gallon shrubs placed every thirty-five (35) feet along the perimeter of a recreational vehicle park. All required landscaping shall be maintained by the developer on a continual basis.

(g) Recreation area. A recreation area shall be required in each recreational vehicle park. A recreation area shall be a minimum of five (5) percent of the total recreational vehicle park area. A recreation area shall include amenities for the enjoyment of guests occupying the recreational vehicle park, including, but not limited to, grass, picnic tables, shade structures, and barbecues. A recreation area shall be clearly delineated on the site plan, shall be maintained by the recreational vehicle park owner, and shall not be reduced below the minimum size or developed into rental spaces.

(h) Restroom, shower, and laundry facilities shall be provided for the benefit of all guests occupying the recreational vehicle park. The location of these facilities shall not reduce the required amount of recreation area described above. Said facilities shall be required to connect to the city wastewater system, pursuant to section 36-106 of this code.

(i) A sanitary dumping station appropriately sized for the number of recreational vehicle sites shall be required. Locations of dumping stations shall be restricted to those locations approved by the city of Lewiston public works department, pursuant to section 36-153(b)(23) of this code. Individual hookups to recreational vehicle sites designed for independent recreational vehicles shall be permitted when connected to a centralized sewer system. All sewage disposal methods must meet federal, state, and local health regulations.

(j) City water service to a recreational vehicle park may require premises isolation, pursuant to section 36-56 of this code.

(k) Accessory uses within a recreational vehicle park only for the benefit of the guests occupying the recreational vehicle park, such as pools and clubhouses, shall be permitted subject to the building permit application review process.

(l) Driveway access to and from a street shall be subject to approval by the public works department. Driveways within a recreational vehicle park shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the standards required by the fire department.

(m) Stormwater detention facilities shall be provided, subject to the requirements of the public works department. (Ord. No. 4398, § 3, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4698, § 13, 10-30-17)

Secs. 23-27 – 23-36. Reserved.
Cross references – Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 10; manufactured housing standards, § 10-8 et seq.; electricity, Ch. 14; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 15; garbage, rubbish and weeds, Ch. 17; gas, Ch. 18; health and sanitation, Ch. 19; oil burning equipment, Ch. 25; parks and recreation, Ch. 26; plumbing, Ch. 27; signs, Ch. 30; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 31; traffic, Ch. 35; water and sewers, Ch. 36; zoning, Ch. 37.


2
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4698, §§ 2, 4 – 10, adopted October 30, 2017, repealed §§ 23-23, 23-25 – 23-31, pertaining to recreational vehicle parks, derived from Ord. No. 4398, § 3, 1-9-06.


3
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4698, § 14, adopted October 30, 2017, repealed § 23-35, pertaining to storage beneath a recreational vehicle, derived from Ord. No. 4398, § 3, 1-9-06.

Former § 23-36, pertaining to parking of manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, was repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 4473, adopted July 9, 2007; such former section originated from Ord. No. 4398, § 4, 1-9-06.


Chapter 24
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 24-1 – 24-36

Art. II.    Noise Control and Regulation, §§ 24-37 – 24-45

Art. III.    Off-Road Vehicles, §§ 24-46 – 24-49

Art. IV.    Graffiti and Graffiti Abatement, §§ 24-50 – 24-53

ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 24-1. Permit required to discharge firearms.
No person shall discharge any air gun, air pistol, rifle, fowling piece, pistol or any other firearms within the city without having first obtained a permit from the chief of police to do so, except when a person is discharging a firearm in the lawful defense of person or persons or property. (Code 1960, § 22-1; Ord. No. 3968, § 1, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 4619, § 1, 11-24-14)

Sec. 24-2. Aisles of churches, theaters, etc.; obstruction prohibited.
No person having charge or control of any theater, church or other building or tent at which an audience or congregation may be assembled shall permit any person to sit or stand in or otherwise obstruct or barricade the free and open passageway of any of the aisles in such building or tent. (Code 1960, § 22-2)

Sec. 24-3. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4610, § 1, adopted August 11, 2014, repealed § 24-3, prohibiting throwing or tossing candy, prizes, toys or any material from a vehicle or participant in a parade, which derived from Ord. No. 3802, § 1, adopted December 23, 1985, and as amended by Ord. No. 3968, § 2, adopted June 25, 1990.

Sec. 24-4. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3559, § 2, adopted Feb. 2, 1981, repealed § 24-4, prohibiting cheating at games of chance, derived from the 1960 Code, § 22-11.

Sec. 24-5. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3968, § 10, adopted June 25, 1990, repealed former § 24-5, relative to permits for the use of explosives in the city, which derived from the 1960 Code, § 22-24.

Sec. 24-6. False alarms.
No person shall call for or summon any police or peace officer or fireman upon any false alarm of disorder, disturbance, fire or crime of whatsoever sort. (Code 1960, § 22-25; Ord. No. 3968, § 3, 6-25-90)

Sec. 24-7. Noncity emergency response vehicles within city limits – Notification required.
All noncity emergency response vehicles entering the city limits of the city of Lewiston pursuant to a code response, or operating within the city limits of the city of Lewiston pursuant to an anticipated code response of two blocks or more, shall be required to notify the city of Lewiston Police Dispatch Center upon entering the city of Lewiston or upon operating pursuant to a code response within the city and advise of the location and destination. (Ord. No. 4180, § 1, 1-27-97)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3968, § 10, adopted June 25, 1990, repealed former § 24-7, relative to permit requirements for the discharge of firearms, which derived from the 1960 Code, § 22-26.

Sec. 24-8. Fireworks – Definitions.
(a) As used in this section, these terms shall have the following meanings:

(1) Authority having jurisdiction means the Lewiston fire department.

(2) Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or articles prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation. Fireworks include items classified as common or special fireworks by the United States Bureau of Explosives or contained in the regulations of the United States Department of Transportation and designated as UN 0335 1.3G or UN 0336 1.4G. The term “fireworks” shall not include any automotive safety flares, toy guns, toy cannons, caps or other items designed for use with toy guns or toy cannons, party poppers, pop-its or other devices which contain twenty-five hundredths (0.25) of a grain or less of explosive substance.

(3) Nonaerial common fireworks means any fireworks such as ground spinners, fountains, sparklers, smoke devices or snakes designed to remain on or near the ground and not to travel outside a fifteen (15) foot diameter circle or emit sparks or other burning material which land outside a twenty (20) foot diameter circle or above a height of twenty (20) feet. Nonaerial common fireworks do not include firecrackers, jumping jacks, or similar products.

(4) Permit means an authorization given by the authority having jurisdiction pursuant to section 24-9 of this code.

(5) Special fireworks means any fireworks designed primarily for display and classified as special fireworks by the United States Bureau of Explosives or designated as UN 0335 1.3G.

(b) No person in the city shall possess fire or discharge any fireworks other than nonaerial common fireworks. Nonaerial common fireworks may be possessed and discharged during the times that nonaerial common fireworks may be sold at retail, as provided in section 24-9 of this code; provided, however, that the fire marshal may permit the public display by responsible persons or organizations of fireworks of such character and in such location as in the fire marshal’s judgment shall not be hazardous to surrounding property or endanger personal safety as defined by Idaho Code, Section 39-2605.

(c) It shall be unlawful for any person, except in compliance with this section, to:

(1) Alter any fireworks;

(2) Throw any fireworks from, into, or at a moving vehicle or at any person;

(3) Sell or use any fireworks at any time not permitted under this chapter;

(4) Use fireworks in any area that constitutes a severe fire threat based on the vegetative conditions during the current fire season as determined by the county commission or authority having jurisdiction; provided, that notice of such areas is given in advance.

(d) The parents, guardians or other persons having custody or control of a minor shall be liable for damage caused by the use of fireworks by the minor.

(e) A violation of subsection (c)(1) or (3) of this section shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).

(f) Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, any person using or possessing fireworks in violation of the provisions of this section or any rules issued hereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-7 of this code. Possession and/or the use of fireworks prohibited by this section is hereby declared a public nuisance and a threat to public safety and any such fireworks may be confiscated by the Lewiston police department or the Lewiston fire department. (Ord. No. 4578, § 2, 5-14-12; Ord. No. 4644, § 3, 10-26-15)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4578, § 1, adopted May 14, 2012, repealed former § 24-8, relative to the use of fireworks within the city, which derived from the 1960 Code, § 22-27, and as amended by Ord. No. 3665, § 1, adopted August 9, 1982, Ord. No. 3747, § 1, adopted June 18, 1984, Ord. No. 4061, § 1, adopted February 8, 1993, and Ord. No. 4088, § 5, adopted November 22, 1993.

Sec. 24-9. Same – Sale prohibited, exception.
(a) No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale any fireworks as defined by Idaho Code, Section 39-2602. Nonaerial common fireworks may be sold at retail from June 28th to July 5th of each year, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. upon obtaining a city business license therefor pursuant to Chapter 21 of this code.

(b) It is unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to purchase or possess any fireworks unless accompanied by or in the presence of their parent or legal guardian. It is unlawful for any permit holder, or agent or employee of a permit holder, to sell fireworks to any person who is under the age of sixteen (16) years unless accompanied by or in the presence of their parent or legal guardian. Only persons who are over the age of eighteen (18) years are permitted to sell fireworks or work in a fireworks stand. Verification of age of workers, sellers and purchasers of fireworks shall be by picture identification only and shall be the responsibility of the permit holder, agent or employee of a permit holder. Retail vendors of nonaerial fireworks shall post age restriction information as required by this section.

(c) Any person desiring to sell nonaerial common fireworks shall file an application for a city of Lewiston business license with the business license representative no later than June 1st.

(d) Any person desiring to present a public display shall file an application for a city of Lewiston business license with the business license representative at least thirty (30) days in advance of the proposed event.

(e) A violation of subsection (a) of this section shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).

(f) Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this section or any rules issued hereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-7 of this code. Possession of or offering to sell fireworks prohibited by this section is hereby declared a public nuisance and a threat to public safety and any such fireworks may be confiscated by the Lewiston police department or the Lewiston fire department. (Ord. No. 4578, § 4, 5-14-12; Ord. No. 4644, § 4, 10-26-15)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4578, § 3, adopted May 14, 2012, repealed former § 24-9, relative to the sale of fireworks, which derived from the 1960 Code, § 22-28, as amended by Ord. No. 3625, § 1, adopted February 8, 1982, Ord. No. 3968, § 4, adopted June 25, 1990, and Ord. No. 4061, § 2, adopted February 8, 1993.

Secs. 24-10, 24-11. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Sections 24-10 and 24-11, relative to gambling, derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 22-29, 22-30, were repealed by Ord. No. 3559, §§ 3, 4, adopted Feb. 2, 1981.

Sec. 24-12. Iceboxes – Doors, etc., to be removed when abandoned.
No person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing such door or lid from such icebox, refrigerator or container. (Code 1960, § 22-32; Ord. No. 2163, § 1)

Sec. 24-13. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3968, § 10, adopted June 25, 1990, repealed former § 24-13, relative to the use of loudspeakers on vehicles, which derived from the 1960 Code, § 22-44.

Sec. 24-14. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3968, § 10, adopted June 25, 1990, repealed former § 24-14, relative to meetings and unlawful assemblies, which derived from the 1960 Code, § 22-45.

Sec. 24-15. Monuments, stakes, etc. – Destruction, removal, etc., prohibited.
No person shall remove, change, destroy or in any manner interfere with any public or private survey monument, stake, post or peg without first obtaining permission from the director of public works. (Code 1960, § 22-46; Ord. No. 3968, § 5, 6-25-90)

Sec. 24-16. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3968, § 10, adopted June 25, 1990, repealed former § 24-16, relative to playing of music in certain places after 1:00 a.m., which derived from the 1960 Code, § 22-49.

Sec. 24-17. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3968, § 10, adopted June 25, 1990, repealed former § 24-17, relative to nude bathing, which derived from the 1960 Code, § 22-50.

Sec. 24-18. Destruction, defacing, etc., public notices.
No person shall willfully or carelessly tear down, destroy, deface or otherwise injure any notice of every description used by the city and its officers in their official capacity for giving information to the public. The provisions of this section do not apply to the city officers having charge of the posting of such notices. (Code 1960, § 22-57)

Sec. 24-19. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Section 24-19, prohibiting punchboards, chance spindles and chance prize games, and providing that conviction of a violation of the section would bar eligibility for a beer or liquor license, was repealed by Ord. No. 3559, § 5, enacted Feb. 2, 1981. Said section was derived from the 1960 Code, § 22-58.

Sec. 24-20. Reservoirs – Bathing prohibited.
No person shall wade or bathe in any public utility water storage reservoirs. (Code 1960, § 22-59; Ord. No. 3968, § 6, 6-25-90)

Sec. 24-21. Same – Pollution.
No person shall throw any rocks, timbers, trash, debris, animals or other unwholesome objects or substances into any of the reservoirs, swimming pools or other places where water is stored. (Code 1960, § 22-60; Ord. No. 3968, § 7, 6-25-90)

Sec. 24-22. Slingshots; use prohibited.
No person shall shoot, throw, sling, fling, hurl or cast any shot, bullet, lead slug, rock, stone, pebble or missile with or by the use of a slingshot, sling, flip or any instrument, by the use of which injury could be inflicted upon the person or property of any other person within the city. (Code 1960, § 22-63)

Secs. 24-23 – 24-28. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3968, § 10, adopted June 25, 1990, repealed former §§ 24-23 – 24-28, relative to various offenses, which derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 22-64 – 22-66, 22-71; and Ord. No. 3318, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 19, 1976.

Sec. 24-29. Loitering around school buildings, etc.
No person found loitering on school property in the city during the school year or any other time when student activity is in progress in any of said schools shall refuse to disperse or vacate such place when requested to do so by any police officer; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to enrolled students of the school, faculty members, school district employees, or other persons connected with or taking part in school activities. (Ord. No. 3318, § 5, 7-19-76; Ord. No. 3968, § 8, 6-25-90)

Secs. 24-30 – 24-36. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. NOISE CONTROL AND REGULATION2
Sec. 24-37. Noise or excessive or unnecessary sound declared public nuisance.
The creation or maintenance of noise(s) or the creation or maintenance of excessive or unnecessary sound(s) within the limits of the city of Lewiston, Idaho, or that emanates from a location outside of the limits of the city of Lewiston, Idaho, be and the same hereby is declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. No. 3560, § 1, 3-9-81)

Sec. 24-38. Noise or excessive or unnecessary sound prohibited.
(a) No person shall make any noise(s) or excessive or unnecessary sound(s) which disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, convenience, repose, health, peace, safety and welfare of any other person or persons or of any residential neighborhood within the limits of the city of Lewiston.

(b) No person on the premises of a restaurant, bank, bar, tavern, theatre, business, public parking facility or other public or private property where parking or drive-in facilities are offered and extended to the public for their use shall unnecessarily do any of the following: Race the engine of any motor vehicle; bring to a sudden start or stop any motor vehicle; or commit any other act constituting a nuisance or disturbance on said premises whereby the quiet of the premises or the neighborhood is disturbed, or the health, peace, safety, comfort or convenience of any person is disturbed.

(c) The following acts are declared to be noise(s) and unreasonable, excessive and unnecessary sounds in violation of this article; however, this enumeration shall not be deemed exclusive:

(1) Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other motor vehicle except as a necessary signal required by the exigencies of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.

(2) Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing, using or operating of any radio, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, tape recorder or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the sleep, peace, convenience, comfort or repose of any other person. The operation of any such radio, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, tape recorder or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to be plainly audible to a law enforcement officer at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, room, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.

(3) Loudspeakers, amplifiers, etc. The use or operation of any loudspeaker or sound amplifier, either stationary or mobile, in such a manner as to project sound upon public streets, or other public property, or upon private property owned by someone other than the owner or operator of the loudspeaker or sound amplifier, except when such use or operation is authorized and permitted by the issuance of a written license and permit according to the requirements set forth in section 24-43(3) of this article.

(4) Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except as a warning of fire or danger or upon the request of proper city authorities.

(5) Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of any exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom, except where such discharge is from vehicles used for participation in vehicle spectator sports activities between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.

(6) Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other motor vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in any otherwise unreasonable manner so as to disturb the sleep, peace, quiet, comfort or repose of any person or residential neighborhood.

(7) Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The loading or unloading of any motor vehicle or the opening, closing or destruction of bales, boxes, crates or containers, so as to disturb the sleep, peace, quiet, comfort or repose of any person or residential neighborhood.

(8) Construction or repair of buildings, streets, etc. The construction, excavation, demolition, alteration, destruction or repair of any building, property, building site, street, sidewalk, driveway, sewer or utility line between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except as provided in section 24-42 of this article.

(9) Schools, cemeteries, churches, hospitals. The creation of any noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, cemetery or funeral home, while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, nursing home or other institution for the care of the sick or infirm, which interferes with the operation of the same or disturbs the sleep, peace, quiet, comfort or repose of any person.

(10) Pile drivers, hammers, machinery, etc. The operation between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other construction equipment, machinery or tools.

(11) Blowers and compressors. The operation of any blower, power fan, internal combustion engine, electrical motor or compressor, the operation of which unreasonably disturbs the sleep, peace, quiet, comfort or repose of any person or residential neighborhood. (Ord. No. 3560, § 1, 3-9-81; Ord. No. 3968, § 9, 6-25-90; Ord. No. 4320, § 5, 6-23-03)

Sec. 24-39. Motor vehicle noise performance standards.
(a) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 24-40 herein, no person shall drive, move or operate or cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved or operated any automobile, motorcycle, bus, truck or other motor vehicle, or combination thereof within the city limits of Lewiston, at any time in such a manner as to exceed the following noise limits for the category of motor vehicles shown below. The standard measurement height shall be not less than four (4) feet above the immediate surrounding surface and the measurement distance not less than twenty-five (25) feet. All sound measurements shall be made on a sound level meter in good working condition which meets ANSI (American National Standards Institute) specifications S1.4-1974 for Type I or Type II equipment. The manufacturer’s published indication of compliance with such specifications shall be prima facie evidence of compliance with this subsection.

Motor vehicles with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) or gross combination weight rating (GCWR) of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more, or any combination of vehicles towed by such motor vehicle

88 dbA

Motorcycles

80 dbA

Any other motor vehicles or any combination of vehicles towed by any motor vehicle

80 dbA

(b) This section shall apply to the total noise from a motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles and shall not be construed as limiting or precluding the enforcement of any other provisions of this article relating to motor vehicle mufflers for noise control. This section shall not apply to motor vehicles operating at speeds greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour in a speed zone in which the posted speed limit is greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour.

(c) No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any automobile, bus, truck, motorcycle or other motor vehicle within the city limits of Lewiston unless the exhaust system of such motor vehicle is:

(1) Free from defects which affect sound reduction;

(2) Equipped with a properly functioning muffler or other noise dissipative device;

(3) Without any cut-out, bypass or similar devices in use.

(d) No person shall operate any automobile, bus, truck, motorcycle or other motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause, or allow to be emitted therefrom, any squealing, screeching or other such noise from the tires in contact with the ground because of rapid acceleration or excessive speed around corners or other such reason, except that noise resulting from emergency braking to avoid imminent danger shall be exempt from this provision.

(e) Notwithstanding the provisions of other noise standards, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle driven upon a public or private street or right-of-way within the city to use, or employ the use of, a compression or “jake” brake. For the purpose of this section, a compression or “jake” brake shall mean any device mounted on or adjacent to the engine of the vehicle being driven which is not effectively muffled and which, when employed reduces engine speed and causes the vehicle to slow without the use of vehicle’s braking system. This section shall not apply to emergency driving situations requiring the use of all vehicle braking systems, including compression or “jake” brakes, when necessary to protect persons or property.

(f) Exceptions. Sounds created by any motor vehicle operated off public highways shall be subject to the sound levels of section 24-40 of this article. (Ord. No. 3560, § 1, 3-9-81; Ord. No. 4265, § 1, 11-27-00)

Sec. 24-40. Maximum permissible environmental noise and sound levels.
(a) No person shall cause or permit noise or sound(s) to intrude into the property of another person, which noise or sound(s) exceeds the maximum permissible noise levels set forth below in this section.

(b) The sound limitations established herein are as set forth in the following table after any applicable adjustments provided for herein are applied, which, when said sound limitations are exceeded, shall constitute excessive and unnecessary sound(s) and shall be violations in their own right, as well as being prima facie evidence of noise.

(c) No sound shall exceed any of the below-established zone limits by fifteen (15) dbA at any point in time.

(d) The sound shall not exceed any of the below-established zone limits by ten (10) dbA for a cumulative total of one (1) minute or more out of any ten-minute period.

(e) The sound shall not exceed any of the below-established zone limits by three (3) dbA continually for a period of five (5) minutes, or for a cumulative total of five (5) minutes or more out of any ten-minute period.

(f) Noise buffering measures shall be provided to mitigate the impacts of noise on receiving land uses. Decibel meter readings entering the land uses listed shall not exceed the listed maximum decibel levels except as allowed in this code:

Land Use Category

Maximum
Decibel
Levels

Residential – Multiple-family, dormitories, etc.

60

Transient lodging

65

School classrooms, libraries, churches

62

Hospitals, nursing homes

55

Auditoriums, concert halls, music shells

60

Sports arenas, outdoor spectator sports

70

Playgrounds, neighborhood parks

65

Golf courses, riding stables, water recreation, cemeteries

65

Office buildings – Personal, business and professional

70

Commercial – Retail, movie theaters, restaurants

70

Commercial – Wholesale, some retails, industry, manufacturing, utilities

75

Manufacturing, communication (noise-sensitive)

62

Livestock farming, animal breeding

70

Agriculture (except livestock), mining, fishing

80

Public rights-of-way

80

Extensive natural recreation areas

75

Land Use Category

Maximum Decibel Levels Permitted from 7 a m. until 10 p.m. of the Same Day

Maximum Decibel Levels Permitted from 10 p. m. until 7 a.m. of the Following Day

Residential –Single-family, duplex, mobile homes

60

50

(Ord. No. 3560, § 1, 3-9-81; Ord. No. 3919, § 1, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 3949, § 1, 5-30-89)

Sec. 24-41. Definitions and standards.
For the purposes of this article, the words used shall have their ordinary and usual usage, except that the words listed hereinbelow shall have the definitions given to them in this section:

A-weighted sound level is the sound level as measured in decibels with a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The standard notation is dbA or DBA.

Decibel is a unit of measure of sound (see “sound pressure level”).

Emergency vehicle is a motor vehicle used in response to a public calamity or to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger.

Motor vehicle is any vehicle which is self-propelled by mechanical power, including, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semitrailers, buses, campers, motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts, racing vehicles, motorboats and snowmobiles.

Muffler is an apparatus consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates designed for the purpose of transmitting gases, which reduces sound emanating from such apparatus.

Noise is any sound(s) which:

(1) Is unwanted; or

(2) Is loud, discordant or disagreeable; or

(3) Causes or trends to cause an adverse physiological or psychological effect on human beings; or

(4) Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; or

(5) Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensibilities; or

(6) Endangers or injures personal or real property; or

(7) Exceeds the maximum permissible environmental noise and sound levels as set forth in this article.

Property boundary means the surveyed line at ground surface which separates the real property owned, rented or leased by one (1) or more persons from that owned, rented or leased by one (1) or more other persons and its vertical extension.

Receiving land use means real property within which sound originating from a source outside the property is received.

Sound is mechanical energy transmitted by a cyclic series of compressions and rarefactions of molecules of the material or materials through which it passes.

Sound level meter is an instrument, including a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector and integrator or time averager, output meter and/or visual display and weighting networks, used to measure sound levels. The sound level meter shall conform as a minimum to the requirements of ANSI (American National Standards Institute) S1.4-1971, Type II, or its successor publication and to be set to an A-weighted response. An acoustical calibrator, accurate to within plus or minus one (1) decibel, shall be used to verify the before and after calibration of the sound level meter on each noise measurement taken.

Sound pressure is the instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as provided by sound.

Sound pressure level is twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the RMS (rote-mean-square) sound pressure to the reference pressure of twenty (20) micropascals. The sound pressure is denoted Lp or SPL. (Ord. No. 3560, § 1, 3-9-81; Ord. No. 3919, § 2, 5-16-88)

Sec. 24-42. Sound level variance permits.
(a) The amount of variance permit fees, when required by the provisions of this article, shall be set by resolution of the council.

(b) In cases of emergency or other urgent public necessity, the police department may issue a permit allowing the activities described in section 24-38(c) to take place at any hour. Emergency permits may not be issued for periods exceeding five (5) days, but may be renewed for successive periods not exceeding three (3) days each for so long as the emergency continues.

(c) If, after a consideration and evaluation of the location of the site, the potential nature of the sound(s) which would be generated on the site, the potential nature of the sound(s) from vehicular traffic to and from the site and the relative effect of such sounds upon the persons residing on property adjacent to the site, the chief of police determines that the sleep, peace, quiet, comfort or repose of such persons will not be disturbed, he may issue a permit allowing activities described in section 24-38(c)(9) to take place between such hours from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., as he deems proper.

(d) If a variance is granted, the chief of police or his authorized representative shall prescribe such reasonable conditions or requirements as are necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community, the surrounding neighborhood and persons residing upon property adjacent to the site. (Ord. No. 3560, § 1, 3-9-81)

Sec. 24-43. Exceptions.
If a person can establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that one (1) or more of the following exceptions apply, then that person shall be excused from compliance with this article:

(1) The sound(s) or noise(s) was made by an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency.

(2) The sound(s) or noise(s) was made by the sounding of the horn of any vehicle as a danger warning signal, or by the sounding of any warning device as required by law.

(3) The sound(s) was made within the terms and conditions of a sound level variance granted by the chief of police or his authorized representative. A variance shall be granted after application is made if the chief of police finds that compliance will cause an undue hardship and further finds:

a. That additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his activities or operation to comply with this article; or

b. The activity, operation or sound source will be of temporary duration and, even with the application of the best available control technology, cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this article; and

c. That no other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.

(4) The sound(s) or noise(s) emanate from residential property and was caused by a temporary project for the maintenance or repair of homes, grounds and appurtenances; provided, however, that this section shall apply only to sound(s) or noise(s) generated between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

(5) The sound(s) or noise(s) was created by the installation or repair of essential utility services.

(6) The sound(s) or noise(s) originate from officially sanctioned parades or other public events.

(7) The sound(s) or noise(s) are generated by any:

a. Interstate railways or engines or cars;

b. Airports or aircrafts.

(8) The sound(s) of temporary construction, excavation or demolition activity as a result of construction equipment, including special construction vehicles, and emanating from temporary construction sites; and where said construction, excavation or demolition activity is conducted pursuant to a valid building or demolition permit; and which activity is conducted during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.

(9) Sound(s) caused by natural phenomena.

(10) Sound(s) created by the discharge of firearms in the course of lawful hunting activities.

(11) Sound(s) created by safety and protective devices, where noise suppression would defeat the intent of the device or is not economically feasible.

(12) Sound(s) created by fire alarms and warning devices, bells, chimes and carillons not operating continuously for more than five (5) minutes.

(13) Sound(s) created by equipment used for highway and street maintenance.

(14) Sound(s) created by emergency equipment and work necessary in the interest of law enforcement or for the health, safety or welfare of the community.

(15) Sound(s) created by blasting.

(16) Sound(s) created by motor vehicles when regulated by section 24-39 of this code.

(17) Sound(s) from existing industrial installations which exceed the standards contained in these regulations which, over the previous three (3) years, have consistently operated in excess of fifteen (15) hours per day as a consequence of process necessity and/or demonstrated routine normal operation. (Ord. No. 3560, § 1, 3-9-81; Ord. No. 3919, § 3, 5-16-88)

Sec. 24-44. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3968, § 10, adopted June 25, 1990, repealed former § 24-44, relative to violation of the article, which derived from Ord. No. 3560, § 1, adopted March 9, 1981.

Sec. 24-45. Construction and severability.
(a) This article shall be liberally construed to carry out its broad purposes.

(b) If any provision of this article or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the article or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected. (Ord. No. 3560, § 1, 3-9-81)

ARTICLE III. OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
Sec. 24-46. Off-road vehicles prohibited.
(a) Definitions.

(1) As used in this section a motor vehicle shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person may be transported and is propelled by the use of a motor or engine of any nature. This definition is meant to specifically include all cars, automobiles, trucks, pick-up trucks, motorcycles, motor scooters, or similar devices, whether or not the same is registered for use on a public highway.

(2) As used in this section unimproved land shall mean any real property not subdivided and platted with the Nez Perce County recorder’s office and not dedicated as a public right-of-way.

(b) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for a person to drive, ride or operate any motor vehicle on any unimproved land in Sections 12 and 13, Range 6 West, Township 35 North, Boise Meridian. The intent of this article is to prohibit the operation of vehicles on unimproved lands south of 23rd Avenue, west of Mayfair Drive and the Lewiston-Nez County Airport, north of the southern boundary of Section 13 above described, and east of the Snake River. A violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-7 of this code.

(c) Exceptions. Police, emergency and utility vehicles operating within utility easements and construction and maintenance vehicles operating with the permission of the landowner shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord. No. 3965, § 1, 6-4-90)

Secs. 24-47 – 24-49. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. GRAFFITI AND GRAFFITI ABATEMENT
Sec. 24-50. Graffiti declared a nuisance and unlawful.
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance, a threat to public health, safety and welfare and to be unlawful for any person to place or put, by any means, any drawing, inscription, figure, writing, symbol or mark of any type commonly known as graffiti on any public or private property without the consent or permission of the owner or leaseholder of the premises. (Ord. No. 4135, § 1, 11-6-95)

Sec. 24-51. Definition of graffiti, abatement.
As used in sections 24-50 through 24-55 of this code, the word graffiti shall mean the marking, defacing, damaging or destroying by spraying of paint or marking of ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public or private buildings, structures, fences, rocks, trees or any other surface capable of displaying words, symbols, pictures or marks, when said marking, defacing, damaging or destroying is done without the consent of the owner of person in charge of said property. Graffiti abatement shall mean the removal or the painting over of the graffiti so that said graffiti is not visible. (Ord. No. 4135, § 1, 11-6-95)

Sec. 24-52. Graffiti abatement.
Whenever a city police officer discovers graffiti on any public or private property or any surfaces visible to the public, the chief of police or designee may attempt to obtain abatement of said graffiti by the person or person causing the graffiti. In the event the person causing the graffiti cannot be located the chief of police or designee shall notify the property owner and make arrangements for the removal of the graffiti. (Ord. No. 4135, § 1, 11-6-95)

Sec. 24-53. Person defacing property with graffiti responsible for cost of abatement.
In the event a person is convicted of any crime which involves the defacing of property with graffiti, said person shall be responsible for the cost of abatement of the graffiti, or, if abatement has already occurred, said person shall be responsible for reimbursing the property owner or the city for the cost of abatement of the graffiti. (Ord. No. 4135, § 1, 11-6-95)

1
Cross reference – Temporary advertising, in the form of signs or merchandise, declared a nuisance, § 31-74(a).


2
Cross references – Use of loudspeakers on vehicles, § 24-13; creation of excessive noise in operation of vehicle, § 24-28.


Chapter 25
OIL BURNING EQUIPMENT1
1
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4283, § 4, adopted April 9, 2001, repealed §§ 25-1 – 25-21 in their entirety. Former Ch. 25 derived from Ch. 22A of the 1960 Code, as amended by Ord. No. 2804 §§ 1 – 20, Ord. No. 2815, and Ord. No. 2833, § 1.

Cross references – Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 10, fire protection and prevention, Ch. 15; gas and oil burning equipment, Ch. 18; mobile homes and tourist facilities, Ch. 23.


Chapter 26
PARKS AND RECREATION1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 26-1 – 26-15

Art. II.    Public Skate Park Facilities, §§ 26-16 – 26-31

Art. III.    Park Regulations Generally, §§ 26-32 – 26-38

Art. IV.    Street Trees, §§ 26-39 – 26-52

Art. V.    Reserving Park Space and Alcohol in Parks, §§ 26-53 – 26-65

ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 26-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

Director means the director of parks and recreation or his or her designated assistants.

Park means a park, playground, beach, open space or recreation center in the city, owned by the city or dedicated to public recreational use.

Recreation means the leisure activity of individuals or groups of individuals in the parks as deemed appropriate by the director. (Ord. No. 3176, § 1, 10-22-73; Ord. No. 3554, § 1, 12-1-80; Ord. No. 4008, § 1, 7-22-91)

Sec. 26-2. Parks and recreation advisory commission.
Pursuant to section 2-180 of this code there is established and created a commission to be known as the parks and recreation advisory commission. The parks and recreation advisory commission shall have the duties as provided for in sections 2-180 through 2-186 of this code. (Ord. No. 3966, § 4, 7-23-90)

Secs. 26-3 – 26-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PUBLIC SKATE PARK FACILITIES2
Sec. 26-16. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a comprehensive set of rules and regulations for the use of public skate parks facilities in the city of Lewiston. (Ord. No. 4596, § 1, 10-28-13)

Sec. 26-17. Definitions.
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this article, words, phrases and terms used hereon shall have their ordinary meaning, unless otherwise indicated as follows:

(1) Department shall be defined as the city of Lewiston parks and recreation department;

(2) Director shall be defined as the director of the parks and recreation department, or his or her designee;

(3) Public skate park facility shall be defined as any facility, structure or area in which skateboarding, in-line skating, bicycling, riding scooters, and roller skating is permitted pursuant to the provisions of this article, which is owned, operated and maintained by the city, and which has been designated as a “public skate park facility” by resolution of the city council;

(4) Roller skates or in-line skates including roller blades shall be defined as any shoe, boot or other footwear to which one (1) or more wheels are attached;

(5) Skateboard shall be defined as any platform with four (4) wheels, skateboard tracks and a deck;

(6) Bike means every vehicle propelled primarily by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) wheels and used for freestyle riding and without training or plastic wheels;

(7) Skate activity shall be defined as the use of a skateboard, scooter, bicycle, roller skates or in-line skates, including roller blades;

(8) Park user shall be defined as any person participating in skate activity.

(9) Scooter shall be defined as a non-motorized vehicle that is made of a narrow board with two (2) small wheels attached underneath and an upright handle attached on top and that is moved by pushing with one (1) foot while holding onto the handle. (Ord. No. 4596, § 1, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4653, § 1, 3-14-16)

Sec. 26-18. Hours of operation.
Public skate park facilities shall be opened from dawn until midnight, or as otherwise posted by the director. Public skate park facilities shall close in the event of rain, rainy conditions, other wet conditions or other adverse weather conditions that could endanger park users. (Ord. No. 4596, § 1, 10-28-13)

Sec. 26-19. Prohibited conduct.
While on skate park facilities:

(1) No person shall ride or use any nonmotorized personal transportation other than bikes, scooters, roller skates, in-line skates or skateboards. Excluded forms of transportation include unicycles, go-carts and wagons or any mode other than the allowed forms of transportation within the skating surface of any public skate park facility, or to cause nonmotorized personal transportation to be ridden or used within the skating surface of any public skate park facility;

(2) No person shall possess any can, bottle or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, has a seal broken or the contents of which have been partially removed;

(3) No person shall allow or cause graffiti or tagging in, on or around any part of the public skate park facility;

(4) No person shall ride or use any roller skates, in-line skates, bicycles, scooters, or skateboards at a public skate park facility in a reckless manner or with willful disregard for the safety of persons or property, or to cause anyone using roller skates, in-line skates, bicycles, scooters, or skateboards to be ridden or used in such a reckless manner;

(5) No person shall deposit or leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers, waste or refuse of any kind in a location other than a receptacle provided for such purpose, or to cause such items to be deposited or left in such a manner. If no receptacle is provided, each person shall be responsible for removing and disposing of such items from the public skate park facility;

(6) No person shall allow or cause any animal of any kind to be brought into a public skate park facility other than an animal certified for use as a service animal for persons with disabilities;

(7) No person shall allow or cause glass containers of any kind to be brought into any public skate park facility;

(8) No person, other than a park user, is permitted within the skating surface of a public skate park facility, except that spectators may sit or stand in areas designated for that purpose;

(9) No person shall place or utilize obstacles or other materials within a public skate park facility that are not affixed to a public skate park facility by the city for recreational purposes;

(10) No park user shall use a public skate park facility while under the influence of alcohol or drugs that would impair that person’s judgment or motor skills;

(11) No person shall conduct organized activities, events or competitions without prior written permission from the director;

(12) No skate activity is permitted on the walls or other boundary structures or seating areas immediately surrounding or adjoining a public skate park facility;

(13) No person under the age of ten (10) years shall be allowed use of the skate facility or left unattended without proper supervision by a person at least eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. No. 4596, § 1, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4653, § 2, 3-14-16)

Sec. 26-20. City immunity from liability.
All skate activity within any public skate park facility is deemed a hazardous recreational activity and the city of Lewiston may not be held liable for injuries sustained or incurred by persons who participate in any such hazardous recreational activity. (Ord. No. 4596, § 1, 10-28-13)

Sec. 26-21. Other regulations.
The director may set forth any other rules and regulations for the use of a public skate park facility, which he or she deems appropriate; provided, that signs describing such rules and regulations are placed and posted pursuant to this article. (Ord. No. 4596, § 1, 10-28-13)

Sec. 26-22. Signage and posting requirements.
In order to provide reasonable notice to the public, the director shall place and post signs in one (1) or more conspicuous and visible area(s) of a public skate park facility designating the facility, structure or area as a public skate park facility, specifying the rules and regulations established pursuant this article, and prohibiting the activities described herein. (Ord. No. 4596, § 1, 10-28-13)

Sec. 26-23. Penalties.
Any violation of the ordinance codified in this article, or the article hereby adopted, shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day the infraction occurs. (Ord. No. 4596, § 1, 10-28-13)

Sec. 26-24. Additional enforcement.
The director or his or her designee shall have the authority to eject and expel any person from the skate park who is in violation of any provision of this article. (Ord. No. 4596, § 1, 10-28-13)

Secs. 26-25 – 26-31. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PARK REGULATIONS GENERALLY
Sec. 26-32. Operation.
(a) Except when otherwise ordered by the director, or as otherwise posted, all parks of the city shall be open to the public every day of the year between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:59 p.m.

(b) Lighting for athletic events shall not be permitted after 11:00 p.m., except when ordered by the director.

(c) Persons and vehicles shall be excluded from the parks of the city during hours of closure except for necessary transit through the parks. (Ord. No. 3176, § 2, 10-22-73; Ord. No. 3589, § 1, 9-8-81; Ord. No. 4733, § 1, 1-28-19)

Sec. 26-33. Recreational activities.
(a) The director shall have the authority to regulate activities in any area where necessary to prevent congestion and to secure maximum use of the parks for the comfort and convenience of the public.

(b) All persons using the parks of the city shall comply with any directions of the director in the use of recreational areas of the parks. (Ord. No. 3176, § 3, 10-22-73)

Sec. 26-34. Use of park property.
(a) No person shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or display or remove any buildings, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, pavings, or other public properties or facilities or any part or parts thereof, nor tamper with nor remove any signs, notices, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or any other structures, equipment or facilities on park property, nor shall any person damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, nor pick any flower or seedlings within any park of the city.

(b) No person shall attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any tree or plant.

(c) No person shall dig or otherwise disturb any grass areas of any park, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty of any park area.

(d) No person shall utilize any kind of chemical to induce the gathering or harvesting of worms or bait within any city park area.

(e) Section 8-31 of this code shall apply in all areas designated by the city as park properties. All dogs shall be required to be on a leash at all times when visiting city parks. Parties responsible for dogs shall clean up and remove any and all fecal matter deposited by dogs within or on park property. Responsible party shall mean any individual or person owning, possessing or having within their immediate vicinity, custody or control of a dog. Responsible persons who do not clean up after their dogs shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(f) No person shall possess or consume liquor, as such term is defined in Chapter 6 of this code, in a park. No person shall possess or consume beer or wine, as such terms are defined in Chapter 6 of this code, in a park, unless in accordance with a valid permit, as set forth in article V of this chapter. (Ord. No. 3176, § 4, 10-22-73; Ord. No. 3743, § 1, 5-7-84; Ord. No. 3819, § 1, 7-14-86; Ord. No. 4008, § 2, 7-22-91; Ord. No. 4331, § 2, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 4733, § 2, 1-28-19)

Cross reference – Utilizing chemicals to induce the gathering or harvesting of worms or bait within cemetery area, § 11-87(p).

Sec. 26-35. Conduct.
No person in any park shall:

(1) Prevent any person from using any park or any park facility, or interfere with any lawful use thereof.

(2) Swim, bathe, or wade in any water or waterways, or pool or fountain in any park, except in such places as are provided therefor and in compliance with such rules and regulations as are posted therefor.

(3) Set up tents, shacks, or other temporary shelter for the purpose of camping, except by permission of the director.

(4) Participate in the playing of any games involving dangerous objects such as stones, arrows, or javelins, except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation by the director. Golfing or driving golf balls shall be prohibited except in duly constituted golf courses or driving ranges.

(5) Ride horses or other animals, except on designated bridle trails or roadways. Where permitted, horses shall be under proper restraint and shall not be permitted to be unattended.

(6) Violate the posted rules for the use of any tennis court.

(7) Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor station or place in a stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale, or display of any article or object, unless in accordance with section 26-59(d) of this code. This section shall not apply to regularly licensed concessionaires acting by and under the authority of the parks and recreation department of the city.

(8) Distribute, leave, or throw any advertising material or give away or otherwise distribute for advertising purposes any goods or wares within any park of the city.

(9) Paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any signs, advertisements, or inscriptions whatever, except as may be authorized by the director. (Ord. No. 3176, § 5, 10-22-73; Ord. No. 4008, § 3, 7-22-91; Ord. No. 4733, § 3, 1-28-19)

Sec. 26-36. Traffic.
No person in any park shall:

(1) Fail to obey any police officer or park and recreation department employee involved in directing traffic.

(2) Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding fifteen (15) miles per hour, except where another speed is properly posted.

(3) Drive any vehicle on any area except paved park roads or parking areas, except as may be otherwise designated by the director.

(4) Park a vehicle in other than established or designated parking area.

(5) Leave a vehicle standing or parked after closing hours of the park.

(6) Double park any vehicle on any road or parkway, unless directed by a police officer or parks and recreation department employee. (Ord. No. 3176, § 6, 10-22-73)

Cross reference – Traffic, Ch. 35.

Sec. 26-37. Enforcement.
All duly constituted police officers, the director and all employees of the parks and recreation department shall have authority to enforce any provision of this article, and shall have the authority to eject from any park or public facility any person violating any provision of this article. (Ord. No. 3176, § 7, 10-22-73)

Sec. 26-38. Violation.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. No. 3176, § 8, 10-22-73)

ARTICLE IV. STREET TREES3
Sec. 26-39. Statement of purpose.
The city of Lewiston hereby declares that it shall be the policy of the city to protect trees planted and growing within the public right-of-way. It shall also be the policy of the city to prohibit the planting and growing of types or kinds of trees that may be hazardous, susceptible to injurious pest and/or disease or damaging to streets, sidewalks and curbs. Further, the city finds and declares that providing an aesthetically attractive plan to planting and growth of trees for the beautification of the streets of the city is in the best interests of the city. (Ord. No. 3776, § 1, 7-1-85)

Sec. 26-40. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings:

Diseased tree: Any tree which has become blighted, defaced, infected or has acquired a disease not capable of care through treatment or the use of any acceptable form of spray material.

Forester: The person responsible for administering the city’s street tree program as provided for in this article.

Injurious pest or disease: An organism capable of seriously damaging the form or structural integrity of a tree.

Owner: Every person including an owner, agent, tenant, occupant or lessee who exercises care, custody and control of real property within the city of Lewiston.

Person: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company, municipal corporation, or other governmental entity or organization of any kind.

Public right-of-way: Improved or unimproved public property dedicated or deeded to the city for the purpose of providing vehicular, pedestrian and public use.

Street tree list: The list of acceptable trees and acceptable planting practices for trees located within the public right-of-way.

Tree pruning practices: Rules and regulations adopted for purposes of describing appropriate tree pruning practices and procedures for trees located in, upon and over the public right-of-way.

Trees: Any plant materials which at maturity would exceed a height of more than thirty (30) inches. (Ord. No. 3776, § 1, 7-1-85)

Sec. 26-41. Authority of forester.
The forester, subject to the provisions of this article, is hereby authorized to:

(1) Plant, prune, spray, preserve and remove trees in the public right-of-way or preserve the symmetry and beauty of trees located within the public right-of-way.

(2) Order the pruning, spraying, preservation or removal of trees upon private property when he shall find such action necessary to prevent the spread of injurious pest or disease to trees located within the public right-of-way.

(3) Supervise all work done under a permit issued in accordance with the terms of this article.

(4) Prepare a street tree list consisting of acceptable trees, size and variety, proper planting instructions, and tree spacing of trees located within the right-of-way which shall be approved by the urban forestry advisory commission.

(5) Prepare rules and regulations containing guidelines for the pruning of trees located within the right-of-way, to be known as the tree pruning practices.

(6) Provide a form for applying for the planting, pruning, or removal of trees located within the public right-of-way. (Ord. No. 3776, § 1, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 4008, § 4, 7-22-91)

Sec. 26-42. Urban forestry advisory commission.
Pursuant to section 2-180 of this code there is established and created a commission to be known as the urban forestry advisory commission. The urban forestry advisory commission shall have the duties as provided for in sections 2-180 through 2-186 of this code. (Ord. No. 3776, § 1, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 3966, § 5, 7-23-90)

Sec. 26-43. Permit required.
No person or owner shall plant any tree within the public right-of-way until a permit shall have been issued by the forester. Applications for tree planting shall be filed with the forester. Such tree must be the type and variety permitted by the street tree list. The forester shall approve each tree for appropriateness and ensure freedom from injurious pest or disease. Any application denied by the forester shall be returned to the applicant with the reasons for the refusal noted thereon. The applicant may file a new application or an amended application at any time thereafter. (Ord. No. 3776, § 1, 7-1-85)

Sec. 26-44. Contents of permit; variances from tree list.
(a) Each permit issued for tree planting shall designate the type and variety of tree permitted. The forester shall designate the appropriate location of the tree on the permit.

(b) Approved species, species not permitted, authorized spacing information and minimal tree well sizes for trees planted in paved areas shall be obtained from the street tree list.

(c) Permission for variance from the street tree list may be granted by the forester when said variance will be in the best interests of the city. (Ord. No. 3776, § 1, 7-1-85)

Sec. 26-45. Street tree removal.
(a) It shall be unlawful for an owner to remove any tree from the public right-of-way until a permit shall have first been issued by the forester. Applications for such tree removal shall be filed with the forester and if in the judgment of the forester such removal is desirable a permit shall be issued. All work of removal shall be under the supervision of the forester but shall be at the sole expense of the applicant.

(b) Any removal of trees for emergency or public safety reasons shall be supervised by the forester. (Ord. No. 3776, § 1, 7-1-85)

Sec. 26-46. Forester to revoke permit.
The forester is authorized and directed to stop work being performed contrary to the tree pruning practices or under a permit issued by the forester. An aggrieved person may appeal the action of the forester as provided for in section 26-52. (Ord. No. 3776, § 1, 7-1-85)

Sec. 26-47. Street tree pruning.
All trees located within the public right-of-way shall be pruned by the owner of the abutting property as provided for in Chapter 35.5 of this code and the tree pruning practices. (Ord. No. 3776, § 1, 7-1-85)

Sec. 26-48. Injurious pests or diseases.
(a) All injurious pests and diseases infecting any tree within the city are hereby declared to be public nuisances.

(b) It shall be the duty of the owner of any private property within the city to take all proper measures for the eradication of any injurious disease or pest infecting or infesting any tree and to cause the same to be sprayed with an effective formula approved by the forester.

(c) The owner of property abutting the public right-of-way shall be responsible for prohibiting the infestation, or spread or continued existence of injurious pests or disease, and their eggs or larvae, to any tree located within the public right-of-way. (Ord. No. 3776, § 1, 7-1-85)

Sec. 26-49. Collection of costs.
In the event the owner of property abutting the right-of-way fails to eradicate injurious pests or diseases, or their eggs or larvae, the same shall be done by the city under the supervision of the forester and the costs and charges incurred thereby are declared to be a lien upon the real property owned by such person and collected as provided for in Idaho Code, Section 50-1008. (Ord. No. 3776, § 1, 7-1-85)

Sec. 26-50. Authority of the city.
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the city, without charge to the owners of the abutting property, from eradicating injurious pests and diseases or pruning trees located within the public right-of-way. (Ord. No. 3776, § 1, 7-1-85)

Sec. 26-51. Penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this article is declared a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) and imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months. (Ord. No. 3776, § 1, 7-1-85)

Sec. 26-52. Appeal of forester action.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the forester may appeal to the urban forestry advisory commission by delivering written notice to the director of parks and recreation. The urban forestry advisory commission shall hold a hearing upon a notice being given to the appellant. Notice of the hearing shall be given indicating the time and place of the hearing at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. The decision of the urban forestry advisory commission may be appealed to the city council upon delivery of written notice to the city clerk. Written notice of appeal shall be delivered to the city clerk within fourteen (14) days of the decision of the urban forestry advisory commission. The city clerk shall file the notice of appeal with the council. The council may decide to hear or not hear the appeal. If the council decides to hear the appeal, notice of the hearing shall be given indicating the time and place of the hearing at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. If the council decides not to hear the appeal, the decision of the urban forestry advisory commission will be final. (Ord. No. 3776, § 1, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 4008, § 5, 7-22-91)

ARTICLE V. RESERVING PARK SPACE AND ALCOHOL IN PARKS
Sec. 26-53. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings set forth in this section:

Applicant means any person applying for a park permit or park alcohol permit, as applicable, pursuant to this article.

Beer means the same as defined in Chapter 6 of this code.

City means the city of Lewiston, Idaho.

Park alcohol permit means the permit required pursuant to this article to have beer or wine served or consumed, but not sold, in a park. An approved application will serve as the park alcohol permit.

Park permit means a permit issued pursuant to this article to reserve and have exclusive use of an open space area, shelter, or bandshell in a park. An approved application will serve as the park permit.

Person means a person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.

Police chief means the city of Lewiston chief of police or designee.

Prescheduled youth event means an event scheduled or arranged in advance that primarily involves children under eighteen (18) years of age, including, but not limited to, youth sports league events and youth-focused special events.

Wine means the same as defined in Chapter 6 of this code. (Ord. No. 4733, § 4, 1-28-19)

Sec. 26-54. Park permit for exclusive use of park area.
If a person wishes to reserve and have exclusive use of an open space area, shelter, or bandshell at a park, then said person shall obtain a park permit from the director in accordance with this article. (Ord. No. 4733, § 4, 1-28-19)

Sec. 26-55. Application for park permit; fee.
(a) An applicant shall obtain an application form for a park permit from the parks and recreation department and file a completed application with the parks and recreation department. If an applicant is only applying for a park permit, then an application for a park permit shall be filed at least seven (7) calendar days in advance of the date of the proposed event. If an applicant wishes to apply for a park alcohol permit in conjunction with a park permit, then the applicant shall comply with the filing requirements set forth in section 26-60(a) of this article, in addition to the other requirements of this article.

(b) An application for a park permit shall be accompanied by the application fee, as set by resolution of the city council. Such fee is nonrefundable, unless the application is withdrawn at least five (5) days before the event. Additional fees may also be charged, as applicable, and such additional fees shall be set by resolution of the city council.

(c) The parks and recreation department may request information from the applicant that is necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable provisions of law. Information may be requested on the application form or through written or oral inquiries. (Ord. No. 4733, § 4, 1-28-19)

Sec. 26-56. Contents of park permit application.
(a) Each application shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:

(1) The full name, street address, and telephone number of the applicant;

(2) The full name, street address, and telephone number of the person in charge of the event, if different from the applicant;

(3) The type or nature of the event;

(4) The date and time when the event will be held;

(5) The park and area where the event will be held;

(6) The estimated number of people expected to attend the event; and

(7) Such other information as the director may deem reasonably necessary.

(b) At the time of application, the applicant shall be required to sign a hold harmless agreement provided by the parks and recreation department. (Ord. No. 4733, § 4, 1-28-19)

Sec. 26-57. Issuance or denial of park permit.
(a) Standards for issuance. Only one (1) park permit may be issued for the same time and location. The director shall issue park permits on a first-come, first-served basis. Subject to subsection (b) of this section, the director shall issue a park permit upon receipt and review of an application.

(b) Standards for denial. The director may deny an application for a park permit when the director finds that:

(1) The applicant failed to file a complete application;

(2) The applicant failed to timely file an application;

(3) The applicant failed to pay the full application fee; or

(4) Another park permit was already issued for the same time and location.

(c) Time for determination. The director shall act on an application for a park permit within three (3) calendar days, excluding holidays, from the filing of a complete application; provided, however, if additional information is requested pursuant to section 26-55(c) of this code, then the time for acting on an application shall be extended by the number of days that it takes the applicant to satisfactorily respond to such request for additional information, not to exceed three (3) additional calendar days.

(d) Notice of determination. The director shall provide written notification to the applicant of the director’s determination within the time frame set forth in subsection (c) of this section. If the director’s determination is to deny the park permit, then the written notice of determination shall set forth the reason(s) for denial. (Ord. No. 4733, § 4, 1-28-19)

Sec. 26-58. Duties of person issued a park permit.
A person issued a park permit shall:

(1) Comply with all park permit terms and conditions and with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.

(2) Be responsible for cleanup of the area for which the park permit was issued and for any damage to city property in the area for which the park permit was issued. (Ord. No. 4733, § 4, 1-28-19)

Sec. 26-59. Other permits may be required.
(a) If a person issued a park permit wishes to have beer or wine served or consumed, but not sold, at the event for which the park permit was issued, then said person shall obtain a park alcohol permit and comply with sections 26-60 through 26-62 of this code, in addition to the other requirements set forth in this article; provided, however, that a park alcohol permit shall not be required if wine is served pursuant to a wine-sponsored event permit, as set forth in Idaho Code, Section 23-1338, as may be amended from time to time. A park alcohol permit shall only be issued in conjunction with a park permit, as set forth in section 26-60 of this code.

(b) If a person issued a park permit wishes to have beer or wine sold at the event for which the park permit was issued, then an alcohol beverage catering permit from the city shall be obtained in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 6 (Alcohol Beverages) of this code, unless wine is sold pursuant to a wine-sponsored event permit as set forth in Idaho Code, Section 23-1338, as may be amended from time to time.

(c) If a person issued a park permit wishes to have beer or wine served or consumed, but not sold, at the event for which the park permit was issued and it is estimated that more than one hundred (100) adults will attend said event, then an alcohol beverage catering permit from the city shall be obtained in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 6 (Alcohol Beverages) of this code, unless wine is served pursuant to a wine-sponsored event permit as set forth in Idaho Code, Section 23-1338, as may be amended from time to time.

(d) If a person issued a park permit wishes to sell goods or services at the event for which the park permit was issued, then said person shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 21 (Licenses) of this code, in addition to the requirements set forth in this article. (Ord. No. 4733, § 4, 1-28-19)

Sec. 26-60. Application for park alcohol permit; age requirement; fee.
(a) An application for a park alcohol permit shall be made, in writing, in conjunction with an application for a park permit and filed with the parks and recreation department. An application for a park alcohol permit shall be filed in conjunction with an application for a park permit at least fourteen (14) calendar days in advance of the date of the proposed event.

(b) An application for a park alcohol permit shall be accompanied by: (1) proof that the applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years old; and (2) the application fee, as set by resolution of the city council. Such fee is nonrefundable, unless the application is withdrawn at least five (5) days before the event.

(c) The parks and recreation department and police chief may request information from the applicant that is necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable provisions of law. Information may be requested on the application form or through written or oral inquiries. (Ord. No. 4733, § 4, 1-28-19)

Sec. 26-61. Issuance or denial of park alcohol permit.
(a) Standards for issuance. A park alcohol permit shall not be issued for a playground; public skate park facility, as defined in article II of this chapter; or if a prescheduled youth event will take place immediately adjacent to the area where beer or wine will be served or consumed.

The police chief shall make a recommendation on an application for a park alcohol permit to the director, which recommendation may include conditions to ensure public safety. Subject to subsection (b) of this section, the director shall issue a park alcohol permit upon receipt and review of an application.

(b) Standards for denial. The director may deny an application for a park alcohol permit when the director finds that:

(1) The applicant failed to timely file an application;

(2) The applicant failed to pay the full application fee;

(3) The applicant failed to provide proof that he or she is at least twenty-one (21) years old;

(4) The applicant failed to obtain a park permit for the event;

(5) Less than ten (10) or more than one hundred (100) adults are estimated to attend the event;

(6) The event will be open to the public;

(7) The event will be held at a playground or public skate park facility; or

(8) A prescheduled youth event will take place immediately adjacent to the area where beer or wine will be served or consumed.

(c) Time for determination. The director shall act on an application for a park alcohol permit within seven (7) calendar days, excluding holidays, from the filing of a completed application; provided, however, if additional information is requested pursuant to section 26-60(c) of this code, then the time for acting on an application shall be extended by the number of days that it takes the applicant to satisfactorily respond to such request for additional information, not to exceed three (3) additional calendar days.

(d) Notice of determination. The director shall provide written notification to the applicant of the director’s determination within the time frame set forth in subsection (c) of this section. If the director’s determination is to deny the park alcohol permit, then the written notice of determination shall set forth the reason(s) for denial. (Ord. No. 4733, § 4, 1-28-19)

Sec. 26-62. Duties of person issued a park alcohol permit.
A person issued a park alcohol permit shall:

(1) Comply with all park alcohol permit terms and conditions and with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations;

(2) Remain at the location where the park alcohol permit was issued at all times while the park alcohol permit is in effect;

(3) Ensure that minors are not served at the location where the park alcohol permit was issued;

(4) Ensure that glass containers for beer or wine are not allowed at the location where the park alcohol permit was issued;

(5) Maintain order at the location where the park alcohol permit was issued;

(6) Ensure that beer and/or wine is not served or consumed for more than four (4) consecutive hours at the location for which the park alcohol permit was issued; and

(7) Ensure that beer and/or wine is not served or consumed before noon or after 11:00 p.m. at the location for which the park alcohol permit was issued. (Ord. No. 4733, § 4, 1-28-19)

Sec. 26-63. Revocation of park alcohol permit.
A park alcohol permit issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the director or police chief for a violation of the terms or conditions of the park alcohol permit. Written notice of such action revoking a park alcohol permit shall be delivered to the person originally issued the park permit by personal service or by certified mail. (Ord. No. 4733, § 4, 1-28-19)

Sec. 26-64. Violation; penalty.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly conduct or participate in an event in violation of any of the terms or conditions of a park permit or park alcohol permit.

(b) Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as set forth in section 1-7 of this code. (Ord. No. 4733, § 4, 1-28-19)

Sec. 26-65. Severability.
If any provision of this article is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such finding shall not affect the validity of other provisions of this article that can be given effect without the invalid provision. (Ord. No. 4733, § 4, 1-28-19)

1
Cross references – Manufactured homes and tourist facilities, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 32; zoning, Ch. 37.


2
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3966, § 1, adopted July 23, 1990, repealed former Art. III, §§ 26-16 – 26-19, relative to the parks and recreation commission, which derived from Ord. No. 3261, §§ 1 – 4, adopted March 10, 1975; and Ord. No. 3554, § 2, adopted Dec. 1, 1980.


3
Cross reference – Tree pruner’s license, § 21-199 et seq.; vegetation, Ch. 35.5; compliance with tree pruning practices, § 35.5-1.


Chapter 27
PLUMBING1
1
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4557, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, repealed Ch. 27, plumbing, in its entirety. Former §§ 27-1 – 27-17 derived from Code 1960, §§ 26-1, 26-11 – 26-13 and 26-15; as amended by Ord. No. 3029, § 1, adopted July 12, 1971, Ord. No. 3190, §§ 1 – 4, adopted Jan. 14, 1974, Ord. No. 3661, §§ 2 – 5, adopted Aug. 2, 1982, Ord. No. 3786, §§ 14 – 16, adopted Aug. 26, 1985, Ord. No. 3826, §§ 5 – 7, adopted July 7, 1986, Ord. No. 3898, §§ 14, 16, 17, 18, adopted Jan. 4, 1988, Ord. No. 3945, §§ 1 – 5, adopted May 30, 1989, Ord. No. 4086, § 1, adopted Jan. 3, 1994, Ord. No. 4151, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, Ord. No. 4232, §§ 1, 2, 4, 5, adopted June 21, 1999, Ord. No. 4333, § 3, adopted Aug. 25, 2003, and Ord. No. 4456, §§ 3, 4, adopted Jan. 8, 2007. Ord. No. 4232, § 3, approved June 21, 1999, repealed §§ 27-6 – 27-12, regarding licensing requirements for plumbing contractors. These provisions derived from Code 1960 §§ 26-4, 26-5 and 26-7 – 26-10, as amended by Ord. No. 2834, § 1, Ord. No. 3013, § 1, approved Feb. 22, 1971, Ord. No. 3593, § 18, approved Oct. 26, 1981, Ord. No. 3613, § 1, approved Dec. 21, 1981, Ord. No. 3898, § 15, approved Jan. 4, 1988 and Ord. No. 4086, § 1, approved Jan. 3, 1994.


Chapter 28
POLES AND WIRES1
1
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4024, § 2, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed §§ 28-1 – 28-4 in their entirety. Former Ch. 28 derived from Ch. 27 of the 1960 Code as amended by Ord. No. 2007.

Cross references – Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 10; electricity, Ch. 14.


Chapter 29
POLICE
Art. I.    Police Officer’s Retirement Fund, §§ 29-1 – 29-17

Art. II.    Police Reserve and Special Police Officers, §§ 29-18 – 29-24

Art. III.    Fingerprinting Fees, §§ 29-25 – 29-26

ARTICLE I. POLICE OFFICER’S RETIREMENT FUND1
Sec. 29-1. Created; purpose; administration; participation.
There is hereby created and established a special fund to be known and designated as the police officer’s retirement fund, for the purpose of providing retirement pay and other benefits for the police officers of the city, which fund shall be conducted and administered by the city in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 15 , Title 50, Idaho Code, except as that chapter is amended herein or may hereafter be amended by ordinance of the city. All paid police officers employed by the city on or before July 1, 1979, and such civilian employees of the police department as are now included in the police officer’s retirement fund on July 1, 1979, shall participate in the police officer’s retirement fund. (Code 1960, § 2-58; Ord. No. 2376, § 1; Ord. No. 2873, § 1; Ord. No. 3256, § 1, 1-13-75; Ord. No. 3492, § 1, 7-2-79; Ord. No. 4037, § 1, 3-23-92)

Sec. 29-2. Adoption of state law.
(a) The city hereby adopts Chapter 15 , Title 50, Idaho Code, and all of the provisions now contained therein, with the exceptions, hereinafter specified, as the police officers’ retirement ordinance.

(b) Idaho Code, Section 50-1502, as adopted by the city is hereby amended to read as follows:

Definitions. The following are definitions of terms used in Idaho Code, Sections 50-1501 through 50-1525:

a. Paid police officer means any individual who is on the payroll of the city or any other jurisdiction, who is engaged in hazardous duty and is empowered to enforce the laws of the jurisdiction and the state through the exercise of police powers and who devotes his or her principal time of employment to the care, operation, or maintenance of the regularly constituted police department of the city;

b. Industrial commission means the board as authorized and created under the provisions of Chapter 5 of Title 72 or as the same may be hereafter amended;

c. Workmen’s compensation law means the workmen’s compensation law as authorized and created under Title 72, or as the same may hereafter be amended;

d. Twenty (20) years’ active service. An individual whose principal means of livelihood for the period of twenty (20) years has been through employment by a city in a regularly constituted police department, and has actually been carried on the payroll for twenty (20) years;

e. Five (5) years’ continuous service, ten (10) years’ continuous service, fifteen (15) years’ continuous service. An individual who has been employed by a regularly constituted police department for a period of five (5) years, ten (10) years or fifteen (15) years continuously, without having engaged in any other gainful occupation;

f. Leave of absence means a period of time which a paid police officer shall have been out of the service of said police department of the city of which he was a member, and who for that like period of time was off the payrolls thereof;

g. The meaning of the term incapacitated in a degree which prohibits efficient service means that degree of mental or physical disability which prohibits the efficient performance of the duties of a paid police officer during any occasion when his said services as a police officer shall be necessary;

h. Twenty (20) years of accumulated service. An individual who has been employed by the city police department without having engaged in any other gainful occupation and has twenty (20) years of accumulated service with the same police department and has been carried on the payrolls of such department for that period of accumulated time.

(c) Idaho Code, Section 50-1514(a), as adopted by the city is hereby amended to read as follows:

RETIREMENT OF POLICE OFFICER – RETIREMENT BENEFITS

(1) Whenever any person employed as a member of the police department of the city on or before July 1, 1979, shall have served not less than twenty (20) years accumulatively with the police department or shall reach the age of fifty-five (55) years, he or she shall, upon his or her written application to the board of retirement fund commissioners, be retired.

(2) When the board issues an order of retirement, said order shall terminate and end the services of a person in the police department, and such person shall thereafter, during his or her lifetime, be paid from the retirement fund a yearly retirement sum equal to one-half (1/2) of the average annual salary received by such person during his or her three (3) highest consecutive salary years, computed as the thirty-six (36) highest consecutive salary months of the ten (10) years of service next preceding the date of retirement. The retirement sum shall be adjusted in proportion to any cost of living adjustments made to the salaries of active employees.

(3) Any person who accumulates in excess of twenty (20) years’ service with the city police department shall accrue an additional three (3) percent retirement benefit for each additional year of service accumulated. The maximum total allowed retirement sum shall not exceed sixty-five (65) percent of the average annual salary received by such person during the three (3) highest salary years, computed as the thirty-six (36) highest consecutive salary months of his last ten (10) years of service, which retirement sum shall be adjusted in proportion to any cost of living adjustments made to the salaries of active employees.

(4) A police officer with at least fifteen (15) years’ service may retire, subject to the restrictions of this subsection. No police officer who retires after less than fifteen (15) years’ service with the city shall be eligible for retirement benefits. The retirement benefit of a police officer who retires with fifteen (15) or more years of service, but with less than twenty (20) years of service with the city shall be reduced by four (4) percent per year for each year less than twenty (20) years.

(5) Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring any person under the age of seventy (70) years to be retired involuntarily; provided that any person who has served not less than twenty (20) years with the city police department and who does not meet the physical requirements established by the city for the position he or she holds shall be retired.

(d) Idaho Code, Section 50-1515, as adopted by the city is amended to read as follows:

A paid police officer whose employment with the city began on or before July 1, 1979, shall, upon termination of such employment, or upon transferring to a civilian status therein, and upon application to the board of police retirement fund commissioners therefor, be refunded without interest all of the moneys deducted from his salary and placed in the police officer’s retirement fund of the City of Lewiston. Any such police officer who has terminated his employment or who has transferred to civilian status in the police department prior to the adoption of this amending ordinance shall be notified by regular mail addressed to the last known address of said police officer, of the provisions of this ordinance and be further notified that he may take advantage of said provisions and obtain a refund hereunder upon written request therefor being made to the secretary of the board of police retirement fund within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this amending ordinance, such notice to contain the said effective date hereof.

(e) Idaho Code, Section 50-1516(f), as adopted by the city is amended to read as follows:

In addition to the foregoing, at the death of any paid police officer from whatever cause, the said fund shall pay the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) as funeral expenses.

(f) Idaho Code, Section 50-1516(a)(1), as adopted by the city is hereby amended to read as follows:

(a) Any paid police officer incapacitated by injury or illness as a result of the performance of his/her official duties as a member of a police department shall be retired so long as the disability shall continue in a degree which prevents efficient service and during the disability shall be paid from the retirement fund a disability benefit as follows:

(1) For disability attributable wholly to service as a paid police officer, a monthly sum equal to one twenty-fourth (1/24) of the amount of the annual salary attached to the rank which he/she held in the police department for a period of one (1) year next preceding the date of retirement; provided, however, that the benefits may be reduced by the board of police retirement fund commissioners commensurate to the extent of the disability and the person’s income earning capacity. Reduction of a disabled police officer’s retirement benefit shall only be as follows:

(A) When a police officer’s disability is determined by the board to be fifty (50) percent or less, the disability retirement benefit shall be reduced to be equal with the percentage of disability. When a police officer’s disability is fifty-one (51) percent or greater, the disabled police officer shall receive a full disability retirement benefit.

(B) Whenever a person receiving disability retirement benefits obtains employment as a paid police officer in any jurisdiction, that person’s disability retirement benefit shall terminate.

(Code 1960, § 2-59; Ord. No. 2376, § 5; Ord. No. 2722, § 1; Ord. No. 2895, § 1, 8-11-70; Ord. No. 3256, § 3, 1-13-75; Ord. No. 3356, § 1, 3-28-77; Ord. No. 3492, §§ 2 – 4, 7-2-79; Ord. No. 3627, § 1, 2-22-82; Ord. No. 3696, § 1, 5-31-83; Ord. No. 3958, §§ 1, 2, 1-2-90; Ord. No. 4037, § 2, 3-23-92)

Sec. 29-3. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3256, § 4, adopted Jan. 13, 1975, repealed § 2-60 of the 1960 Code, as amended by Ord. No. 2376, § 3. Said section, which pertained to the establishment of a special fund in the treasury, had been codified herein as § 29-3.

Sec. 29-4. Deduction from police officer’s salaries.
(a) The rate of contribution per month, from the compensation paid to each police officer employed by the city who is a member of the police officers’ retirement fund, shall be as follows:

Pay periods starting on or after:

Rate (percent of salary)

July 1, 1982

6.00

October 1, 1982.

6.05

July 1, 1983

6.25

October 1, 1983

6.30

October 1, 1984

6.35

October 1, 1985

6.40

(b) Said sums shall be deducted from each police officer’s salary by the finance director, and placed in the police officers’ retirement fund.

(c) The city council shall annually levy a tax not to exceed the amount permitted by law on all assessed and taxable property within the city, which tax shall be placed in the police officers’ retirement fund. (Ord. No. 3203, § 1, 4-8-74; Ord. No. 3657, § 2, 7-12-82; Ord. No. 4037, § 3, 3-23-92)

Sec. 29-5. Standards for training and employment of city police officers.
(a) The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid for police training from the law enforcement planning commission under the provisions of Idaho Code, Section 19-5118.

(b) Pursuant to Idaho Code, Section 19-5117, the police department of the city, while receiving aid from the law enforcement planning commission pursuant to said Chapter 51, will adhere to the standards for employment and training established by the Idaho Peace Officer Standards and Training Advisory Council. At least one (1) copy of such standards shall be kept on file in the office of the chief of police of the city. (Code 1960, § 2-4.5; Ord. No. 2891, §§ 1, 2, 5-11-70; Ord. No. 4037, § 4, 3-23-92)

Editor’s note – Idaho Code, Sections 19-5117 and 19-5118 were repealed by S.L. 1981, Ch. 307, § 1.

Sec. 29-6. Paid police officers employed after July 1, 1979.
All paid police officers who became employed by the city on or after July 2, 1979, shall be included in the Idaho Public Employees’ Retirement System – Police and not included in the city’s police retirement system. (Ord. No. 3492, § 5, 7-2-79; Ord. No. 4037, § 5, 3-23-92)

Sec. 29-7. Reinstatement.
(a) Any person who was a paid police officer for a period of seven (7) or more years with the city and thereafter resigned may, if that person is rehired as a paid police officer with the city within one (1) year of resignation, elect to have eligibility to participate in the police officer’s retirement fund be reinstated pursuant to the conditions as set forth in this section.

(b) This option shall only be exercised by payment as set forth in subsection (c) herein within a maximum of one (1) year from the date that the person’s share was withdrawn from the fund.

(c) Any person electing to reinstate his/her status in the fund shall pay back the entire amount previously withdrawn and, in addition, pay interest thereon from the date of rehiring to the date of repayment. Interest shall be at an amount fixed by the board based upon the prevailing investment interest rate being obtained in the investment of the fund at the time of the rehiring of the paid police officer.

(d) In the event that any benefits become due prior to the full repayment of funds as set forth in subsection (c) herein, any benefits shall be reduced by the pro rata amount of the unpaid balance.

(e) In the event that the paid police officer fails or refuses to repay the funds as aforesaid within one (1) year from the date that person’s share was withdrawn from the fund, the city shall automatically enroll said person in the public employees retirement system. (Ord. No. 3556, § 1, 1-19-81; Ord. No. 4037, § 6, 3-23-92)

Secs. 29-8 – 29-17. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. POLICE RESERVE AND SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS2
Sec. 29-18. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the commissioning of members of the Lewiston police reserve. (Ord. No. 3645, § 1, 5-24-82)

Sec. 29-19. Definitions.
Chief of police means the chief of police of Lewiston, Idaho, or his designee.

City clerk means the city clerk of the city of Lewiston, Idaho.

Police officer means a regular and commissioned officer authorized by the state of Idaho and employed by the city of Lewiston.

Police reserve member means a member of good standing in the Lewiston police reserve unit, appointed pursuant to the policies of the Lewiston police department governing appointments to the Lewiston police reserve unit.

Without monetary compensation means without pay from the city of Lewiston or the Lewiston police department. (Ord. No. 3645, § 2, 5-24-82)

Sec. 29-20. Appointment of special police officers; restrictions; qualifications; compensation; procedure upon termination.
(a) All appointments shall be by the chief of police, after the appointee has been admitted to membership in the Lewiston police reserve unit. Upon appointment, the officer shall be sworn in by the city clerk.

(b) All appointments of special police officers shall be restricted to active members of the Lewiston police reserve. Such officers must have met all the entrance requirements and have been accepted for membership in the reserve unit at the time of such appointment.

(c) Such appointments shall be without monetary compensation.

(d) Said appointment will terminate and become void upon the appointee’s discharge from the police reserve unit. At the time of termination of appointment, all equipment issued to the appointee, including the police reserve identification card, shall be returned to the chief of police. The identification card shall then be destroyed. (Ord. No. 3645, § 3, 5-24-82)

Sec. 29-21. Declaration of appointment.
The following shall be the form of declaration of appointment as a special police officer:

To ________(name)_____________:

You are hereby appointed a special police officer to serve within the corporate limits of the City of Lewiston, Nez Perce County, under the supervision of the chief of police or his representative, from the ____ day of _______, 19__, until discharged from such duty by the chief of police thereof, at no pay.

You will take the oath below and file this appointment with said oath at the Lewiston police department, and apply to the chief of police or his representative for further instructions.

Dated at Lewiston, Idaho, _________, 19___.

(signature)

Chief of police

(Ord. No. 3645, § 4, 5-24-82)

Sec. 29-22. Oath of office.
The following oath of office shall be administered and subscribed to by the appointee:

I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution and laws of the State of Idaho, and the ordinances of the City of Lewiston; that I will faithfully discharge the duties of special police officer, under the supervision of the chief of police or his representative, within the corporate limits of the City of Lewiston, State of Idaho, according to the best of my ability, so help me God.

(signature)

Subscribed and sworn to before me this _______ day of ______, 19____.

(signature)

Notary Public in and for the

State of Idaho, residing at

Lewiston therein.

(Ord. No. 3645, § 5, 5-24-82)

Sec. 29-23. Authority of special police officer.
A special police officer shall have the authority and powers prescribed by the chief of police while on any authorized duty representing the city, the Lewiston police department, or the Lewiston police reserve unit. (Ord. No. 3645, § 6, 5-24-82)

Sec. 29-24. Duties and responsibilities of officer.
Special police officers shall be responsible to the chief of police or his designated representative, and his or her duties will be as directed by them. (Ord. No. 3645, § 7, 5-24-82)

ARTICLE III. FINGERPRINTING FEES
Sec. 29-25. Fingerprinting fees.
Persons desiring to have their fingerprints taken by the Lewiston police department shall first pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). Monies obtained from fingerprinting fees shall be deposited into the general fund. (Ord. No. 4582, § 2, 8-27-12)

Sec. 29-26. Fees set by resolution.
All fees for taking and providing fingerprints shall, after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, be established by the city council by resolution which shall remain in full force and effect until amended or repealed by subsequent resolution. (Ord. No. 4582, § 3, 8-27-12)

1
Cross reference – Finance, § 2-64 et seq.


2
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3645, §§ 1 – 7, enacted May 24, 1982, did not specifically amend the code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. II, §§ 29-18 – 29-24 was at the editor’s discretion.


Chapter 30
SIGN CODE1
Sec. 30-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the sign code. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-2. Findings, purpose and intent, interpretation.
(a) Signs obstruct views, distract motorists, displace alternative uses for land, and pose other problems that legitimately call for regulation.

(b) The purposes of this sign code are to:

(1) Promote freedom of speech in the use of signs;

(2) Provide for reasonable and appropriate communication and identification for commercial districts in order to foster successful businesses;

(3) Promote and maintain visually attractive residential, commercial, and historic areas;

(4) Ensure that signs are located and designed to reduce sign distraction and confusion that may be contributing factors in traffic congestion and accidents, and maintain a safe and orderly pedestrian and vehicular environment;

(5) Minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property;

(6) Regulate the size, color, illumination, movement, materials, location, height, and condition of all signs placed on private property for exterior observation, thus ensuring the protection of property values, the character of various neighborhoods, the creation of an attractive and harmonious community, and encouraging economic development;

(7) Promote the public health, safety, and welfare by avoiding conflicts between signs and traffic control devices, avoiding traffic hazards, and reducing visual distractions and obstructions; and

(8) Protect and preserve the aesthetic quality and physical appearance of the city of Lewiston.

(c) A sign placed on land or on a building for the purpose of identification, protection, or directing persons to a use conducted therein must be deemed to be an integral, but accessory and subordinate, part of the principal use of the land or building. Therefore, the intent of this chapter is to establish limitations on signs in order to ensure that they are appropriate to the land, building, or use to which they are appurtenant and are adequate for their intended purposes while balancing the individual and community interests identified in subsection (b) of this section.

(d) This chapter shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the First Amendment guarantee of free speech.

(e) These regulations do not regulate every form and instance of visual communication that may be displayed anywhere within the jurisdictional limits of the city of Lewiston. Rather, they are intended to regulate those forms and instances that are most likely to meaningfully affect one (1) or more of the purposes set forth above.

(f) These regulations are not intended to and do not apply to signs erected, maintained, or otherwise posted, owned, or leased by the state of Idaho, the federal government, the city of Lewiston, or any other local governmental entities. The inclusion of “government” in describing some signs does not intend to subject the government to regulation, but instead helps describe the types of signs that fall within the immunities of the government from regulation. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-3. Substitution.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, whenever a commercial message is allowed to be displayed, then a noncommercial message shall be allowed, as well. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-4. Scope.
This chapter shall apply except where specifically preempted by another chapter, article, or section of the Lewiston City Code. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-5. Definitions.
Alley means a street intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.

Animated sign means any illuminated sign on which sign copy is animated, scrolling, or flashing, including an electronic message center.

Bench sign means a sign that is integral to the construction of a bench.

Billboard means an elevated outdoor sign on which the owner may use, lease, or rent space for the purpose of conveying a commercial or noncommercial message. A billboard shall not exceed three hundred seventy-eight (378) square feet nor be more than forty (40) feet in height. A billboard may also be an electronic message center.

Billboard Overlay Zone means the same as set forth in Chapter 37, Article III of this code.

Certificate of appropriateness means the same as defined in Chapter 19.5, Article II of this code.

Clear vision area means the same as defined in Chapter 31 of this code.

Commercial message means any sign copy that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.

Department means the city of Lewiston community development department.

District means a historic district, as defined in Chapter 19.5, Article II of this code.

Dwelling unit means the same as defined in Chapter 37, Article I of this code.

Electronic message center means a sign that utilizes computer-generated messages or some other electronic means of changing sign copy, which may include displays using incandescent lamps, light emitting diodes, liquid crystal displays, and/or a flipper matrix.

Encroachment permit means a permit issued by the city of Lewiston public works department in accordance with Chapter 31, Article III of this code.

Freestanding sign means a sign erected and maintained on a freestanding frame, mast, post, or pole not attached to any building. A freestanding sign shall not include a ground monument sign.

Government sign means a sign that is: (a) constructed, placed, or maintained by federal, state, or local governmental entities; or (b) required to be constructed, placed, or maintained by federal, state, or local governmental entities, either directly or to enforce a property owner’s rights, including, but not limited to, the following: no trespassing, no solicitors, dangerous animal, high voltage, and sinkholes.

Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting, or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, engraved on, or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property to the extent that such graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner of the property, or, despite advanced authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the city of Lewiston.

Graphic sign means a sign located in a historic district and approved by the Lewiston historic preservation commission, notwithstanding the sign’s nonconformity with this chapter.

Ground monument sign means a sign that extends from the ground or has support that places the bottom of the sign at ground level or less than two (2) feet above the ground.

Height means the vertical distance measured from the highest point of a sign, excluding decorative embellishments, to the grade of the adjacent street or the surface grade beneath such sign, whichever is less.

Internally illuminated sign means any sign with internal components that emit light.

Local, state, or federal election means an election conducted by the Nez Perce county clerk in which city of Lewiston residents, or a portion thereof, may vote.

Lot means the same as defined in Chapter 37 of this code.

Marquee sign means a sign on a canopy or covering structure that projects from the wall of a building.

Noncommercial message means any message that is not a commercial message.

Owner means the person or entity that: (a) owns a lot; or (b) has control of a lot, such as a lessee. If a lot is leased by multiple lessees, then: (a) each lessee shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this chapter for the portion of the lot leased by such lessee, and (b) the area of the lot shall be deemed to be the area leased by such lessee for purposes of determining the size and number of signs allowed on such lot.

Projecting sign means a sign, other than a wall sign, that projects at right angles from and is supported by a wall or eave of a building or structure.

Public right-of-way means the same as defined in Chapter 31 of this code.

Roof sign means a sign attached to the roof of a building, not including a false mansard roof, canopy, or other fascia.

Sign means a name, identification, description, display, or illustration that is affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, object, or other surface, or on the inside of a window and visible from the exterior of a building, which directs attention to or is designed or intended to direct attention to the sign face or to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business. Signs located completely within an enclosed building and not exposed to view from a street shall not be considered a sign. Any flag adopted by federal, state, or local governmental entities shall not be considered a sign. A display of business hours, “open,” or “closed” shall not be considered a sign. Sign shall not include a wall art display.

Sign area means the area measured by the smallest circle, square, or rectangle that encompasses all elements of informational or representational matter, including all cut outs or extensions, together with any materials or color forming an integral part of the display or to differentiate the sign from the background to which it is placed. The term sign area shall not be construed to include architectural trim, frames, and structural supports that do not bear any sign copy. Each display surface of a sign face shall be included in calculating sign area where multiple sign faces are visible at the same time from a fixed location.

Sign copy means alphabetic, pictorial, numerical, and/or graphic display of permanent or removable words, letters, numbers, figures, characters, symbols, logos, and/or insignia that are used on a sign area.

Sign face means the entire display surface area of a sign upon which sign copy is displayed.

Sign permit means a permit issued by the department in accordance with section 30-20 of this code.

Subdivision means the same as defined in Chapter 32 of this code.

Temporary sign means a sign that is portable and displayed for a limited period of time.

Temporary vendor means the same as defined in Chapter 21 of this code.

Wall art display means a work of visual art that is hand painted, mechanically produced, or computer generated, including, but not limited to, digitally printed vinyl. A wall art display may be affixed to or painted directly on the exterior wall of a structure or located inside a window. A wall art display shall not be an internally illuminated sign or an animated sign. A wall art display shall not be considered a sign.

Wall sign means a sign or sign copy affixed directly to or painted or otherwise inscribed on an exterior wall, and confined to the limits therein, of a building, which projects from the building surface less than twelve (12) inches at all points.

Window sign means a sign within, affixed to, or behind a window or glass door.

Zone, commercial means, for the purposes of this chapter, the following zoning districts within the city of Lewiston: the Local Commercial (C-1) Zone; the Tourist Commercial (C-2) Zone; the Community Commercial (C-3) Zone; the General Commercial (C-4) Zone; the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone; the Regional Commercial (C-6) Zone; the Light Industrial (M-1) Zone; the Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone; the Planned Unit Development (PD) Zone, where commercial uses are allowed; the Port (P) Zone; and the Airport (A) Zone.

Zone, mixed use means, for the purposes of this chapter, the following zoning districts within the city of Lewiston: the Bryden Avenue Special Planning Area A (BASPAA) Zone; the North Lewiston Mixed Use Development (MXD-NL) Zone; the Normal Hill Special Planning Area Mixed Use (NHMU) Zone; and the Planned Unit Development (PD) Zone, where commercial and residential uses are allowed.

Zone, residential means, for the purpose of this chapter, the following zoning districts within the city of Lewiston: the Agricultural Transitional (F-2) Zone; the Suburban Residential (R-1) Zone; the Low Density Residential (R-2) Zone; the Low Density Residential (R-2A) Zone; the Medium Density Residential (R-3) Zone; the Higher Density Residential (R-4) Zone; the Bryden Avenue Special Planning Area B (BASPAB) Zone; the Normal Hill North (NHN) Zone; the Normal Hill South (NHS) Zone; and the Planned Unit Development (PD) Zone, where residential uses are allowed. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-6. Signs, generally.
(a) Subject to the limitation set forth in this chapter, a person may only place signs on property owned or controlled by such person; provided, however, a person may place signs on property owned or controlled by another person so long as the owner of such property has consented to placement of such signs.

(b) Signs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with this chapter and the International Building Code, as adopted by the city of Lewiston. In case of a conflict between the requirements of this chapter and the requirements of the International Building Code, the requirements of the International Building Code shall control.

(c) Signs shall not be internally illuminated or animated unless specifically authorized by this chapter.

(d) No sign shall interfere with any component of a building’s exiting system, such as doors, windows, and fire escapes.

(e) A violation of this chapter shall be an infraction, punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-7. Prohibited signs.
(a) Signs are prohibited in all zoning districts unless:

(1) Authorized under this chapter; and

(2) Placed pursuant to a valid sign permit when required under this chapter.

(b) Signs that block free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape are prohibited.

(c) Signs that do not provide sufficient horizontal or vertical clearance from any communication line or energized electrical powerline as required by the laws of the state of Idaho are prohibited.

(d) Signs attached to streetlights located on public property or in the public right-of-way are prohibited unless expressly authorized in this chapter.

(e) Signs that may be misconstrued as a traffic control device are prohibited.

(f) Signs that obstruct any traffic or street sign or signal are prohibited.

(g) Wall art display is prohibited unless the owner of the property on which the wall art display is located has given permission for such wall art display.

(h) Graffiti is prohibited.

(i) Signs that pose a threat to public safety are prohibited.

(j) Signs that do not comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter are prohibited. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-8. Required signs – Permit not required.
The following signs are required without a sign permit in every zoning district:

(1) Each property owner shall mark their property using numerals that identify the address of the property, as required by Chapter 31 of this code and the Lewiston fire department.

(2) Government signs required by federal, state, or local law to warn of a danger or to prohibit access to the property, either generally or specifically. If the federal, state, or local regulation describes the form and dimensions of such government sign, the property owner must comply with those requirements. Otherwise, when not defined, such government sign shall be no larger than two (2) square feet and located in a place on the property that provides access to such notice.

(3) Signs required by this section shall not count toward any limitation on the number or area of signs allowed on private property, as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-9. Authorized signs – Permit not required.
The following signs are authorized without a sign permit in every zoning district:

(1) Although this chapter does not apply to signs erected, maintained, or otherwise posted, owned, or leased by the state of Idaho, the federal government, or the city of Lewiston, this section clarifies that government signs are authorized without a sign permit in every zoning district when erected, maintained, or posted in accordance with the law.

(2) Traffic control devices on private or public property; provided, that such traffic control devices must be erected and maintained to comply with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state of Idaho and, if not adopted by the state of Idaho, with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the Federal Highway Administration. Because this chapter does not apply to the state of Idaho, the federal government, or the city of Lewiston, a failure to comply with this chapter by such governmental units does not constitute evidence of negligence or form the basis for a cause of action.

(3) Official notices or advertisements posted or displayed by or under the direction of any public or court officer in the performance of official duties; provided, that all such signs must be removed by the property owner, or the department in cases of hearing notices, no more than ten (10) days after their purpose has been accomplished or as otherwise required by law.

(4) Wall art displays; provided, that such displays do not include electrical or mechanical components. Wall art displays shall not project more than six (6) inches from the plane of the wall upon which such display is painted or affixed. If a wall art display includes electrical or mechanical components, a sign permit shall be required.

(5) Signs authorized by this section shall not count toward any limitation on the number or area of signs allowed on private property, as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-10. Temporary signs – Permit not required.
The following temporary signs are authorized without a sign permit in every zoning district:

(1) One (1) temporary sign no larger than four (4) square feet on the day prior to and on a day when the property on which the temporary sign is placed is open to the public.

(2) One (1) temporary sign no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet when the property on which the temporary sign is placed is under construction or being offered for sale, lease, or rent. Such temporary sign shall be removed within fifteen (15) days after construction is complete or such property is sold, leased, or rented.

(3) Temporary signs no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet placed on an owner’s property no earlier than seventy-five (75) days in advance of a local, state, or federal election. Such temporary signs shall be removed no later than forty-eight (48) hours after such local, state, or federal election.

(4) Signs authorized by this section shall not count toward any limitation on the number or area of signs allowed on private property, as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-11. Signs in the public right-of-way.
(a) Only government signs shall be placed in the public right-of-way unless specifically authorized by this section.

(b) Signs not authorized by this section to be placed in the public right-of-way are declared a public nuisance and may be removed by the city without notice. The city shall hold such signs for thirty (30) calendar days. Owners of such signs may claim their signs from the public works department, located at 215 D Street, Suite B, Lewiston, Idaho, during normal business hours. If such signs remain unclaimed after thirty (30) calendar days, the city may dispose of such signs without further notice.

(c) No sign shall be placed in the following public rights-of-way:

(1) Within three hundred (300) feet of the center of any public roundabout; provided, however, this restriction shall not apply to government signs.

(d) Type I signs are temporary signs placed in a portion of the public right-of-way that is not used for vehicular travel or on-street parking, or as a sidewalk or planter box. Type I signs may be placed in the public right-of-way subject to the following conditions:

(1) No larger than thirty-two (32) square feet;

(2) No taller than eight (8) feet;

(3) Placed in the public right-of-way no earlier than seventy-five (75) days in advance of a local, state, or federal election;

(4) Removed from the public right-of-way no later than forty-eight (48) hours after such local, state, or federal election;

(5) Placed and maintained so as not to obstruct free and clear vision of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and

(6) Not an internally illuminated or animated sign.

Type I signs shall not require a sign permit or encroachment permit.

(e) Type II signs are temporary signs placed on a public sidewalk within the General Commercial (C-4) Zone or the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone. Type II signs may be placed on a public sidewalk subject to the following conditions:

(1) No larger than six (6) square feet;

(2) No taller than three (3) feet;

(3) Placed and maintained so as not to obstruct free and clear vision of pedestrian and vehicular traffic;

(4) Placed and maintained so that there are at least forty-eight (48) inches of clear and unobstructed space between the outer edge of the sign and the edge of the public sidewalk for access purposes; and

(5) Not an internally illuminated or animated sign.

Type II signs may be placed adjacent to a business upon permission of the adjacent business or property owner. Only one (1) Type II sign shall be placed adjacent to a business at any time, and such sign shall be removed from the public sidewalk during nonoperating hours of such business. Type II signs shall not require a sign permit or encroachment permit.

(f) Type III signs are temporary signs attached to city-owned utility poles. Type III signs are allowed only upon approval of an encroachment permit from the public works department pursuant to Chapter 31, Article III of this code. A Type III sign shall not be an internally illuminated sign or an animated sign.

(g) Type IV signs are temporary signs affixed to a city-provided structure that is located in the public right-of-way and designed to display such signs. Type IV signs are allowed subject to the following conditions:

(1) Approval from the department;

(2) Thirty-two (32) square feet in size;

(3) Not an internally illuminated or animated sign; and

(4) Affixed to the city-provided structure no longer than thirteen (13) consecutive days.

An application for a Type IV sign may not be granted by the department more than six (6) months prior to placement of such sign.

(h) Bench signs shall not be allowed in the public right-of-way. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17; Ord. No. 4752, § 1, 6-24-19)

Sec. 30-12. Signs in residential zones.
(a) The following signs are authorized in all residential zones without a sign permit:

(1) One (1) temporary sign no larger than six (6) square feet.

(2) One (1) window sign no larger than two (2) square feet in one (1) window on the property or one (1) wall sign no larger than two (2) square feet next to one (1) door on the property. Such window sign or wall sign may be an internally illuminated sign, but shall not be an animated sign.

(3) One (1) temporary sign, no larger than six (6) square feet when the property on which the temporary sign is placed is being offered for sale, lease, or rent. Such temporary sign shall be removed within fifteen (15) days after such property is sold, leased, or rented.

(4) Bench signs, so long as such signs are not visible from the public right-of-way.

Signs authorized by this subsection shall not count toward any limitation on the number or area of signs allowed on a lot, as set forth in this section.

(b) Within a residential zone, a property owner shall secure a sign permit prior to placing any other sign on the owner’s property.

(c) Unless otherwise provided, the following regulations apply to all signs within residential zones:

(1) Signs may be internally illuminated signs. If a sign is an internally illuminated sign, the illumination shall be constant and not animated.

(2) Billboards, electronic message centers, roof signs, and wall art displays that include electrical or mechanical components are prohibited.

(3) Signs may be placed anywhere on the property; provided, however, no sign shall be placed in a clear vision area or in an area to be dedicated as public right-of-way.

(4) Bench signs are prohibited in all residential zones, unless such signs are not visible from the public right-of-way.

(5) No sign shall exceed six (6) square feet per dwelling unit; provided, that the total area of all signs located on a lot shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.

(6) A subdivision may have one (1) ground monument sign per entrance to such subdivision no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet. Such sign(s) shall be placed at the entrance(s) of the subdivision, but not within a clear vision area or in an area to be dedicated as public right-of-way.

(7) Ground monument signs and freestanding signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.

(8) The length of ground monument signs and freestanding signs shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the linear lot street frontage or eighteen (18) feet, whichever is less; provided, however, if the lot is a flag lot, then a ground monument sign or freestanding sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet and the length requirement set forth above shall not apply.

(9) No more than two (2) signs shall be allowed per lot street frontage.

(d) A property owner who obtains a conditional use permit in a residential zone shall comply with the requirements of this section unless the planning and zoning commission modifies such requirements as part of the conditional use permit. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-13. Signs in commercial zones, excepting the Local Commercial (C-1) Zone and the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone.
(a) The following signs are authorized in all commercial zones, except the Local Commercial (C-1) Zone and the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone, without a sign permit:

(1) One (1) temporary sign no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet.

(2) Window signs covering no more than fifty (50) percent of the total window area, including glass doors. Such window signs may be internally illuminated and/or animated signs.

(3) One (1) bench sign no larger than fourteen (14) square feet. The bench sign shall not exceed four (4) feet in height and shall not obstruct free and clear vision of pedestrians and vehicular traffic, including clear vision areas.

Signs authorized by this subsection shall not count toward any limitation on the number or area of signs allowed on a lot, as set forth in this section.

(b) Within all commercial zones subject to this section, a property owner shall secure a sign permit prior to placing any other sign on the owner’s property.

(c) Unless otherwise provided, the following regulations apply to all signs within commercial zones, except the Local Commercial (C-1) Zone and the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone:

(1) Wall signs.

a. Shall not exceed thirty-three (33) percent of the wall area on which such sign is located, including the area of any parapet. Such signs may be located under eaves.

b. Shall not extend above the wall roofline or above the top of a parapet wall, whichever is higher.

c. May be internally illuminated and/or animated signs.

(2) Freestanding signs.

a. One freestanding sign is allowed per five hundred (500) linear feet of lot street frontage or fraction thereof.

b. Shall not exceed forty (40) feet in height.

c. Shall not exceed an area equal to two (2) square feet per linear foot of lot street frontage; provided, however, all lots shall be allowed at least sixty (60) square feet.

d. Shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.

e. Shall not be located in a side or rear yard that is required by Chapter 37 of this code.

f. May project out to the public right-of-way; provided, that there is ground clearance of at least: (1) eight (8) feet six (6) inches above the grade of an adjacent sidewalk, or (2) fifteen (15) feet above driveways and parking lots.

g. Shall not project over the public right-of-way, alleys, or driveways.

h. May be internally illuminated and/or animated signs.

(3) Ground monument signs.

a. One (1) ground monument sign is allowed per five hundred (500) linear feet of lot street frontage or fraction thereof.

b. Shall not exceed six (6) feet in height; provided, however, if the sign width is thirty-three (33) percent or less than the sign height, then such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height.

c. The length shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the linear lot street frontage or eighteen (18) feet, whichever is less; provided, however, if the lot is a flag lot, then the sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet and the length requirement set forth above shall not apply.

d. Shall not be located in a side or rear yard that is required by Chapter 37 of this code.

e. May be internally illuminated and/or animated signs.

(4) Roof signs shall not exceed one-half (1/2) the height of the building to which such sign is attached or ten (10) feet in height, whichever is less.

(5) Projecting signs.

a. One (1) projecting sign is allowed per street frontage.

b. Shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet.

c. Shall be spaced at least fifteen (15) feet apart.

d. Shall not project over the public right-of-way.

e. Shall be placed at least fifteen (15) feet above all vehicle access routes.

(6) Marquee signs.

a. May project below the lower edge of a canopy or covering structure a maximum of twelve (12) inches.

b. Shall not project above a roof.

c. Shall have a ground clearance of at least eight (8) feet six (6) inches above the grade of an adjacent sidewalk.

 

(7) Wall art displays that include electrical or mechanical components shall not project more than six (6) inches from the plane of the wall upon which such display is painted or affixed. Wall art displays shall not be internally illuminated or animated signs.

(8) The combined total area of all signs on a lot shall not exceed three (3) square feet per linear foot of lot street frontage or sixty (60) square feet, whichever is more, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. If a building fronts on two (2) or more streets, then the owner shall choose one (1) street frontage for the purpose of computing allowable sign area.

(9) No more than two (2) signs shall be allowed per lot street frontage. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-14. Signs in the Local Commercial (C-1) Zone and the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone.
(a) The following signs are authorized in the Local Commercial (C-1) Zone and the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone without a sign permit:

(1) One (1) temporary sign no larger than six (6) square feet.

(2) One (1) window sign covering no more than thirty-three (33) percent of the total window area, including glass doors. Such window sign may be an internally illuminated and/or animated sign.

(3) One (1) bench sign no larger than fourteen (14) square feet. The bench sign shall not exceed four (4) feet in height and shall not obstruct free and clear vision of pedestrians and vehicular traffic, including clear vision areas.

Signs authorized by this subsection shall not count toward any limitation on the number or area of signs allowed on a lot, as set forth in this section.

(b) Within the Local Commercial (C-1) Zone and the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone, a property owner shall secure a sign permit prior to placing any other sign on the owner’s property.

(c) Unless otherwise provided, the following regulations apply to all signs within the Local Commercial (C-1) Zone and the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone:

(1) Wall signs.

a. Shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the wall area on which such sign is located, including the area of any parapet. Such signs may be located under eaves.

b. Shall not extend above the wall roofline or above the top of a parapet wall, whichever is higher.

c. May be internally illuminated signs, but shall not be animated signs, in the Local Commercial (C-1) Zone.

d. May be internally illuminated and/or animated signs in the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone.

(2) Freestanding signs.

a. Shall be prohibited in the Local Commercial (C-1) Zone.

b. One (1) freestanding sign is allowed per five hundred (500) linear feet of lot street frontage or fraction thereof in the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone.

c. Shall not exceed forty (40) feet in height in the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone.

d. Shall not exceed an area equal to two (2) square feet per linear foot of lot street frontage in the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone; provided, however, all lots in the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone shall be allowed at least sixty (60) square feet.

e. Shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone.

f. Shall not be located in a side or rear yard that is required by Chapter 37 of this code.

g. In the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone, may project out to the public right-of-way; provided, that there is ground clearance of at least: (1) eight (8) feet six (6) inches above the grade of an adjacent sidewalk, or (2) fifteen (15) feet above driveways, parking lots, and alleys.

h. Shall not project over the public right-of-way, alleys, or driveways in the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone.

i. May be internally illuminated and/or animated signs in the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone.

(3) Ground monument signs.

a. One (1) ground monument sign is allowed per street frontage.

b. Shall not exceed six (6) feet in height; provided, however, if the sign width is thirty-three (33) percent or less than the sign height, then such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height.

c. The length shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the linear lot street frontage or eighteen (18) feet, whichever is less; provided, however, if the lot is a flag lot, then the sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet and the length requirement set forth above shall not apply.

d. Shall not be located in a side or rear yard that is required by Chapter 37 of this code.

e. May be internally illuminated signs.

f. Shall not be animated signs in the Local Commercial (C-1) Zone.

(4) Roof signs.

a. Shall be prohibited in the Local Commercial (C-1) Zone.

b. In the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone, shall not exceed one-half (1/2) the height of the building to which such sign is attached or ten (10) feet in height, whichever is less.

(5) Projecting signs.

a. Shall be prohibited in the Local Commercial (C-1) Zone.

b. One (1) projecting sign is allowed per street frontage in the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone.

c. Shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet.

d. Shall be spaced at least fifteen (15) feet apart.

e. May project over the public right-of-way a maximum of two-thirds (2/3) of the distance from the outer edge of the building to which such sign is attached to the adjacent curb; provided, that such sign shall not project closer than two (2) feet to the edge of the adjacent curb. A projecting sign that projects over an alley shall not project over the alley by more than three (3) feet.

f. Shall be placed at least fifteen (15) feet above all vehicle access routes.

g. Shall be placed at least seven (7) feet six (6) inches above all other public rights-of-way and private sidewalks.

h. If a projecting sign projects over the public right-of-way, then an encroachment permit shall be required.

(6) Marquee signs.

a. May project below the lower edge of a canopy or covering structure a maximum of twelve (12) inches.

b. Shall not project above a roof.

c. Shall have a ground clearance of at least seven (7) feet six (6) inches above the grade of an adjacent sidewalk.

d. If a marquee sign projects over the public right-of-way, then an encroachment permit shall be required.

(7) Wall art displays that include electrical or mechanical components shall not project more than six (6) inches from the plane of the wall upon which such display is painted or affixed. Wall art displays shall not be internally illuminated or animated signs.

(8) The combined total area of all signs on a lot shall not exceed two (2) square feet per linear foot of lot street frontage or sixty (60) square feet, whichever is more, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. If a building fronts on two (2) or more streets, then the owner shall choose one (1) street frontage for the purpose of computing allowable sign area.

(9) No more than two (2) signs shall be allowed per lot street frontage. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-15. Signs in mixed use zones.
For purposes of this chapter, a lot within a mixed use zone shall be classified as either residential or commercial according to the use of the lot, as determined by the department. Unless otherwise provided for in Chapter 37 of this code, if a lot in a mixed use zone is classified as commercial, then the requirements of section 30-13 of this code shall apply. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-16. Illumination.
(a) No sign shall be erected or maintained that, by use of lights or illumination, creates a hazardous condition to motorists, pedestrians, or the general public.

(b) The nighttime illumination of electronic message centers shall comply with the requirements set forth in this section.

(c) The illuminance of an electronic message center shall be measured with an illuminance meter that measures foot candles and is accurate to at least two (2) decimals.

(d) Illuminance shall be measured with the electronic message center off and again with the electronic message center on and displaying a white image for a full color-capable electronic message center, or a solid message for a single-color electronic message center. All measurements shall be taken perpendicular to the face of the electronic message center at the distance determined by the total square footage of the electronic message center as set forth in Table 1 of this section. The difference between illuminance readings shall not exceed three-tenths (0.3) foot candles at night.

(e) All electronic message centers shall be equipped with a sensor or other device that: (1) automatically determines the ambient illumination and is programmed to automatically dim according to ambient light conditions, or (2) can be manually adjusted to comply with the requirements of this section.

(f) All electronic message centers shall not change messages more than once every nine (9) seconds. The message changing process shall be completed within two (2) seconds.

(g) The illuminance of electronic message centers shall be measured in accordance with Table 1:

Table 1

Sign Area versus
Measurement Distance* 

Area of Sign (square feet)

Measurement Distance (feet)

10

32

15

39

20

45

25

50

30

55

35

59

40

63

45

67

50

71

55

74

60

77

65

81

70

84

75

87

80

89

85

92

90

95

95

97

100

100

110

105

120

110

130

114

140

118

150

122

160

126

170

130

180

134

190

138

200

141

220

148

240

155

260

161

280

167

300

173

* For signs with an area other than those specifically listed in Table 1, the measurement distance shall be calculated as follows:

Measurement Distance = v(Area of Sign in Square Feet x 100)

(Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-17. Billboards.
(a) Billboards shall only be allowed within the Billboard Overlay Zone, as provided in Chapter 37, Article III of this code.

(b) General construction standards.

(1) An application for construction of a billboard shall include plan sets approved and stamped by an engineer or architect licensed in the state of Idaho. Where a billboard is intended to be located along a road within the jurisdiction of the Idaho Transportation Department, plans shall also be submitted to the Idaho Transportation Department for its approval.

(2) There shall be at least five hundred (500) feet between all billboards located on the same street or highway, measured along the centerline of the public right-of-way, regardless of which side of the street or highway the billboards are located.

(3) No billboard shall be constructed within one hundred fifty (150) feet of an intersection, measured perpendicular to the nearest public right-of-way line for the crossing street.

(4) A billboard shall only be placed adjacent to an arterial street, as designated on the most recent urban functional classification map adopted by the Lewis-Clark Valley Metropolitan Planning Organization.

(5) A billboard shall not extend over the public right-of-way or any property line.

(6) A billboard may be attached to a building approved for occupancy by the building official. If attached to a building, the sign area of the billboard shall be counted towards the total allowable sign area for that building and lot.

(7) A billboard sign face shall not exceed three hundred seventy-eight (378) square feet.

(8) A billboard shall not exceed forty (40) feet in height as measured from the centerline of the adjacent street.

(9) A billboard may be an illuminated sign, an animated sign, and/or an electronic message center.

(10) A billboard may contain a mechanically-controlled face in order to change content; for example, a tri-face.

(11) A billboard that is an electronic message center shall not change messages more than once every nine (9) seconds. The message changing process shall be completed within two (2) seconds.

(12) A billboard that is an electronic message center shall be designed, in an event of malfunction, to: (a) freeze the display in a static position, (b) display a full black screen, or (c) turn off.

(c) Modifications.

(1) The copy on a billboard may be changed at any time without a new sign permit.

(2) A billboard structure may be changed only with an approved building permit.

(3) A billboard sign face may be removed and replaced with another visual medium that did not previously exist on the sign face only with an approved building permit – for example, replacing a static sign face with a movable face, scrolling message digital display, video display, or other similar technology that previously did not exist on the billboard sign face.

(d) Repair and demolition.

(1) If a billboard is damaged or destroyed, the owner of such billboard shall repair or demolish the billboard within fifteen (15) days of the damage or destruction. If a billboard is demolished, the owner of the billboard shall remove all demolition debris within said 15-day period.

(2) Unless otherwise provided, the owner of a billboard shall secure a demolition permit from the department prior to demolishing a billboard. The owner of the billboard shall file an application for a demolition permit at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the scheduled time for demolition.

(3) If a billboard poses an immediate safety hazard, the owner of such billboard may immediately demolish the billboard. The owner of the billboard shall report such demolition to the building official within forty-eight (48) hours of the demolition. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-18. Signs in historic districts.
(a) Certificate of appropriateness.

(1) Except as otherwise provided, a person shall obtain a certificate of appropriateness and a sign permit before placing, constructing, altering, or relocating a sign in a district.

(2) An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made in writing to the Lewiston historic preservation commission. An application shall contain the proposed location of the sign by street and number, the name and address of the owner of the sign, and other relevant information requested by the Lewiston historic preservation commission. An applicant for a certificate of appropriateness shall also pay the application fee, as adopted by resolution of the city council.

(3) A certificate of appropriateness shall become null and void if the work for which such certificate of appropriateness is issued is not completed within six (6) months of the date of such certificate of appropriateness.

(4) A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for the following:

a. Replacing sign copy;

b. Maintaining a sign, including painting a sign in a manner that does not alter the color scheme of such sign; repainting a sign; cleaning a sign; and/or repairing a sign in a manner that does not alter the structure of such sign; or

c. Temporary signs.

(b) The following regulations shall apply to all signs within a district:

(1) Wall signs.

a. May be an internally illuminated sign, but may not be an animated sign.

b. Shall not extend above the wall roofline or above the top of a parapet wall, whichever is higher.

(2) Projecting signs.

a. Shall be spaced at least fifteen (15) feet apart.

b. May project over the public right-of-way a maximum of two-thirds (2/3) of the distance from the outer edge of the building to which such sign is attached to the adjacent curb; provided, that such sign shall not project closer than two (2) feet to the edge of the adjacent curb. A projecting sign that projects over an alley shall not project over the alley by more than three (3) feet.

c. Shall be placed at least fifteen (15) feet above all vehicle access routes.

d. Shall be placed at least seven (7) feet six (6) inches above all other public rights-of-way and private sidewalks.

e. If a projecting sign projects over the public right-of-way, then an encroachment permit shall be required.

f. May be an internally illuminated sign, but may not be an animated sign.

(3) Marquee signs.

a. May project below the lower edge of a canopy or covering structure a maximum of twelve (12) inches.

b. Shall not project above a roof.

c. Shall have a ground clearance of at least seven (7) feet six (6) inches above the grade of an adjacent sidewalk.

d. If a marquee sign projects over the public right-of-way, then an encroachment permit shall be required.

e. May be an internally illuminated sign, but may not be an animated sign.

(4) Graphic signs.

a. May be an internally illuminated sign, but may not be an animated sign.

(c) Ground monument signs, billboards, and animated signs are prohibited in all districts.

(d) The combined total area of all signs on a lot, per lot street frontage, shall not exceed:

(1) Twenty-five (25) square feet for up to thirty (30) linear feet of lot street frontage.

(2) Thirty-two (32) square feet for more than thirty (30) linear feet of lot street frontage.

(e) A sign that is structurally altered; relocated or replaced; and/or damaged by accident or natural cause, to the extent of fifty (50) percent or more of such sign’s value, shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-19. Signs for temporary vendors.
(a) Signs for temporary vendors are authorized without a sign permit in all commercial zones.

(b) The following regulations apply to all signs for temporary vendors:

(1) Shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet total.

(2) Shall not be an internally illuminated sign or an animated sign.

(3) Shall not be placed in the public right-of-way. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-20. Sign permits.
(a) The department shall process all applications for sign permits.

(b) The department is authorized to make rules and policies to carry out the purpose of this chapter. If a rule or policy affects a sign in the public right-of-way, then the department shall consult with the public works department.

(c) An application for a sign permit shall be made in writing upon a form furnished by the department. An application shall contain the proposed location of the sign by street and number and the name and address of the owner of the sign. The department may require the filing of plans and/or other pertinent information where, in its judgment, such information is necessary to ensure compliance with safety regulations and this chapter.

(d) Sign permit fees shall be set by resolution of the Lewiston city council.

(e) The department shall issue a sign permit within twenty-eight (28) calendar days upon a completed application, payment of the required fee, and compliance with this chapter.

(f) Upon issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall construct or install the sign(s) approved by such sign permit within six (6) months. Upon construction or installation of a sign, the applicant shall contact the department within such six-month period and request an inspection of the sign. The department shall inspect such sign. If a sign is not constructed or installed and inspected within such six-month period, then the sign permit shall expire, and the applicant may reapply for another sign permit.

(g) A sign permit application may include a request for multiple signs located on a single lot.

(h) If an electrical permit is required for installation of a sign, then such electrical permit shall be obtained prior to commencement of installation of the sign. A sign that contains electrical wiring shall comply with the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the city of Lewiston.

(i) A sign permit shall not be required to change the sign copy on an existing sign or sign structure.

(j) Minor repair and/or maintenance to a sign that does not include structural modification or change in sign area or height shall not require a sign permit. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-21. Modification or removal of signs.
The department may require a sign to be modified or removed under any of the following circumstances:

(1) The department determines that information in the sign permit application was materially false or misleading;

(2) The sign, as installed, does not conform to the requirements of the sign permit;

(3) The sign violates this chapter; the zoning ordinance of the city of Lewiston, as set forth in Chapter 37 of this code; the International Building Code, as adopted by the Lewiston city council; or any other applicable law, regulation, or ordinance; or

(4) The sign becomes a hazard to motorists, pedestrians, or the general public. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-22. Appeals.
(a) This section shall not apply to signs located in or over the public right-of-way. Any decision made by the public works department regarding such signs shall be final.

(b) A person aggrieved by a written order or decision of the department pursuant to this chapter may appeal such written order or decision to the planning and zoning commission by filing a written notice of appeal with the department within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of such written order or decision. The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for appeal.

Service of the department’s written order or decision may be accomplished by hand-delivery or by mail. If such order or decision is hand-delivered, it shall be deemed received immediately. If such order or decision is served by mail, it shall be deemed received forty-eight (48) hours after depositing the same in the U.S. mail, first class, certified, or registered; postage prepaid; and addressed to the recipient’s last known address.

If an appeal is not filed within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of the department’s written order or decision, then the decision of the department shall be final.

(c) The planning and zoning commission shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal. Notice of such hearing shall be provided as required by section 37-184(b) of this code. The appellant shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel at the hearing and rebut any evidence that is submitted. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply.

(d) The planning and zoning commission shall issue a written decision within twenty (20) calendar days after the hearing. The planning and zoning commission may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the department.

(e) A person aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning commission may appeal such decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the planning and zoning commission’s decision. The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for the appeal. If an appeal is not filed within the fifteen (15) calendar day period, then the decision of the planning and zoning commission shall be final.

(f) Upon a timely notice of appeal, the city council may either: (1) refuse to accept jurisdiction of the appeal, in which case, the decision of the planning and zoning commission shall be final; or (2) hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal.

(g) If the city council holds a hearing on the appeal, then notice of such hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Lewiston at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Additionally, notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the owners of all properties within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundary of the property that is the subject of such hearing. Notice shall be mailed at least eight (8) calendar days prior to the hearing. All notices shall include the date, time, and place of the hearing, as well as a short statement as to the subject matter of the hearing.

If notice is required to be mailed to two hundred (200) or more property owners, then public announcements of the hearing may be made in lieu of mailing notice. Such public announcements shall be made on local radio and television stations at least five (5), but not more than fifteen (15), calendar days prior to the hearing.

The appellant shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel at the hearing and rebut any evidence that is submitted. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply.

(h) The city council shall issue a written decision within twenty (20) calendar days after the hearing. The city council may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the planning and zoning commission. The city council’s decision shall be final.

(i) An appeal (other than an appeal of an emergency order) shall stay enforcement of the written order or decision until the appeal is heard and a final decision is rendered.

(j) A person aggrieved by a final decision of the planning and zoning commission or the city council is entitled to judicial review only as provided by law. This section does not provide an independent basis for judicial review. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-23. Variances.
(a) This section shall not apply to signs located in or over the public right-of-way. Any decision made by the public works department regarding such signs shall be final.

(b) The planning and zoning commission may authorize variances from the requirements of this chapter where it can be shown that the requirements of this chapter would cause undue hardship. In considering an application for a variance, the planning and zoning commission shall consider:

(1) The minimum variance necessary to overcome the hardship described in the application;

(2) Whether the grant of the variance would be detrimental to: (a) the purposes of this chapter; (b) the characteristics of the zone, district, or property in the vicinity of the premises on which a sign is proposed to be or is located; or (c) the objectives of the city’s comprehensive plan;

(3) Whether conditions should be attached to the granting of a variance to achieve the purposes of this chapter;

(4) Whether granting the variance, in full or in part, would improve the appearance of the sign, building, or premises on which the sign is proposed to be or is located;

(5) Whether inherent difficulties of terrain exist on the premises on which the sign is proposed to be or is located; and

(6) Whether the proposed variance is in conflict with the public interest.

(c) The planning and zoning commission shall not grant a variance for a sign that is not authorized within the zone in which the proposed sign would be located.

(d) An applicant for a sign permit may request a variance from the requirements of this chapter by filing an application with the department, which application shall be available from the department. An applicant shall also pay the application fee, as adopted by resolution of the city council. The applicant shall submit such application and application fee to the department at least twenty (20) calendar days prior to the meeting at which the application will be considered.

(e) The planning and zoning commission shall hold a hearing on an application for a variance within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of such application. Notice of such hearing shall be provided as required by section 37-184(b) of this code. The planning and zoning commission shall issue a written decision within twenty (20) calendar days after the hearing.

(f) The planning and zoning commission may grant, in full or in part, or deny a variance application. The planning and zoning commission may place conditions on the grant of a variance to protect the interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood and to achieve the purposes of this chapter.

(g) A person aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning commission may appeal such decision to the city council, as set forth in section 30-22 of this code.

(h) Authorization of a variance shall be void after twelve (12) months unless: (1) the applicant has applied for a sign permit, or (2) the department has determined that the applicant has made substantial progress towards completion of the sign.

(i) Once granted, a variance is permanent. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-24. Existing signs.
(a) A sign that was installed prior to October 16, 2017, may remain; provided, that such sign:

(1) Does not block free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape;

(2) Provides sufficient horizontal or vertical clearance from any communication line or energized electrical powerline, as required by the laws of the state of Idaho;

(3) Is not attached to a streetlight located on public property or in the public right-of-way;

(4) Is not located in the public right-of-way;

(5) Cannot be misconstrued as a traffic control device;

(6) Does not obstruct any traffic or street sign or signal;

(7) Is not graffiti;

(8) Does not pose a threat to public safety;

(9) Conformed with the prior sign ordinance of the city of Lewiston; and

(10) Was installed pursuant to a valid sign permit, if applicable.

(b) A sign that was installed prior to October 16, 2017, that does not meet all of the above requirements shall be removed within fifteen (15) calendar days upon receipt of notice from the department.

(c) A sign that was installed prior to October 16, 2017, that is subsequently structurally altered, relocated, or replaced shall comply with all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

Sec. 30-25. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such finding shall not affect the validity of other provisions of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision. (Ord. No. 4692, § 2, 10-30-17)

1
Cross references – Advertising, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 10; mobile homes and tourist facilities, Ch. 23; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 31; subdivisions, Ch. 32; zoning, Ch. 37.

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4216, § 1, adopted August 10, 1998, repealed Ch. 30, Signs, in its entirety. Said chapter was derived from Ord. Nos. 3111, §§ 1 – 9, 10-2-72; 3319, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-76; 3358, §§ 1, 2, 3-28-77; 3409, § 1, 11-7-77; 3740, § 1, 4-16-84; 3759, § 1, 10-15-84; 3773, §§ 1 – 5, 4-29-85; 3962, §§ 1, 2, 3, 4-16-90; 4026, § 1, 1-6-92; and 4104, §§ 1, 2, 3, 6-27-94.

Ord. No. 4692, § 1, adopted October 30, 2017, repealed Ch. 30, Signs, in its entirety. Said chapter was derived from Ord. No. 4216, § 2, 8-10-98; Ord. No. 4263, § 1, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 4333, § 4, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 4361, §§ 1 – 12, 8-23-04; Ord. No. 4465, § 2, 3-12-07; and Ord. No. 4521, §§ 1, 3, 11-24-08.


Chapter 31
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY1
Art. I.    Right-of-Way, §§ 31-1 – 31-32

Div. 1.    Generally, §§ 31-1 – 31-11

Div. 2.    Construction, §§ 31-12 – 31-15

Div. 3.    Safety, §§ 31-16 – 31-32

Art. II.    Curbs and Sidewalks, §§ 31-33 – 31-65

Div. 1.    Generally, §§ 31-33 – 31-45

Div. 2.    Construction, Reconstruction and Repair, §§ 31-46 – 31-65

Art. III.    Encroachments, §§ 31-66 – 31-84

Art. IV.    Street Names and House Numbering, §§ 31-85 – 31-99

Art. V.    Vacation of Public Rights-of-Way, Easements, and Plats, §§ 31-100 – 31-117

Art. VI.    Right-of-Way Regulations for Wireless Communication Facilities, §§ 31-125 – 31-146

ARTICLE I. RIGHT-OF-WAY
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY

Sec. 31-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be referred to as the “Right-of-Way Ordinance of the City of Lewiston.” (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-2. Definitions.
City means the city of Lewiston, Idaho.

City standards means the most current city standard drawings and specifications adopted by the Lewiston city council.

Clear vision area means the triangular area within the intersection of the linear extension of the lateral curb lines, or edges, if no curb exists, of two (2) roadways, or a roadway and a railroad and extending back from the point of the intersection along each roadway or railroad a distance of forty (40) feet; except that where the angle of intersection is less than thirty (30) degrees, a greater distance may be required as determined by the director.

Curb means curb and gutter combination and/or curb sections, including paving of those areas between the curb and existing street pavement or to a distance to ensure sufficient cross drainage, per the city’s standard drawings.

Department of public works, hereinafter referred to as “department,” means the department of public works of the city.

Director means the director of the department of public works or his or her designee.

Emergency means an unforeseen circumstance that calls for immediate corrective action, which must be performed outside of the department’s normal working hours.

Encroachment means a structure or thing that exists permanently, semi-permanently, or temporarily within the public right-of-way.

Engineering means the engineering division of the department of public works of the city.

Major remodeling occurs when the value of additions, alterations or repairs, within any 12-month period, exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the existing building or structure constructed after 1950; or for buildings or structures constructed in 1950 or earlier, major remodeling occurs when the value of additions, alterations, or repairs, within any 12-month period, exceeds one hundred (100) percent of the value of the building or structure.

Manufactured home means a manufactured home as defined by Chapter 23 of this code.

New construction means the construction of any building or structure, as those terms are defined in the International Building Code, as adopted by the city, including the installation of any manufactured home or prefabricated structures for which a permit is issued after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, association, business venture, public or private utility, or special service district.

Right-of-way means any land dedicated and open to the public and under the jurisdiction of the city.

Routine maintenance services means the raising of utility fixtures, including necessary excavation, after city street improvements, the placement of utility poles, and any other maintenance or modification of existing utility facilities which does not require excavation of city street pavement, curb, gutter or sidewalk.

Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and adjacent property lines intended for use by pedestrians.

Street means a road, thoroughfare, alley, highway, or bridge under the jurisdiction of the city.

Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.

Substantial public improvement means an improvement that will become part of an existing or anticipated street and/or building improvement, which promotes the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city and is constructed with city funds.

Temporary use of right-of-way is any use proposed for the right-of-way for a duration of ninety (90) days or less.

Travel lanes means the portion of a street for the movement of vehicles, exclusive of the shoulders, berms, sidewalks, and parking areas, as illustrated on applicable city standard drawings.

Travelway means the area between the curbs or edges of asphalt that provides the surface for travelway. (Ord. No. 3726, § 1, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 3773, § 3, 4-29-85; Ord. No. 3872, § 1, 8-3-87; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 4025, § 1, 12-30-91; Ord. No. 4394, § 1, 4-11-05; Ord. No. 4384, § 1, 11-28-05; Ord. No. 4761, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-3. Right-of-way work – Permit required.
No person shall dig up, break, excavate, obstruct, tunnel, undermine, or disturb any street or other public property, place any obstruction thereon or fill in, place, leave, or deposit upon the same any earth, rubbish, garbage, rock or other material that may obstruct, disturb or interfere with the free use thereof without first obtaining a permit therefor from the department. Construction of subdivision improvements performed under a subdivision improvement agreement and which are approved by the department are exempt from the above requirement and do not require a permit. Violations of this section within the travel lanes of the roadway shall constitute a public offense and are punishable as set forth in section 1-7 of this code. In addition to the penalty provision set forth in section 1-7 of this code, the public works director is authorized to immediately abate violations of this section by closing the traffic work zone until such time as the traffic zone is in compliance with this section. No fee permit shall be required for public utilities and districts, including their contractors, which are performing routine maintenance services within public rights-of-way. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 3992, § 2, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 4025, § 2, 12-30-91; Ord. No. 4384, § 2, 11-28-05)

Sec. 31-4. Same – Application.
An applicant for a right-of-way work permit hereunder shall file with the department an application showing:

(1) Name and address of the party doing the work;

(2) Location of the work area;

(3) Scope of work or use;

(4) Attached plans showing details of the proposed alteration or work;

(5) Estimated cost of the alteration;

(6) Such other information as the department of public works shall find reasonably necessary for the determination of whether a permit should issue hereunder;

(7) Plans shall be required by the department of public works. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 3992, § 3, 1-28-91)

Sec. 31-5. Same – Conditions for issuance.
(a) The director may issue a permit hereunder when it is determined:

(1) That the work will be done according to the standards of the city.

(2) That the work will not (a) unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic, (b) adversely affect or demand more than four (4) parking spaces, (c) [interfere with] ingress or egress to and from the adjacent properties.

(3) That the work will not in the opinion of the director be overly deleterious to the surface or foundation of the existing improvements. Where determined appropriate, the director may require the permittee to bore, or utilize other means which will not disturb the existing surface improvements. The applicant shall have the right of appeal of such determination to the city council.

(4) That the proper required bonds are in order and in effect for the duration of the guarantee period.

(5) In cases of emergencies the work may be performed without a permit by a contractor or agency properly bonded and insured with the city; however, a permit shall be taken out and [the work] inspected on the next working day.

(6) When applicant is owner of property adjacent to sidewalk and right-of-way work permit is for sidewalk repair, there shall be no charge for the permit.

(b) Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this chapter has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, an investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee in addition to the permit fee shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be in an amount equal to the permit fee required by this section. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this chapter or any other penalty as may be presented. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 3992, § 4, 1-28-91)

Sec. 31-6. Same – Fees.
Before granting the permit, the director shall require the permittee to pay a fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 3818, § 1, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 3992, § 5, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 4506, § 1, 5-12-08; Ord. No. 4761, § 2, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-7. Insurance required.
(a) The permittee obtaining a right-of-way work permit shall be required to provide and maintain proof of insurance. Proof shall be in the form of a certificate approved by the city. Alternate forms of insurance approved by the city will be acceptable if they meet the minimum required insurance limits. The certificate shall contain a provision that the insurance shown on the certificate will not be cancelled or materially altered without at least thirty (30) days’ prior written notice to the city.

(b) The insurance required shall contain the following coverages: Comprehensive general liability including blanket contractual, broad form property damage XCU coverages, and completed operations. Minimum limits shall be three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence for property damage or three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) combined single limits for both bodily injury and property damage. Comprehensive automobile liability shall also be carried by the permittee which will include owned, nonowned and hired coverages. Limits shall be one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage or three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) combined single limit. Workman’s compensation and employer’s liability shall also be carried with the employer’s limit of liability no less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The city shall be named as additional insured under all policies. The coverages shall be written with a company(ies) that is licensed and in good standing with the Idaho State Insurance Department and acceptable to the director of public works. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-8. Bonds required.
The following bonds shall accompany an application for a permit hereunder:

(1) Construction and maintenance. The director shall require of contractors a maintenance and construction bond on a yearly basis to be filed with the city for five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and conditioned that such works done during that year shall be done in accordance with the city’s standards and requirements of the right-of-way work permit. Alternate forms of surety must be approved by the city prior to issuance of a right-of-way work permit. Such work shall be guaranteed for a period of two (2) years. In cases where the estimated cost of a particular project shall exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the director shall require a construction maintenance bond to be filed with the application for a permit hereunder in an amount equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the estimated cost and conditioned that such work shall be done in accordance with the city’s standard specifications and the requirements of the right-of-way work permit. Such work shall be guaranteed for a period of two (2) years. In any case where a permittee hereunder shall be in default or shall fail to comply with the requirements of the city, the director shall order the completion of the work by the city and shall collect the costs from the permittee as permitted by law.

(2) When permit applicant is owner of property adjacent to a sidewalk and right-of-way work permit application is for sidewalk repair, no bond shall be required. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 3992 § 6, 1-28-91)

Sec. 31-9. Order from director to complete right-of-way permit work; effect of failure to complete work.
(a) Order from director. If a permittee fails to complete the work set forth in a right-of-way permit or such work is not completed in accordance with the terms of such permit or the provisions of this chapter, then the director may order such work to be completed or corrected by a certain date. Service of such order shall be accomplished in accordance with section 31-10 of this code, and a copy of such order shall be sent to the surety, if any. Service of the order upon the permittee shall suffice for purposes of providing notice, regardless of when the surety receives a copy of the order.

(b) Effect of failure to complete work. If the permittee does not complete or correct the work within the time approved by the director and no timely appeal of the order is filed, then the department may complete or correct the work identified in the director’s order. The department may contract with a private contractor to complete or correct such work. Money from the department’s street fund and/or the city’s general fund shall be used to pay for the work.

Within forty-five (45) days of completion or correction of the work, the city shall provide the permittee an itemized statement of actual costs of the department to complete or correct the work and the administration costs incurred in completing such work to satisfy the requirements of the right-of-way permit. The permittee shall pay such amount in full to the city within thirty (30) days or such longer period of time as agreed to by the city.

If the permittee does not timely pay such amount in full, then the city may assess the costs of the department to complete or correct the work, including administration costs, in accordance with Idaho Code, Section 50-1008, if applicable. In all other instances, and in addition to the right of a special assessment, the permittee’s surety bond may be used to reimburse such costs to the city. (Ord. No. 4761, § 3, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-10. Appeals.
(a) Applicability. This section shall apply to all written orders and decisions of the department or director made pursuant to this chapter.

(b) Service of order or decision. Service of the department or director’s written order or decision may be accomplished by hand delivery or by mail. If such order or decision is hand delivered, it shall be deemed received immediately. If such order or decision is served by mail, it shall be deemed received seventy-two (72) hours after depositing the same in the U.S. mail, first class, certified, or registered; postage prepaid; and addressed to the recipient’s last known post office address.

(c) Notice of appeal. A person aggrieved by a written order or decision of the department or director pursuant to this chapter may appeal such written order or decision to the city manager. Written notice of the appeal shall be filed with the appeal fee, set by resolution of the city council, paid to the city clerk within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the receipt of the written order or decision. The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for appeal. If an appeal is not filed within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of the department or director’s written order or decision, then the order or decision of the department or director shall be final.

(d) Appeal hearing. The city manager shall hold a hearing on the appeal within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal. The appellant shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel at the hearing and rebut any evidence that is submitted. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The city manager’s review of the department or director’s order or decision shall be de novo. The city manager may affirm, reverse, or modify the order or decision of the department or director. The city manager shall issue a written decision within seven (7) calendar days after the hearing, and such decision shall be final.

(e) Automatic stay. A timely filed appeal shall stay enforcement of the department or director’s written order or decision until the appeal is heard and a final decision is rendered. (Ord. No. 4761, § 4, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-11. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. CONSTRUCTION

Sec. 31-12. Right-of-way standards.
All construction work within the public right-of-way shall be accomplished in accordance with the city standards. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-13. Supervision of work by the department of public works.
(a) The permittee shall notify the department at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of any work being pursued under a right-of-way work permit. The department shall be provided access to all parts of the work, and shall be furnished with such information and assistance by the permittee as is required to make a complete and detailed inspection. The department may direct the per- mittee to remove or uncover portions of the finished work which have not been inspected due to improper notification without the costs being incurred by the city regardless of the test results. After examination, the permittee shall restore said portions of the work to city standards.

(b) Upon the completion of all work the permittee shall advise the department that the work is complete and available for final inspection; upon receipt of this notification the department shall cause the work to be inspected. If the inspection reveals the work to have been performed in a satisfactory fashion the department shall so advise the permittee.

(c) In the event the work has not been completed in a satisfactory fashion, the department shall advise the permittee of the nature and extent of the deficiencies. Unacceptable work shall be removed and replaced to an acceptable condition at the permittee’s expense.

(d) Unacceptable work shall be defined as those repairs which:

(1) Deviate vertically more than one-quarter (1/4) inch per linear foot from the undisturbed surface abutting the repaired area, or

(2) Have cracked or no longer provide a waterproof surface, or

(3) Deteriorate to a condition where a friction course is not being provided.

(e) When the corrective work has been completed the permittee shall so advise the department. The department shall then cause the work to be reinspected and determine if the work is in accordance with the city standards and acceptable. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 3992, § 8, 1-28-91)

Sec. 31-14. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4761, § 5, adopted Sept. 23, 2019, repealed § 31-14, pertaining to city notification and authorization to construct, reconstruct, and/or repair improvements when owner or permittee fails to do so; notice of order, derived from Ord. No. 3726, § 2 and Ord. No. 3992, § 9.

Sec. 31-15. Cost of relocating existing public utilities.
The cost of relocating existing public utilities in order to conform to the requirements of this chapter shall be borne by the developer or permittee requiring the relocation unless the improvement is a substantial public improvement. If a substantial public improvement as provided for in section 31-2 is proposed, the individual public utility that owns the facilities to be relocated shall be responsible for the cost of such relocation. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 3992, § 10, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 4025, § 3, 12-30-91)

DIVISION 3. SAFETY

Sec. 31-16. Department of public works to be notified.
Any person excavating, obstructing, or otherwise disturbing any right-of-way, shall notify the department of public works of the city at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to proceeding with any such work. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-17. Barricades and warnings required.
(a) Any person digging, excavating, disturbing, obstructing or undermining any right-of-way pursuant to a right-of-way work permit granted under the provisions of this chapter shall place proper barricades and warning signs to prevent injury to persons and property. All barricades, warning signs, traffic-control devices, and methods shall be in accordance with Part 6, “Traffic Control of Street and Highway Construction and Maintenance Operation” of the “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.”

(b) If the permittee fails to place and maintain proper traffic-control devices, the city may take action to correct the deficiencies or revoke the permittee’s right to continue work under the right-of-way work permit. Violations of this section within the travel lanes of the roadway shall constitute a public offense and are punishable as set forth in section 1-7 of this code. In addition to the penalty provision set forth in section 1-7 of this code, the public works director is authorized to immediately abate violations of this section by closing the traffic work zone until such time as the traffic zone is in compliance with this section. In the event costs are associated with correcting the problem, such costs shall be billed against the permittee. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 4384, § 3, 11-28-05)

Sec. 31-18. Department of public works may obstruct dangerous right-of-way.
The department may place a barrier, barricade or fence off any portion of any right-of-way which, by reason of any defect, obstruction or special condition, may cause a dangerous condition to exist for the passage of persons or vehicles. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-19. Removal of barricades.
No person shall knowingly and willfully remove, injure or destroy any barricade, fence or other traffic-control device lawfully directed, erected and maintained, whether by the department, permittee, or other persons lawfully authorized. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-20. Moving heavy equipment – Permit required.
No person shall move or cause to be moved any track vehicle or other machinery which does not have rubber tires, rubber tracks or street tracks on or across any crosswalks, sidewalks, culverts, bridges, or any wooden structure over concrete or asphalt paving within the city without having obtained a permit from the department. The owner, or party in charge of any such track vehicle or other machinery shall be held liable for any and all damage done to any of the structures or paving mentioned in the preceding section. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 3992, § 11, 1-28-91)

Sec. 31-21. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3992, § 19, adopted Jan. 28, 1991, amended the code by deleting provisions contained in § 31-21. Said provisions pertained to the protection of the right-of-way while moving heavy equipment and derived from Ord. No. 3726, § 2, adopted Oct. 22, 1984.

Sec. 31-22. Removal of material from or damage to right-of-way.
No person shall injure or remove any rock, sand, gravel, soil, sod, turf, or like substance from any rights-of-way or public property or cause damage to said rights-of-way or public property without the consent of the department. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 3992, § 12, 1-28-91)

Sec. 31-23. Clear vision area requirements.
A clear vision area as defined in section 31-2 of this code shall be required and maintained on the corners of all public and private property within the intersection of roadways or of a roadway and railroad, of a roadway and alley or of a roadway. The clear vision area shall contain no trees, shrubs, or other vegetation, fences, walls, signs or other temporary or permanent sight obstructions of any nature exceeding thirty-six (36) inches in height above the existing centerline elevation of the adjacent roadway, except that trees exceeding thirty-six (36) inches in height may be permitted if all branches and foliage be removed to a height of ten (10) feet above the existing centerline elevation of the adjacent roadway. (Ord. No. 4523, § 3, 1-26-09)

Secs. 31-24 – 31-32. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CURBS AND SIDEWALKS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY

Sec. 31-33. Sidewalks to be kept clear of snow, leaves, debris.
The owner, occupant, lessor or agent of any property abutting upon any sidewalk shall keep the sidewalk in front of such abutting property free and clear from snow, wood, leaves, weeds, litter, debris or other obstructions or impediments of whatsoever kind except as provided for in sections 6-22 through 6-29 and 31-74 and 31-75. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 3992, § 13, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 4436, § 6, 3-27-06)

Sec. 31-34. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3992, § 19, adopted Jan. 28, 1991, amended the code by deleting provisions contained in § 31-34. Said provisions pertained to when snow should be removed from sidewalks and derived from Ord. No. 3726, § 2, adopted Oct. 22, 1984.

Secs. 31-35 – 31-45. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR

Sec. 31-46. Specifications; concrete sidewalks and curbs.
All concrete sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed, reconstructed and repaired under the supervision of the department in accordance with the city standards and with specifications on file in the office of the department. Curb cuts within existing or in new construction will be done in accordance with city standards. All work will be under the supervision of the department. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-47. Inspection of sidewalks; director may order construction, repair, or removal.
(a) The department may inspect sidewalks. Where any sidewalk is dangerous and unsafe, the director shall have the authority to order the owners or agents in charge of the property abutting or adjacent to the sidewalk to repair or remove such sidewalk. Where no sidewalk exists, the director shall have the authority to order the owners or agents in charge of the abutting or adjacent property to construct a sidewalk. Service of such an order shall be accomplished in accordance with section 31-10 of this code.

(b) A dangerous and unsafe sidewalk is a sidewalk that is:

(1) Separated or vertically misaligned by three-quarters (3/4) inch or greater;

(2) Spalled or has an irregular surface of three-quarters (3/4) inch or greater; or

(3) Missing sections or broken into pieces of less than eighteen (18) inches in any measurement.

(c) Notice and appeal of the director’s order shall be as provided in section 31-10 of this code. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 4761, § 6, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-48. Order from director to alter curb cuts or replace curb.
Where the use, convenience, and necessity of the public requires, the director shall have the authority, in accordance with section 31-9 of this code, to order the owners or agents in charge of property abutting or adjacent to where the curb cuts are maintained to alter the curb cut or replace the curb in such manner as the director shall find reasonably necessary under the circumstances. Notice and appeal of the director’s order shall be as provided in section 31-10 of this code. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 4761, § 7, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-49. Effect of failure to construct, repair, or remove sidewalk.
If the owners or agents in charge of the abutting or adjacent property do not begin construction, repair, or removal of a sidewalk within the period of time approved by the director and no timely appeal of the order is filed, then the department may complete such sidewalk construction, repair, or removal. The department may contract with a private contractor to complete such work. Money from the department’s street fund and/or the city’s general fund shall be used to pay for the sidewalk construction, repair, or removal.

Within forty-five (45) days of completion of the sidewalk construction, repair, or removal, the finance department shall serve upon the owners or agents in charge of the abutting or adjacent property an itemized statement of the actual costs of such sidewalk construction, repair, or removal and the administration costs incurred in completing such work. The owners or agents in charge of the abutting or adjacent property shall pay such amount in full to the city within thirty (30) days or such longer period of time as agreed to by the city.

If the owners or agents in charge of the abutting or adjacent property do not timely pay such amount in full, then the city may assess the costs of such sidewalk construction, repair, or removal, including administration costs, to the property in front of which the sidewalk was constructed, repaired, or removed, pursuant to Idaho Code, Sections 50-316 and 50-1008. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 4761, § 8, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-50. Materials for repaired sidewalks and curbs.
Curbs and sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, and shall be constructed in accordance with the city standards for such construction on file in the office of the department. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-51. Concrete sidewalks and curbs, or payment of “in lieu” fee, required in conjunction with all new construction and major remodeling; allowing “in lieu” fee to satisfy sidewalk postponement obligation.
(a) Concrete sidewalks and curbs shall be required in conjunction with all new construction and major remodeling, except as provided in planned unit developments and sections 31-51(d) and 31-51.1 of this code. No building permit for new construction, major remodeling of an existing structure or the installation of manufactured homes or prefabricated structures shall be issued by the building official until adequate provisions are made for necessary sidewalk and curb improvements required by this code in conformity with city standards.

(b) Curbs and sidewalks shall meet city standards and be installed under the supervision and control of the department and shall be installed at the expense of the owner of the property abutting the improvements. Improvements shall extend the full length of the parcel which fronts on any public street. Where no grade or line for curbs and sidewalks has been established for such street, curbs and sidewalks shall be constructed at a grade and line approved by the department.

(c) In planned unit developments approved pursuant to Chapter 37 of this code, curbs and sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all streets except as provided hereafter. Within planned unit developments an alternative sidewalk plan that provides for either a payment in lieu of sidewalks or construction of pedestrian pathways remote from the right-of-way may be approved by the city council. Money collected through the “in-lieu-of” program shall be used by the city to construct sidewalks from the planned unit development to other areas within the city. An agreement identifying the lots on which sidewalk construction is required, the lot on which an “in-lieu-of” payment is required and identifying the sidewalks to be constructed with the money collected under the “in-lieu-of” program shall be approved by the city council and recorded with the Nez Perce County recorder.

(d) Exemptions. At the request of the property owner, payment of a fee, in lieu of sidewalk construction, shall be allowed under the following circumstances:

(1) The street in question is a local residential road; and

(2) The side of the street on which the development is occurring has not been identified in the sidewalk master plan as a priority, or desirable for sidewalk installation; and

(3) Sidewalks or postponement agreements do not exist within one (1) block on the same side of the street of the parcel on which development is occurring; and

(4) Curbs and gutters have been postponed; and

(5) The right-of-way is insufficient, cannot be dedicated, and the city is unable or does not desire to purchase adequate right-of-way; and

(6) Where the director of public works determines a hazard may be created by such installation.

(e) The in-lieu fee shall be assessed per lineal foot of street frontage. The cost per lineal foot shall be determined by February 1st each year for all fees paid for the next twelve (12) months based on the current labor and material costs for sidewalk construction.

(f) Money collected through the “in-lieu-of” program shall be used by the city to construct sidewalks within the same neighborhood, as defined in the comprehensive plan, as the fees were generated from, in accordance with the sidewalk master plan.

(g) After notification by the public works department, property owners who have executed a sidewalk postponement application and have been granted said postponement or owners of real property on which a sidewalk postponement has been recorded in the office of the Nez Perce County recorder, where cause for said postponement is no longer valid and cause would not be valid under existing standards, may elect to satisfy the sidewalk construction obligation by paying a fee in lieu of actual sidewalk construction. The “in-lieu-of” fee shall be fifty (50) percent of the fee as computed pursuant to subsection (e) of this section and shall be paid to the city within three (3) years of election. Payment in full of the “in-lieu-of” fee shall discharge the requirement of sidewalk construction of the property owner. If a property owner elects not to pay the “in-lieu-of” fee after notification by the public works department, the postponement shall be called as provided in section 31-51.1(b)(3) and property owners shall construct the sidewalk previously postponed. If sidewalks are not constructed as provided herein the city may perform the necessary work and have the costs of construction assessed against the real property pursuant to Idaho Code, Sections 50-316 and 50-1008. Proceeds collected by the city pursuant to this section shall be used to construct sidewalks as provided by the city’s sidewalk master plan. All other sidewalk postponements granted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be released; however, if future development that would trigger a requirement for right-of-way improvements under then current city ordinances occurs after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, sidewalks shall be constructed as provided by city codes. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 3992, § 14, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 4132, § 2, 6-26-95; Ord. No. 4270, § 4, 10-30-00; Ord. No. 4394, § 2, 4-11-05; Ord. No. 4539, § 1, 12-28-09)

Sec. 31-51.1. Additional requirements.
(a) Curbs. Curbs shall be required for all new construction, major remodeling, manufactured home installation, prefabricated structures or subdivisions located on all streets.

For all new construction, major remodeling, manufactured home installation and prefabricated structures involving single or duplex residences, the property owner shall be responsible for curb, gutter and sidewalk construction and the city shall be responsible for street construction between the curb and existing street pavement. In all other instances the property owner shall be responsible for curb, gutter, sidewalk and street construction between curb and existing pavement, all in conformity with city standards.

Curbs may be postponed by the public works director if:

(1) A storm drainage problem would be created; or

(2) The centerline of an existing street has not been formally designated.

Postponement in no way relieves the abutting property owner from the responsibility to construct curbs to city standards at such time as it becomes necessary, as determined by the public works director, for public safety or storm drainage.

(b) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required on all streets except as provided for in section 31-51 of this code.

(1) Sidewalks shall be constructed under the supervision and control of the director in accordance with current city standards and shall be constructed at the expense of the owner of the property in front of which the sidewalk is constructed, except as may be provided by the city council for substantial public improvements.

(2) Construction of sidewalks as required by this section may be postponed by the director only when:

a. Curbs and gutters have been postponed;

b. Improvements to the abutting road have been adopted as part of the CIP and it is in the city’s interest to postpone sidewalk until such time as the road improvements have commenced.

(3) Postponement in no way relieves the abutting property owner from the responsibility to construct sidewalks to city standards at such time, as determined by the public works director, that the reason for the postponement no longer exists. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 3992, § 15, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 4025, § 4, 12-30-91; Ord. No. 4132, § 3, 6-26-95; Ord. No. 4394, § 3, 4-11-05)

Sec. 31-52. Liability of owner.
(a) The owners of the property in front of or for the use of which any structures referred to in the preceding section are constructed, kept or maintained shall be liable to the city for the condition thereof and shall construct, keep and maintain the same upon the express condition that the owner of such property will save and keep the city harmless from any and all damages, losses, claims and demands occurring on account of or by reason of the existence of such structures.

(b) Such covenant shall be deemed a covenant running with the land and the construction of such structures or the keeping or maintaining of those in existence for thirty (30) days after the passage of this section shall be deemed an acceptance of all the terms and conditions of this section. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Secs. 31-53 – 31-65. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. ENCROACHMENTS
Sec. 31-66. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3992, § 19, adopted Jan. 28, 1991, amended the code by deleting provisions contained in § 31-66. Said provisions pertained to banners existing within the right-of-way and derived from Ord. No. 3726, § 2, adopted Oct. 22, 1984.

Sec. 31-67. Posts, uprights and supports prohibited.
No person shall place, erect or construct in or upon any public street or sidewalk within the city any post, upright, support or other obstruction to support, uphold or attach to any porch, awning, banner, sign, advertising device or other structure, except as provided for in section 31-74; provided, that nothing in this or the preceding section shall be construed to prohibit the erection and maintenance of authorized utility poles and approved traffic-control devices. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-68. Buildings projecting over streets or sidewalks.
No building shall be erected, altered or repaired so as to project over, into or onto any street or sidewalk, except as provided for in section 31-74; provided, that this section shall not apply to the bases of columns projecting not to exceed six (6) inches or to cornice or projections placed at least ten (10) feet above the top of sidewalks. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-69. When railing required.
(a) All cellarways leading to cellars used for actual business places shall be protected with a solid, substantial railing at least two (2) feet nine (9) inches high on all sides except the direct entrance upon the street.

(b) The person occupying the cellar shall cause the cellarway to be kept lighted during the nighttime. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-70. Excavations and structures under sidewalks; permits; specifications; may be declared nuisances.
(a) No excavations shall be made under any sidewalk or sidewalk space in the city, nor shall any areaway, cellar door, stairway, coal hole or other like structure be constructed, kept or maintained in any such sidewalk or sidewalk space unless a permit shall first be obtained therefor as is or may be required by this code or other ordinances of the city and unless such structure shall be constructed in accordance with this code or other ordinances of the city governing such structures. Such structures shall be so secured, guarded and kept as to protect persons and property from injury by reason of the existence or condition of such structures.

(b) All such structures which are not constructed, kept and maintained in accordance with this section or which are permitted for any reason to become dangerous are hereby declared nuisances. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-71. Gates and doors swinging over sidewalks prohibited; same declared a nuisance.
(a) All gates and doors within the city which are built, constructed and fastened so that in opening the same they swing upon or over any portion of any sidewalk, street or alley of the city are hereby declared to be nuisances.

(b) No person shall build, construct, hang, maintain or keep any such gate or door within the city. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-72. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3992, § 19, adopted Jan. 28, 1991, amended the code by deleting provisions contained in § 31-72. Said provisions pertained to chairs, benches and gatherings on sidewalks and derived from Ord. No. 3726, § 2, adopted Oct. 22, 1984.

Sec. 31-73. Cellarways; when cover required.
(a) All cellarways to cellars, which are not used for offices, stores, restaurants or other places of business where the general public is invited to enter, shall be covered with an iron or glass door or iron grating, the bars of which shall not be more than three-fourths (3/4) of an inch apart and not less than one-half (1/2) inch by one and one-half (1-1/2) inches.

(b) Such bars shall rest on a firm and solid support or iron sufficiently strong to support foot travelers and be so constructed that, when shut, they shall be even with and form a part of the sidewalk and shall not be opened except during the daytime and when open, shall have all the sides thereof, except the side facing the streetway or curb closed by a fence or railing at least two (2) feet high; provided that if double doors are used to hold such doors firmly upright when open, an iron bar shall be extended from door to door across the open space at the end of the next footway or pavement in lieu of such railing, so as to guard persons passing along the pavement or sidewalk from falling therein.

(c) No such door shall be open at any one time to exceed one (1) hour. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-74. Temporary right-of-way uses.
(a) Temporary uses of the right-of-way shall be limited to the following:

(1) Outdoor eating and drinking area furniture associated with an adjacent, licensed business within the central business district, as described in section 37-145 of this code, and outside of such district along Main Street to the Levee Bypass Road/18th Street. Such furniture shall be located directly in front and on the same side of the street as the business with which it is associated. Such areas and furniture may be allowed to encroach upon the store frontage of an adjoining business if allowed by the adjoining business or property owner.

(2) Temporary signs pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 30 of this code. For purposes of this section, temporary sign shall have the same meaning as defined in Chapter 30 of this code.

(3) Right-of-way work as permitted and governed by sections 31-3 through 31-8 of this code.

(4) Community and special events as permitted by the public works director.

(5) Landscaping and beautification consisting only of:

a. Grass.

b. Flowers, bushes, shrubbery no higher than thirty (30) inches.

c. Street trees maintained pursuant to the urban forestry program.

(6) Other uses as permitted upon review and approval of the public works director or his designee.

(b) In no event shall any temporary uses of the right-of-way cause a nuisance, hazard, danger or a sight obstruction for any traffic, vehicular, pedestrian, or bicyclist, using the right-of-way, or violate federal requirements for public accessibility pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act. The city of Lewiston shall not be liable for any theft, vandalism, etc., of any temporary right-of-way use objects. The owner of any such objects shall be subject to any liability caused by the owner’s placement of such objects in the right-of-way.

(c) Any business placing outdoor eating and drinking area furniture, temporary advertising signage, merchandise display items and other appurtenances upon a public sidewalk or public right-of-way shall provide and maintain proof of general business liability insurance for the associated business, with the city named as an additional insured thereon prior to such use of the public sidewalk or right-of-way. Said insurance shall comply with the limits of liability as set forth in section 31-76 of this code. Failure of any business to comply with this insurance requirement may result in the revocation of the business license for the associated business.

(d) Any establishment which serves and/or sells beer, wine, or liquor by the drink, as such terms are defined in Chapter 6 of this code, must comply with the requirements of Chapter 6 of this code. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 3872, § 2, 8-3-87; Ord. No. 3928, § 1, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 3992, § 16, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 4045, § 1, 9-14-92; Ord. No. 4436, § 7, 3-27-06; Ord. No. 4569, § 1, 2-13-12; Ord. No. 4692, § 10, 10-30-17; Ord. No. 4710, § 3, 12-10-18)

Sec. 31-75. Permanent and semi-permanent encroachments in the right-of-way.
Permanent encroachments in the right-of-way are hereby prohibited.

(1) A semi-permanent encroachment may be approved by the public works director upon application, provided the encroachment, conforms to the following requirements:

a. After placement of the encroachment, there remains eight (8) feet of unobstructed sidewalk in commercial districts and four (4) feet in residential and industrial districts.

b. The encroachment is not within the clear vision area as defined in Lewiston City Code section 31-2 nor blocks any traffic control device;

c. The encroachment does not pose any type of safety hazard because of wind, electrical cords, or similar uses.

(2) Nothing herein shall prohibit the placement of mailboxes, allowed by the United States Postal Service, adjacent to the edge of pavement of any right-of-way without permit.

(3) Nothing herein shall prohibit an outdoor eating facility or mobile cart properly licensed under section 6-87 et seq. (Ord. No. 3872, § 3, 8-3-87; Ord. No. 3928, § 2, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 3992, § 17, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 4436, § 8, 3-27-06)

Sec. 31-76. Insurance required.
(a) The permittee obtaining a right-of-way use permit for a semipermanent encroachment, as provided for in section 31-75(1), shall be required to provide and maintain proof of general homeowner’s liability or general business

liability insurance for the real property abutting the right-of-way encroachment, with the city named as an additional insured thereon.

(b) The permittee obtaining a right-of-way use permit in all other circumstances shall be required to provide and maintain proof of insurance coverage as described hereafter. Proof shall be in the form of a certificate approved by the city. Alternate forms of insurance approved by the city will be acceptable that meet the minimum required insurance limits. The certificate shall contain a provision that the insurance shown on the certificate will not be cancelled or materially altered without at least thirty (30) days’ prior written notice to the city.

(c) The insurance required shall contain the following coverages: Comprehensive general liability, including blanket contractual, broad-form property damage, XCU coverages and completed operations. Minimum limits shall be three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence for property damage, or three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) combined single limits for both bodily injury and property damage. Comprehensive automobile liability shall also be carried by the permittee, which will include owned, nonowned and hired coverages. Limits shall be one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage, or three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) combined single limit. Workmen’s compensation and employer’s liability shall also be carried with the employer’s liability limit of liability no less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The city shall be named as the additional insured under all policies. The coverages shall be written with a company (or companies) that is licensed and in good standing with the Idaho State Insurance Department and acceptable to the director of public works. (Ord. No. 3872, § 4, 8-3-87; Ord. No. 3928, § 3, 7-5-88)

Sec. 31-77. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4263, § 2, adopted April 17, 2000, amended the code by deleting provisions contained in § 31-77. Said provisions pertained to political signs and derived from Ord. No. 3773, § 4, adopted April 29, 1985, as amended by Ord. No. 3962, § 1, adopted April 16, 1990.

Sec. 31-78. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3992, § 19, adopted Jan. 28, 1991, amended the code by deleting provisions contained in § 31-78. Said provisions pertained to prohibited signs and derived from Ord. No. 3773, § 5, adopted April 29, 1985.

Secs. 31-79 – 31-84. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. STREET NAMES AND HOUSE NUMBERING
Sec. 31-85. Names of new streets shall be approved by city council.
(a) For purposes of this article, the city will be divided into three (3) sections, North Lewiston, Lewiston and Lewiston Orchards.

(1) The North Lewiston district of the city will be all that area north of the Clearwater River.

(2) The Lewiston district of the city will be all that area south of the Clearwater River and north and west of the following described line: The centerline of Stewart extended east and west. The north/south line will be a line extended south from the east/west boundary along the west boundary line of the east one-half of Sections 12, 13, 24 and 25, Township 35 North, Range 6 West through the south city limits line.

(3) The Orchards district of the city will be all that area south and east of the above-described line.

(b) All streets laid out and dedicated within the city shall be named to correspond with the streets and avenues of which they are extensions; all names shall be submitted to the city council for approval before filing for record.

(c) The general plan of the city is to number all north and south streets and call them “streets.”

(1) On the plats for the Lewiston district north of the bluff between Snake River Avenue and 9th Street, north of Idaho Street between 9th Street and 21st Street and south of the Clearwater River, west of 21st Street and east of the Snake River, the east and west streets are to be designated “streets.”

(2) In the remainder of the Lewiston district and in the North Lewiston district, east and west streets are to be designated as “avenues” and be numbered.

(3) In the Orchards district the original east/west streets are to be named and called “avenues”; all other through east/west streets are to be named and called “drives.”

(4) Streets not conforming to this grid in the judgment of the department of public works, such as diagonal, curvilinear, contour, cul-de-sac, etc., shall be assigned a name followed by an appropriate title such as “boulevard,” “road,” “trail,” “way,” “drive,” etc.

(d) The city council shall give final approval to all proposed street names by resolution. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 4490, § 1, 2-25-08; Ord. No. 4616, § 1, 11-24-14)

Sec. 31-86. All houses and buildings to be numbered.
All houses and buildings within the city shall be assigned a number by the director and shall be physically numbered by the owners or occupants thereof in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 4025, § 5, 12-30-91)

Sec. 31-87. Decimal system of numbering adopted.
The decimal system of numbering is hereby adopted for the numbering of buildings and houses within the city. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-88. System used in the Lewiston district of the city.
(a) Number assigned. One hundred (100) numbers are hereby assigned to each block and twenty (20) feet to each number, but in cases where the lots or blocks are irregularly platted the numbers shall be assigned in such manner as will, under all the circumstances, be most nearly in conformity with the system hereby adopted.

(b) Base line. Main Street is hereby adopted as the initial or base line for the numbering of all buildings and houses on streets running approximately north and south of the Lewiston district.

The following streets are hereby adopted as the initial or base line for the numbering of all buildings and houses on streets and avenues running approximately east and west in the city: First Street from its northern terminus to Main Street and Snake River Avenue from its intersection with Main Street to monument No. 7; thence east two hundred (200) feet; thence south to the intersection of Fifteenth Avenue and First Street to University Addition and thence south along First Street to the southern city limits.

(c) System used on streets running north and south. The numbering on all streets extending southerly from Main Street shall begin at Main Street with No. “101” and continue with the even numbers on the west side of the street and the odd numbers on the east side of the street in accordance with the system established by this article.

In like manner, the numbering on all streets extending northerly from Main Street to the Clearwater River shall begin with the even numbers on the west side and the odd numbers on the east side of the street, in accordance with such system.

All such numbers on streets running northerly from Main Street shall have the cipher preceding the number.

This shall constitute a part of the house or building number.

(d) System used on streets running east and west. The numbering on all streets and avenues extending easterly from the First Street base or initial line, with its extensions, shall commence at such base lines with No. “101” and continue on each street with the even numbers on the south side of the street and the odd numbers on the north side of the street or avenue.

The numbering on all streets or avenues extending westerly from the First Street initial or base line, with its extensions, shall commence at such initial line with No. “101” and continue on each street with the even numbers on the south and the odd numbers on the north side of the street, in accordance with such system.

Each and every number on such streets or avenues running westerly from the First Street initial line shall have the capital letter “W” prefixed.

Such letter shall constitute a part of the building or house number. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84; Ord. No. 3992, § 18, 1-28-91)

Sec. 31-89. Systems used in North Lewiston district of the city.
(a) Number spacing. One hundred (100) numbers are hereby assigned to each block and twenty (20) feet to each number, but in cases where the lots or blocks are irregularly platted, the numbers shall be assigned in such manner as will, under all the circumstances, be most nearly in conformity with the system hereby adopted.

(b) Base line. First Avenue North is hereby adopted as the initial or base line for numbering of all buildings and houses on the streets running approximately north and south in the North Lewiston district. First Street North is hereby adopted as the initial or base line for the numbering of all buildings and houses on the avenues running approximately east and west in the North Lewiston District.

(c) System used on streets running north and south. The numbering on all streets extending northerly from First Avenue North shall begin at First Avenue with number “101” and continue with even numbers on the west side of the street and the odd numbers on the east side of the street in accordance with the system established by this article.

(d) System used on streets running east and west. The numbering on all streets and avenues extending easterly from the First Street base or initial line, with its extension, shall commence at such base lines with No. “101” and continue on each street with the even numbers on the south side of the street and the odd numbers on the north side of the street or avenue.

The numbering on all streets or avenues extending westerly from the First Street initial or base line, with its extensions, shall commence at such initial line with No. “101” and continue on each street with the even numbers on the north and the odd numbers on the south side of the street or avenue.

Each and every number on such streets or avenues running westerly from the First Street initial line shall have the capital letter “W” prefixed.

Such letter shall constitute a part of the building or house number. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-90. System used in the Lewiston Orchards District of the city.
(a) Numbering spacing. One hundred (100) numbers are hereby assigned to each block and 63.25 feet to each number, but in cases where the lots and blocks are irregularly platted, the numbers shall be assigned in such manner as will, under all the circumstances, be most nearly in conformity with the system hereby adopted.

(b) Base line. Fourth Street is hereby adopted as the initial or base line for the numbering of all streets and houses on streets running approximately east and west.

Stewart Avenue is hereby adopted as the initial or base line for the numbering of all buildings and houses on streets running approximately north and south.

(c) The numbering of all streets and avenues extending easterly from Fourth Street shall begin at Fourth Street starting with “401” and continuing on each street with the even numbers on the south side of the street and the odd numbers on the north side of the street or avenue.

In a like manner the numbering on all streets extending westerly from Fourth Street to the boundary of the Orchards shall begin with the number “340” and decrease with the even numbers on the north and the odd numbers on the south side of the street or avenue.

(d) The numbering of all streets extending southerly from the Stewart Avenue base line or initial line, with its extension shall commence at such base line with Number “3101” and continue on each street with the even numbers on the west side of the street and the odd numbers on the east side of the street in accordance with the system established by this article.

(e) The numbering of Thain Road will start at the center line of Preston with “101” numbers and continue with the even numbers on the west and the odd numbers on the east side of the road.

(f) The north and south street and Thain Road will change 100 block numbers only on Stewart, Preston, Warner, Bryden, Burrell, Grelle, Powers, Ripon and Richardson. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-91. Director to prepare and file map; assignment of numbers.
(a) The director shall prepare and place on record in the department a plat showing the numbers assigned, in accordance with this article to each house, building or tract of land within the city.

(b) Such map shall be a permanent record of the department and shall be kept for the inspection and use of the public.

(c) The director shall advise persons who inquire of the numbers assigned to any particular house, building, lot or parcel of land as to which information is sought. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

Sec. 31-92. Owners to furnish own numbers; specifications of same.
(a) Building or house numbers to be used in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be obtained by the owners or occupants of the property at their own expense. Such numbers shall be of neat and legible character and of such size as will enable persons of ordinary eyesight to easily read the same from the street line in front of the house or building upon which such numbers are placed.

(b) Such numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous position upon such house or building, over or at the side of the front entrance thereto. (Ord. No. 3726, § 2, 10-22-84)

31-93 – 31-99 Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3992, § 19, adopted Jan. 28, 1991, amended the code by deleting provisions contained in § 31-93. Said provisions pertained to violations of Art. IV and derived from Ord. No. 3726, § 2, adopted Oct. 22, 1984.

Chapter 31
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY1
Art. I.    Right-of-Way, §§ 31-1 – 31-32

Div. 1.    Generally, §§ 31-1 – 31-11

Div. 2.    Construction, §§ 31-12 – 31-15

Div. 3.    Safety, §§ 31-16 – 31-32

Art. II.    Curbs and Sidewalks, §§ 31-33 – 31-65

Div. 1.    Generally, §§ 31-33 – 31-45

Div. 2.    Construction, Reconstruction and Repair, §§ 31-46 – 31-65

Art. III.    Encroachments, §§ 31-66 – 31-84

Art. IV.    Street Names and House Numbering, §§ 31-85 – 31-99

Art. V.    Vacation of Public Rights-of-Way, Easements, and Plats, §§ 31-100 – 31-117

Art. VI.    Right-of-Way Regulations for Wireless Communication Facilities, §§ 31-125 – 31-146

ARTICLE V. VACATION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY, EASEMENTS, AND PLATS
Sec. 31-100. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the vacation of a subdivision plat, an easement granted for public use, a public street, way, alley, or other area dedicated for the use of the public. This article shall apply to the vacation of all or part of any subdivision plat, an easement granted for public use, a public street, avenue, boulevard, way, alley, plat, or other area dedicated for the use of the public. Sections 31-101 through 31-113 of this code define the procedure to vacate a subdivision plat or a public street, way, alley, or other area dedicated for public use. Sections 31-101 through 31-103 of this code and sections 31-114 through 31-117 of this code define the procedure to vacate an easement granted for public use. (Ord. No. 4595, § 2, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4674, § 2, 2-13-17)

Sec. 31-101. Action – Recordation – Effective date.
(a) Approval of a vacation petition can be granted only by means of a city resolution approved by the city council.

(b) No vacation shall be recorded until:

(1) All fees have been paid as specified in section 31-112 of this code;

(2) All required actions by the city council are complete and the resolution document has been signed; and

(3) The petitioners have complied with all conditions of approval or have been granted an exception by the city council.

(c) The effective date of the vacation shall be the date that the signed resolution is recorded by the Nez Perce County recorder. (Ord. No. 4595, § 3, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4674, § 3, 2-13-17)

Sec. 31-102. Process – Initiation.
A vacation petition may be initiated by any person, persons, firm, association, corporation or other legally recognized form of business and as further defined in Idaho Code, Section 50-1306A. (Ord. No. 4595, § 2, 10-28-13)

Sec. 31-103. Pre-petition conference required.
(a) The person(s) interested in submitting a vacation petition shall contact the public works secretary to schedule a pre-petition conference with the public works director, the city engineer, and the city surveyor or their designated representatives. The public works secretary must be given, at a minimum, the following information when scheduling a pre-petition conference:

(1) A basic reason for the vacation;

(2) A general description of the area to be vacated;

(3) Contact information including name(s), telephone number(s) and/or email address(es) for the interested person(s).

(b) The pre-petition conference shall be for the purpose of:

(1) Discussing the reasons for the proposed petition;

(2) Determining the specific area to be vacated;

(3) Explaining the vacation procedure;

(4) Explaining the approval criteria;

(5) Explaining the fees and other costs associated with a vacation;

(6) Identifying other options, if any; and

(7) Advising on the feasibility of the proposed petition. (Ord. No. 4595, § 2, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4674, § 4, 2-13-17)

Sec. 31-104. Notice of intent to file vacation of public right-of-way or plat petition – Notice to interested parties.
(a) If the interested person(s) desires to proceed with the petition following the prepetition conference, they shall submit a notice of intent to file a vacation petition (notice) to the public works secretary with the initial fee, as provided by section 31-112 of this code, and notarized consent letters from all owners of property that are adjacent to the proposed vacation area if a public street, public right-of-way, or any part thereof is included in the proposed vacation area. Incomplete submittals shall not be accepted.

(b) The area to be vacated in the notice must be the same area that was defined in the pre-petition conference.

(c) The public works secretary shall forward to the public works director a copy of the notice, and the director or his or her designee shall provide a copy, with supporting maps and documents, to all utility providers, the county, and other interested parties, of the intent to file. The director or his or her designee shall request all utility providers and interested parties to provide a written response within fourteen (14) days. (Ord. No. 4595, § 2, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4674, § 5, 2-13-17; Ord. No. 4719, § 1, 5-14-18)

Sec. 31-105. Summary letter for vacation of public right-of-way or plat petition.
When the utility providers and other interested parties have responded to the notice or the 14-day response period has expired, the public works director or his or her designee shall prepare a summary letter from the responses of the utility providers and other interested parties.

(1) The summary letter may contain:

a. Information on the rights claimed by utility providers and other interested parties;

b. The proposed means of protecting the rights of the utility providers and other interested parties; and

c. The course of action that the public works director will recommend to the city council regarding the vacation petition if the interested person(s) decides to continue the vacation petition process.

(2) The public works director or his or her designee shall transmit the summary letter to the interested person(s) that submitted the notice. (Ord. No. 4595, § 2, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4674, § 6, 2-13-17)

Sec. 31-106. Vacation of public right-of-way or plat petition requirements and staff review.
(a) If the interested person(s) decides to proceed with the vacation process, a vacation petition (petition) shall be submitted to the public works secretary on a form prescribed by the city of Lewiston. After reviewing the petition, the public works department shall file the petition with the city clerk. Incomplete submittals shall not be accepted.

(b) A complete vacation petition submittal shall include:

(1) A completed petition, which shall include the information required in Idaho Code Title 50, Chapter 13, if the petition is for vacation of a plat or any part thereof; and

(2) The petition fee, as required by section 31-112 of this code. (Ord. No. 4595, § 2, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4674, § 7, 2-13-17; Ord. No. 4719, § 2, 5-14-18)

Sec. 31-107. Vacation of public right-of-way or plat staff report and list of property owners.
The public works director or designated representative shall prepare a staff report that includes a recommendation to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the petition. The recommendation shall be based on the following items:

(1) The effect on:

a. Traffic, pedestrian and bicycle circulation;

b. The provision of fire and police service as related to increasing response time;

c. Storm water drainage;

d. Utilities.

(2) Compliance with the comprehensive plan and the transportation plan.

(3) Compliance with capital improvement programs.

The recommended conditions of approval, if any, shall be those conditions necessary to protect the rights and interest of the public.

The public works director or designated representative shall prepare a list of names and addresses of owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the requested vacation and a corresponding map, which shall be delivered to the city clerk along with the staff report. (Ord. No. 4595, § 2, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4674, § 8, 2-13-17)

Sec. 31-108. Public hearing and notice for vacation of public right-of-way or plat petition.
The city clerk shall schedule the public hearing and provide the hearing schedule to the public works director or designated representative, who posts the proposed vacation area with temporary signs containing information on the proposed vacation at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing date.

(1) Notice of the public hearing shall be given as follows:

a. The city clerk shall give written notice of the petition and public hearing by certified mail with return receipt, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing, to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the area described in the petition.

b. The city clerk shall give notice of the petition and hearing by publishing a notice in the city official newspaper once each week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the public hearing, the last of which shall not be less than seven (7) days prior to the date of the public hearing.

(2) The notice shall contain the following:

a. A heading entitled “Notice of Proposed Vacation of X” with “X” being what is proposed to be vacated;

b. A description of the area to be vacated by the petition;

c. The date the petition was filed;

d. The name of at least one (1) petitioner; and

e. The time and place set for the public hearing. (Ord. No. 4595, § 2, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4674, § 9, 2-13-17)

Sec. 31-109. Council action, approval standards, conditions for vacation of public right-of-way or plat petition.
(a) The city council shall hold the public hearing and it shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the petition, in whole or in part, by resolution based on findings that:

(1) Proper notice has been given as required by section 31-108 of this code; and

(2) The public interest will not be prejudiced by the vacation.

(b) The city council findings shall be based on:

(1) The petition;

(2) The public testimony;

(3) The staff report and recommendation of the public works director or designated representative; and

(4) The written information submitted by utility providers and interested parties.

(c) The conditions of approval shall be those conditions necessary to protect the rights and interest of the public and may include:

(1) The maintenance and use of underground public utilities or service facilities in the vacated area;

(2) Limitations on the use of the area above and adjacent to underground utilities or service facilities;

(3) Moving at petitioner’s expense the utilities or services either below, on, or above the surface;

(4) Construction, extension or relocation of sidewalks and curbs;

(5) Grading or pavement extensions;

(6) Dedication for public use of another area in lieu of the area to be vacated;

(7) Any other matter relating to the vacation that is necessary to protect the public or adjoining property owner or to carry out city adopted plans. (Ord. No. 4595, § 2, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4674, § 10, 2-13-17)

Sec. 31-110. Satisfaction of conditions required and exception for vacation of public right-of-way or plat petition.
(a) Satisfaction of conditions required. All conditions of approval shall be satisfied prior to the recording of the resolution approving a petition for vacation unless an exception is granted by the city council under the provisions of subsection (b) of this section.

(b) Exception.

(1) The city council may grant an exception to the requirement that all conditions of approval be satisfied prior to the recording of the resolution if it finds that the vacation petition involves one (1) property owner and upon the conditions that:

a. The petitioner posts a performance bond, or other acceptable method of financial assurance approved by the city attorney, in the amount of one hundred fifty (150) percent of the project cost as estimated by an Idaho licensed civil engineer whose fees are paid by the property owner. The project cost estimate shall be reviewed and approved by the public works director or designated representative;

b. It is agreed in writing that the work will be completed, inspected, and approved by the city within one (1) year from the date of the recording of the vacation resolution. If the work is not completed, the financial surety may be used by the city to complete the work. (Ord. No. 4595, § 2, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4674, § 11, 2-13-17)

Sec. 31-111. Payment of taxes and city liens for vacation of plat.
No resolution for the vacation of all or part of a plat shall be approved by the city council until the petitioner has provided the public works secretary a certificate showing that all city liens and all taxes have been satisfied and/or paid on the lands covered by the plat or the portion of the plat being vacated. This section does not apply to vacations in which only public rights-of-way are being vacated. (Ord. No. 4595, § 2, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4674, § 12, 2-13-17)

Sec. 31-112. Fees for vacation of public right-of-way or plat.
The petitioner(s) shall be responsible for all fees associated with the vacation action. All fee amounts shall be set by resolution adopted by the city council. All fees shall be paid prior to the recording of the vacation resolution. (Ord. No. 4595, § 2, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4674, § 13, 2-13-17)

Sec. 31-113. Title to vacated area.
The title to property in platted lots shall remain vested in the same owners as previous to the vacation. The title to a street or other publicly dedicated area shall revert to the owner of the adjacent real estate, one-half (1/2) on each side thereof, or as the city council deems in the best interests of the adjoining properties, but the right-of-way, easements, and franchise rights of any lot owner or public utility shall not be impaired thereby. (Ord. No. 4595, § 2, 10-28-13; Ord. No. 4674, § 14, 2-13-17)

Sec. 31-114. Filing of an easement vacation petition.
(a) If an interested person(s) desires to proceed with an easement vacation petition following the pre-petition conference, such person(s) shall submit an easement vacation petition to the public works secretary along with a fee, in the amount set forth by resolution adopted by the city council, and notarized consent letters from all utility companies that have the right to use the easement for the installation, maintenance, and access to their utility systems. A letter of consent to vacate signed by the public works director or designated representative shall be sufficient for all city of Lewiston water, wastewater, and stormwater utility systems. If one (1) or more utility companies with valid easement rights refuses to consent to the easement vacation, the easement vacation petition process shall be terminated. If one (1) or more utility companies with valid easement rights consents to the easement vacation with specific conditions, such as the relocation of existing utility lines at the petitioner’s expense, the easement vacation petition process may continue with the specified conditions.

(b) Incomplete submittals shall not be accepted. (Ord. No. 4674, § 15, 2-13-17)

Sec. 31-115. Easement vacation staff report and list of property owners.
The public works director or designated representative shall prepare a staff report that shall include a recommendation to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the easement vacation petition. The recommendation shall be based on verification of the notarized consent letters from all utility companies and an analysis by the public works director or designated representative of future public utility needs.

The public works director or designated representative shall prepare a list of names and addresses of property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the requested easement vacation and a corresponding map, which shall be delivered to the city clerk along with the staff report. (Ord. No. 4674, § 16, 2-13-17)

Sec. 31-116. Easement vacation public hearing and notice.
The city clerk shall schedule the easement vacation public hearing and provide the public hearing schedule to the public works director or designated representative.

(1) Notice of the public hearing shall be given as follows:

a. The city clerk shall give written notice of the petition and public hearing by certified mail with return receipt, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the area described in the petition.

b. The city clerk shall give notice of the petition and hearing by publishing a notice in the city official newspaper once each week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the public hearing, the last of which shall not be less than seven (7) days prior to the date of the public hearing.

(2) The notice shall contain the following:

a. A heading entitled “Notice of Proposed Easement Vacation of X,” with “X” being what is proposed to be vacated;

b. A description of the easement area to be vacated by the petition;

c. The date the petition was filed;

d. The name of at least one (1) petitioner; and

e. The time and place set for the public hearing. (Ord. No. 4674, § 17, 2-13-17)

Sec. 31-117. Council action, approval standards, conditions for easement vacations.
(a) The city council shall hold the public hearing on the easement vacation petition and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the easement vacation petition, in whole or in part, by resolution.

(b) The city council findings shall be based on the following:

(1) The easement vacation petition;

(2) The public testimony;

(3) The staff report and recommendation of the public works director or designated representative;

(4) The letters of consent submitted by utility providers;

(5) Verification that proper notice was given as required by section 31-116 of this code; and

(6) Verification that the public interest will not be prejudiced by the easement vacation.

(c) Any conditions of approval shall be those conditions necessary to protect the rights and interest of the public and the utility companies. Such conditions of approval may include, but are not limited to:

(1) Moving existing utilities at petitioner’s sole expense. This shall be allowed only with the written consent of the affected utilities.

(2) Granting an easement for public use across another area of the petitioner’s property in exchange for the easement to be vacated.

(3) Any other matter relating to the easement vacation that is necessary to protect the rights and interests of the utility companies, the public, or the adjoining property owners or to carry out city adopted plans. (Ord. No. 4674, § 18, 2-13-17)

ARTICLE VI. RIGHT-OF-WAY REGULATIONS FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Sec. 31-125. Purpose.
The provisions of this article shall be known as the right-of-way regulations for wireless communication facilities. It is the purpose of these provisions to delineate restrictions, development standards and siting criteria, and establish removal procedures in order to protect the city from the uncontrolled siting of wireless communication facilities in rights-of-way that have significant adverse effects and cause irreparable harm. It is further the purpose of these provisions:

(1) To protect the community’s visual quality and safety while facilitating the reasonable and balanced provision of wireless communication services. More specifically, it is the city’s goal to minimize the visual impact of wireless communication facilities on the community, particularly in rights-of-way in residential zones, the central business district, the Normal Hill Heritage Overlay Zone, and historic districts;

(2) To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare, preserve the aesthetic character of the Lewiston community, and to reasonably regulate the development and operation of wireless communication facilities within rights-of-way to the extent permitted under state and federal law;

(3) To minimize the impact of wireless communication facilities by establishing standards for siting design and screening;

(4) To preserve the opportunity for continued and growing service from the wireless industry;

(5) To accommodate the growing need and demand for wireless communication services;

(6) To establish clear guidelines and standards and an orderly process for review intended to facilitate the deployment of wireless transmission equipment in rights-of-way, to provide advanced communication services to the city, its residents, businesses and community at large;

(7) To minimize the number of new poles in the rights-of-way and encourage the collocation of antenna arrays of more than one wireless communication service provider on a single pole;

(8) To ensure city regulations are applied consistently with federal and state telecommunications laws, rules, regulations, and controlling court decisions; and

(9) To provide regulations that are specifically not intended to, and shall not be interpreted or applied to: (a) prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of wireless services, (b) unreasonably discriminate among functionally equivalent service providers, or (c) regulate wireless communication facilities and wireless transmission equipment on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such emissions comply with the standards established by the Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-126. Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:

Antenna is a WCF and means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a pole or structure and used in communications that sends or receives digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies or wireless communication signals.

Antenna array is a WCF and means a single or group of antenna elements, not including small cells, and associated mounting hardware, transmission lines, or other appurtenances that share a common attachment device for the sole purpose of transmitting or receiving wireless communication signals.

Applicant means any person engaged in the business of providing wireless communication services or the wireless communication infrastructure required for wireless communication services and who submits an application pursuant to this article.

Application means the process by which an applicant submits a written request on a form provided by the city and indicates a desire to be granted a permit to utilize rights-of-way in the city. A complete application includes all written documentation, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the city concerning the construction of wireless communication facilities; the wireless services proposed to be provided in the city by a provider; and any other matter pertaining to a proposed system or service.

Base station is a WCF and means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables city-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in this article or any equipment associated with a tower.

(1) The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with wireless communication services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services, such as microwave backhaul.

(2) The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small cell networks).

(3) The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the city under this article, supports or houses equipment described in this section that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support.

(4) The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or the city under this article, does not support or house equipment described in this section.

Central business district means that area described as the central business district in section 37-145 of this code.

City means the city of Lewiston, Idaho.

Collocation means the mounting or installation of an antenna on an existing pole or structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.

Commercial zone means the following zoning districts within the city of Lewiston: the Local Commercial (C-1) Zone; the Tourist Commercial (C-2) Zone; the Community Commercial (C-3) Zone; the General Commercial (C-4) Zone; the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone, except that portion of the C-5 Zone located in the central business district; the Regional Commercial (C-6) Zone; the Light Industrial (M-1) Zone; the Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone; the Planned Unit Development (PD) Zone, where commercial uses are allowed; the Port (P) Zone; and the Airport (A) Zone.

Distributed antenna system or DAS is a WCF and means a network consisting of transceiver equipment at a central hub site to support multiple antenna locations throughout the desired coverage area.

Eligible facilities request means any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving:

(1) Collocation of new transmission equipment;

(2) Removal of transmission equipment; or

(3) Replacement of transmission equipment.

Eligible support structure is a WCF and means any tower or base station as defined in this section; provided, that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the city under this article.

Equipment cabinet means an enclosure that is either placed on a concrete slab, tower, or pole that contains a provider’s improvements and facilities to operate its antennas including, without limitation, radio receivers, transmitters, cables, utility lines, electrical meters, and any other equipment necessary for the operation of a wireless antenna.

Existing means a tower or base station that has been reviewed and approved under an applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process; provided, that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition.

FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.

FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.

Historic district(s) means that historic district(s) described in Chapter 19.5 of this code.

Macro cell is a WCF and means a wireless communication facility that provides broad coverage (typically one (1) mile or greater) served by a high power cell site (tower, antenna or mast). Generally, macro cell antennas are mounted on ground-based towers and other existing structures, at a height that provides a clear view over the surrounding buildings and terrain. Macro cells typically cover large geographic areas with relatively high capacity and are capable of hosting multiple wireless service providers.

Mixed use zone means the following zoning districts within the city of Lewiston: the Bryden Avenue Special Planning Area A (BASPAA) Zone; the North Lewiston Mixed Use Development (MXD-NL) Zone; the Normal Hill Special Planning Area Mixed Use (NHMU) Zone; and the Planned Unit Development (PD) Zone, where commercial and residential uses are allowed.

Normal Hill Heritage Overlay Zone or NHHO means the NHHO zone described in Chapter 37, Article III of this code.

Operator means any person who provides service over a wireless communication system and directly or through one (1) or more persons owns a controlling interest in such system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a system.

Person includes any individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not the city.

Pole means a vertical structure in the right-of-way that typically supports utilities, cable television, telecommunications, or other types of facilities. A pole is a type of tower if it is constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting wireless communication facilities.

Protected areas mean all real property located in residential zones, within two hundred (200) feet of a residential zone, the central business district, the Normal Hill Heritage Overlay Zone, and all historic districts.

Provider means an operator, wireless infrastructure provider, or wireless services provider.

Public works director means the director of the public works department of the city of Lewiston and his/her designee(s).

Residential zone means the following zoning districts within the city of Lewiston: the Agricultural Transitional (F-2) Zone; the Suburban Residential (R-1) Zone; the Low Density Residential (R-2) Zone; the Low Density Residential (R-2A) Zone; the Medium Density Residential (R-3) Zone; the Higher Density Residential (R-4) Zone; the Bryden Avenue Special Planning Area B (BASPAB) Zone; the Normal Hill North (NHN) Zone; the Normal Hill South (NHS) Zone; and the Planned Unit Development (PD) Zone, where residential uses are allowed.

RF means radio frequency emissions at such levels as are determined by the FCC.

Rights-of-way or right-of-way means the same as defined or referenced in Chapter 31 of this code.

Site means the area in general proximity to a WCF.

Small cells and small wireless facilities mean facilities that meet the following conditions: (1) the facilities (a) are mounted on structures fifty (50) feet or less in height, including their antennas, or (b) are mounted on structures no more than ten (10) percent taller than other adjacent structures, or (c) do not extend existing structures on which they are located to a height of more than fifty (50) feet or by more than ten (10) percent, whichever is greater; (2) each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment, is no more than three (3) cubic feet in volume; (3) all other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any preexisting associated equipment on the structure, is no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume; (4) the facilities do not require antenna structure registration under federal law; (5) the facilities are not located on tribal land as defined under federal law; and (6) the facilities do not result in human exposure to radio frequency radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified under federal law.

Stealth design means a design that minimizes the visual impact of wireless communication facilities by camouflaging, disguising, screening or blending them into the surrounding environment. Examples of stealth design include, but are not limited to, WCFs disguised as trees (monopines), flagpoles, utility and light poles, bell towers, clock towers, ball field lights, and architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas.

Substantial change means a significant change to a WCF, as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations (Title 47, Part 1, Subpart U § 1.6100(b)(7), as amended from time to time).

Tower is a WCF and means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC licensed or authorized antenna arrays, antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communication services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services, such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site.

Tower height means the vertical distance measured from the base of the building and including the tower structure to the highest point of the structure including the tower. A lightning rod, not to exceed ten (10) feet in height, shall not be included within tower height.

Transmission equipment is a WCF and means equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supplies. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communication services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services, such as microwave backhaul.

Utility support structure means utility poles or utility towers supporting electrical, telephone, cable, or other similar facilities.

Wireless communication facilities or WCF means equipment for the transmission or reception of: (1) radio frequency signals or other wireless communications; or (2) other signals for communications purposes. Such equipment may consist of, for example, antennas, antenna arrays, base stations, equipment cabinets, distributed antenna systems, macro cells, small cells, poles, towers, and transmission equipment.

Wireless infrastructure provider means a person, other than a wireless services provider, that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities’ utility poles, or wireless support structures.

Wireless services provider means a person that provides wireless services. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-127. Applicability.
(a) Application to rights-of-way. The regulations set forth in this article shall apply to all WCFs located or proposed to be located within the rights-of-way. Wireless communication facilities regulations that apply to all other locations within the city of Lewiston are addressed in Chapter 37, Article XVII of this code.

(b) Exempt facilities. A government-owned WCF installed upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the federal, state, or local government, or a written determination of public necessity by the city is exempt from this article; except that such facility must comply with all federal and state requirements. The WCF shall be exempt from the provisions of this article for up to one (1) month after the duration of the state of emergency. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-128. General requirements.
(a) All WCFs in rights-of-way shall comply with the following regulations:

(1) Color. All WCFs shall be placed and colored to blend into their surroundings. The use of grays, blues, greens, dark bronze, browns or other site-specific colors may be appropriate; however, each case should be evaluated individually.

(2) Lighting. Security lighting for the equipment shelters or cabinets and other on-the-ground ancillary equipment is permitted, as long as it is appropriately down-shielded to keep light within the boundaries of the site.

(3) State or federal requirements. Towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. Towers and antennas must comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules, and regulations.

(4) Permits. All WCFs shall be required to obtain permits in accordance with Chapter 10 of this code.

(5) Certificate of appropriateness and alternative use permits. All WCFs located in a historic district shall be required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission so that the WCFs’ stealth design blends into the historic district in accordance with code requirements for new construction. All WCFs that are proposed to be located in a historic district shall be subject to the additional regulations governing those areas, including, but not limited to, securing a certificate of appropriateness when required. Additionally, all WCFs located in historic district(s) or the Normal Hill Heritage Overlay Zone shall be required to obtain an alternative use permit. The processes for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness and alternative use permit shall proceed simultaneously.

(6) Notice. When seeking an administrative permit or approval pursuant to this article, the applicant shall notify all surrounding property owners and utility providers located within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed location of the WCF. Notice shall also be provided to the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Regional Airport if the WCF is proposed to be installed within a three-mile radius of the center of the airport. Notice shall be provided not more than five (5) business days after the filing of an application and shall include, at a minimum: (a) a description, site plan, elevation drawing, and photo simulation of the proposed WCF; (b) an advisement that comments regarding the proposed WCF may be submitted to the public works department within fourteen (14) days; and (c) contact information for the public works department, including the physical address, mailing address, and phone number. The applicant shall, within five (5) business days of filing an application, provide a copy of such notice to the public works department, and a copy of such notice shall be forwarded to the building code official.

(7) Signs. A WCF shall not bear any signage or advertisement other than signage required by law or expressly required by the city.

(8) Visual impact. All WCFs, except for those located in the commercial and mixed use zones, shall be sited and designed in rights-of-way to minimize adverse visual impacts on surrounding properties and the traveling public to the greatest extent reasonably possible, consistent with the proper functioning of the WCF. Such WCFs and equipment enclosures shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site. Such WCFs shall also be designed to either resemble the surrounding landscape and other natural features where located in proximity to natural surroundings, or be compatible with the built environment, through matching and complementary existing structures and specific design considerations, such as architectural designs, height, scale, color, and texture, or be consistent with other uses and improvements permitted in the relevant zone.

(9) Use of stealth design. Stealth design is required as provided in Table 1 of section 31-131 of this code, and concealment techniques must be appropriate, given the proposed location, design, visual environment, and nearby uses, structures, and natural features. Stealth design shall be designed and constructed to substantially conform to surrounding building designs or natural settings, so as to be visually unobtrusive.

(10) Installation in rights-of-way. Installation of any WCF in rights-of-way requires a duly executed written agreement with the city prior to installation. The public works director shall have the authority to approve all such written agreements.

(11) Utility support structure or pole-mounted equipment. All transmission equipment mounted on a utility support structure or pole shall be mounted as close as possible to the structure or pole so as to reduce the overall visual profile to the maximum extent feasible in accordance with safety standards.

(12) Collocation encouraged. A written statement shall be provided demonstrating the applicant’s willingness to allow transmission equipment owned by others to collocate with the proposed wireless communication facility whenever technically and economically feasible and aesthetically desirable. The city desires that providers collocate onto existing or replacement poles in lieu of placing multiple poles in close proximity to one another.

(13) Accessory equipment. All accessory equipment located at the base of a WCF shall be located or placed (at the applicant’s choice) underground or in an equipment shelter or cabinet that is: (a) designed to blend in with existing surroundings, using architecturally compatible construction and colors; and (b) located so as to be as unobtrusive as possible, consistent with the proper functioning of the WCF.

(14) Compliance report. A written report shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by an Idaho-licensed professional engineer or another person with demonstrated expertise in the field of RF engineering. Such report shall assess whether the proposed WCF (whether it be new or replacement equipment) demonstrates compliance with the RF emissions limits established by the FCC. Such report shall be submitted with a permit application.

(15) Setback requirements. WCFs shall be set back from travel lanes as determined by the public works director. The public works director shall use the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) as a guide in determining the setback requirements for WCFs.

(b) Site design flexibility. Individual WCF sites in rights-of-way vary in the location of adjacent buildings, existing trees, topography, and other local variables. By mandating certain design standards, there may result a project that could have been less intrusive if the location of the various elements of the project could have been placed in more appropriate locations within a given site. Therefore, the WCF and supporting equipment may be installed so as to best camouflage, disguise, or conceal them, to make the WCF more closely compatible with and blend into the setting or host structure, upon approval from the public works director. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-129. Antenna arrays.
(a) Unless an alternative use permit is obtained, antenna arrays shall not be permitted: (1) in residential zones, (2) on signs, (3) in historic districts, or (4) in the Normal Hill Heritage Overlay Zone.

(b) Subject to subsection (a) of this section, antenna arrays are permitted if located on an existing structure such that they do not extend more than fifteen (15) feet above said structure. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-130. Distributed antenna systems and small cells.
(a) Distributed antenna systems and small cells are allowed in all zones, provided the applicant complies with all federal and state laws and requirements and structural industry standards.

(b) Distributed antenna systems and small cells are subject to approval via permits and administrative review unless their installation requires the construction of a pole that exceeds the height limitation set forth in Table 1 of section 31-131 of this code. If the height limitation is exceeded, a waiver pursuant to section 31-133 of this code shall be required. A waiver shall not be required for replacement utility support structures, so long as the height of a replacement structure, including antennas, does not exceed the height of the existing structure. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-131. Towers and poles.
(a) New towers and poles. New towers and poles shall be subject to the general requirements set forth in section 31-128 of this code. Additionally, new tower and pole locations shall meet all requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended, and not interfere with sight distance triangle or approaches.

(b) Height restrictions and stealth design. New towers and poles shall be subject to the height restrictions and stealth design requirements set forth below in Table 1. If an applicant desires to exceed the maximum height restrictions set forth in Table 1, then the applicant shall be required to apply for a waiver pursuant to section 31-133 of this code.

Table 1

Height Restrictions

Zone

Maximum Height

Stealth Design

Residential Zones

40 feet

Required[1]

Central Business District

40 feet

Required[1]

Normal Hill Heritage Overlay

40 feet

Required[2]

Historic District(s)

40 feet

Required[2]

Commercial Zones

120 feet[3]

Optional[1]

Mixed Use Zones

90 feet[3]

Optional[1]

[1] Stealth design is subject to approval by the public works director and must comply with the general requirements set forth in section 31-128 of this code.

[2] Stealth design is subject to approval by the historic preservation commission and must comply with the general requirements set forth in section 31-128 of this code.

[3] Up to an additional thirty (30) feet in height is allowed if applicant uses stealth design.

(c) Preferred macro cell tower locations. The following siting priorities for macro cell towers, ordered from most-preferred (1) to least-preferred (7), are as follows and require an alternative sites analysis, as set forth in subsection (e) of this section:

(1) City-owned property and facilities, except those in protected areas, and not including rights-of-way;

(2) Commercial zones, except the central business district;

(3) Mixed use zones;

(4) Rights-of-way in nonresidential zones;

(5) City-owned property and facilities in protected areas, but not including rights-of-way;

(6) Other parcels of land in protected areas, but not including rights-of-way;

(7) Rights-of-way in protected areas.

(d) Macro cell towers in protected areas. Macro cell towers in the rights-of-way in protected areas are permitted only upon the issuance of an alternative use permit.

(e) Alternative sites for macro cell towers.

(1) Analysis.

a. For proposed macro cell towers, the applicant must address the city’s preferred macro cell tower locations with a detailed explanation justifying why a site of higher priority was not selected. The city’s macro cell tower location preferences must be addressed in a clear and complete written alternative sites analysis that shows at least three (3) higher ranked, alternative sites considered that are in the geographic range of the service coverage objectives of the applicant, together with a factually detailed and meaningful comparative analysis between each alternative site and the proposed site that explains the substantive reasons why the applicant rejected each alternative site.

b. A complete alternative sites analysis provided under this subsection may include fewer than three (3) alternative sites so long as the applicant provides a factually detailed written rationale for why it could not identify at least three (3) potentially available, higher ranked, alternative sites.

c. For purposes of disqualifying potential collocations or alternative sites for the failure to meet the applicant’s service coverage or capacity objectives, the applicant shall provide: (1) a description of its objective, whether it be to address a deficiency in coverage or capacity; (2) detailed maps or other exhibits with clear and concise RF data to illustrate that the objective is not met using the alternative site (whether it be collocation or a more preferred location); and (3) a description of why the alternative site (collocation or a more preferred location) does not meet the objective.

d. An applicant must apply for and be granted an alternative use permit in order to locate a macro cell tower at an alternative site.

(2) Documentation. The following materials shall be submitted with an alternative sites analysis:

a. A copy of the applicant’s FCC license or registration.

b. A color visual analysis that includes to-scale visual simulations that show unobstructed before- and after-construction daytime and clear-weather views from at least four (4) angles, together with a map that shows the location of each view, including all equipment and ground wires.

c. A written analysis that explains how the proposed design complies with the applicable design standards under this article to the maximum extent feasible. A complete design justification must identify all applicable design standards under this article and provide a factually detailed reason why the proposed design either complies or cannot feasibly comply.

d. A noise study for the proposed macro cell tower and all associated equipment.

e. A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type, height, and width of the proposed macro cell tower; on-site improvements; land uses and zoning; adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to the county); separation distances from a macro cell tower to property lines; adjacent roadways; buildings on adjoining properties; photo simulations; a depiction of all proposed transmission equipment; proposed means of access; setbacks from property lines; elevation drawings or renderings of the proposed macro cell tower; topography, utility runs, or other information deemed by the public works department to be necessary to assess compliance with this article.

f. An inventory of the applicant’s existing towers and antennas and sites approved for towers or antennas that are either within the jurisdiction of the city or within one (1) mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower and antenna. The public works department may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or alternative use permits under this article or other organizations seeking to locate macro cell towers within the jurisdiction of the city; provided, however, that the public works department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.

g. An updated site plan or map showing the separation distance from other macro cell towers and antennas that are described in the inventory of existing sites. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing macro cell towers and antennas and the owner/operator of the existing macro cell towers and antennas, if known.

h. A description of compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws.

i. A written statement of purpose, which shall minimally include: (1) a description of the objective to be achieved; (2) a to-scale map that identifies the proposed site location and the targeted service area to be benefited by the proposed project; and (3) full-color signal propagation maps with objective units of signal strength measurement that show the applicant’s current service coverage levels from all adjacent sites without the proposed site, predicted service coverage levels from all adjacent sites with the proposed site, and predicted service coverage levels from the proposed site without all adjacent sites. These materials shall be reviewed, signed, and sealed by an Idaho-licensed professional engineer.

(f) Separation requirements for macro cell towers. No macro cell tower may be constructed within one-half (1/2) mile of an existing macro cell tower unless a waiver is obtained pursuant to section 31-133 of this code or through an alternative use permit pursuant to section 31-132 of this code waiving or modifying this separation standard, and the applicant can demonstrate that: (1) an existing macro cell tower is not available or feasible for collocation of an additional wireless communication facility; (2) the location of the existing macro cell tower does not satisfy the operational requirements of the applicant; or (3) another departure from this standard is needed. Factors to be considered in determining whether an applicant has made this demonstration include those listed in section 31-132(g) of this code. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-132. Alternative use permits.
(a) Applicability. This section shall apply only to alternative use permits required by this article and shall have no applicability to Chapter 37 of this code.

(b) Application and fee. A request for an alternative use permit shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city. A request will not be processed until the application is completed in its entirety and the application fee, as set by resolution of the city council, is paid in full.

(c) Public comment required. Before the public works director shall act upon a request for an alternative use permit, the public works director shall solicit comments from the public in accordance with this section.

(d) Notice content. Each notice of a public comment period shall include, at a minimum: (1) a summary of the proposed action necessitating an alternative use permit; (2) a statement that additional information regarding the proposed action is available at the public works department for review by the public; (3) a statement that written comments may be submitted to the public works department via mail, hand delivery, email, and such other methods deemed appropriate by the public works director, if any; (4) the date by which written comments must be received by the public works director; and (5) the address and phone number of the public works department and the email address of the public works director.

(e) Notice required. At least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the end date of the public comment period, notice of the public comment period shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and mailed to the owners of all properties within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed WCF.

(1) Public announcements in lieu of mailed notice. When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners, mailed notice may be omitted. In lieu thereof, public announcements of the public comment period shall be made on local radio and television stations at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the end date of the public comment period.

(2) Failure to receive notice. Failure of any property owner to receive the notice prescribed in this section shall not impair the validity of the public comment period.

(f) Written response. Within five (5) calendar days of the end of the public comment period, the public works director shall provide copies of all written comments received during the public comment period to the applicant. The applicant shall be allowed at least five (5) calendar days to provide a written response to the comments to the public works director.

(g) Factors. In applying for an alternative use permit, the applicant shall address and the public works director shall consider the following factors. The public works director may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one (1) or more of these factors if the public works director concludes that the purposes of this article are, nevertheless, served thereby.

(1) Whether the proposed WCF meets the other applicable provisions of this article.

(2) Surrounding topography, trees, buildings and antennas that would impair RF signals.

(3) Proximity of the WCF to residential structures and residential zone boundaries and whether the WCF impairs the view shed.

(4) Proximity of the WCF to structures in historic district(s) or in the Normal Hill Heritage Overlay Zone so as to impair visual aesthetics.

(5) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties and compatibility with those uses.

(6) Design of the WCF, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.

(7) Whether existing towers or structures are available and located within the geographic area that meets the applicant’s service coverage and structural requirements.

(8) Whether existing towers or structures have sufficient structural strength to support applicant’s proposed WCF and related equipment.

(9) Whether the applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors not enumerated herein that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.

(10) Whether the WCF will be within the RF emission limits allowed by the FCC. The applicant shall provide documentation from an expert regarding this requirement.

(11) Whether the applicant’s proposed WCF would interfere with city communications equipment and/or frequency space.

(12) Whether the WCF will comply with applicable federal, state, and local laws, orders, rules, and regulations, including, but not limited to, those of the FAA and FCC.

(h) Contents of decision. The decision by the public works director to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for an alternative use permit shall be in writing and include, at a minimum: (1) the reasons for such decision; (2) a notice of the right to appeal, as set forth in this section; and (3) the date on which the decision was rendered. If the decision is to deny the alternative use permit, then the public works director shall also include in the decision the actions, if any, the applicant could take to obtain an alternative use permit.

(i) Decision. Within five (5) business days of the public works director’s receipt of the applicant’s written response, the public works director shall provide the applicant with a copy of the public works director’s written decision, and such decision shall be available for public inspection at the public works department. Such decision shall be final, unless appealed in accordance with this section.

(j) Appeal. The public works director’s decision regarding an application for an alternative use permit may be appealed to the city manager by the applicant or any property owner entitled to notice by mail pursuant to this section on a form provided by the city. Written notice of the appeal shall be filed with the appeal fee, set by resolution of the city council, and paid to the city clerk within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the public works director’s written decision. The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for appeal.

The city manager shall hold a hearing on the appeal within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal. The applicant shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel at the hearing and rebut any evidence that might be submitted. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply during the hearing. The city manager’s review of the public works director’s decision shall be de novo. The city manager shall issue a written decision within seven (7) calendar days after the hearing, and such decision shall be final. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-133. Waiver to standards.
(a) Applicability. No WCF shall be developed or modified contrary to any applicable development standard set forth in this article unless a waiver has been granted pursuant to this section or through an alternative use permit waiving or modifying a development standard.

(b) Application and fee. A request for a waiver shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city. A request will not be processed until the application is completed in its entirety and the application fee, as set by resolution of the city council, is paid in full.

(c) Notice and procedure. A waiver to an applicable WCF development standard shall require approval by the public works director. The notice and procedural requirements set forth in this article for alternative use permits shall apply to waivers sought pursuant to this section, including the procedures and timelines for notices, written responses, contents of the public works director’s decision, and appeals, and the requirement for payment of an appeal fee, as set by resolution of the city council.

(d) Submittal requirements. In applying for a waiver to a development standard, the applicant shall address and the public works director shall consider the following items. The public works director may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one (1) or more of these items if the public works director concludes that the purposes of this article are, nevertheless, served thereby.

(1) A description of the requested waiver.

(2) A written statement demonstrating how the waiver would not contradict or conflict with the purposes of this article.

(3) A site plan that includes:

a. Description of the proposed WCF’s design and dimensions, as it would appear with and without the waiver.

b. Elevations showing all components of the WCF, as it would appear with and without the waiver.

c. Color simulations of the WCF after construction, demonstrating compatibility with the vicinity, as it would appear with and without the waiver.

(4) An explanation that demonstrates the following:

a. The WCF development standard materially limits or inhibits the ability of the provider to compete in a fair and balanced legal and regulatory environment;

b. The problem can only be resolved by a waiver to one (1) or more of the standards in this article;

c. The waiver is narrowly tailored such that the WCF conforms to this article’s standards to the greatest extent possible; and

d. The impact on development standards, such as height requirements. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-134. Independent technical and other review.
(a) Although the city intends for city staff to review applications to the extent feasible, the city may retain the services of an independent technical expert and other consultants of its choice to provide technical and other evaluations of permit applications for WCFs. The third-party experts shall have recognized training or qualifications in their fields of radio frequency engineering or wireless communication facilities regulations.

(b) The expert’s review may include, but is not limited to: (1) the accuracy and completeness of the items submitted with the application; (2) the applicability of analysis and techniques and methodologies proposed by the applicant; (3) the validity of conclusions reached by the applicant; (4) whether the proposed WCF complies with the applicable approval criteria set forth in this article; and (5) an evaluation of the functionality of the equipment after addition or replacement.

(c) The applicant shall pay the cost for any independent consultant fees through a deposit, estimated by the city, within ten (10) days of the city’s request. When the city requests such payment, the application shall be deemed incomplete for purposes of application-processing timelines until the deposit is received. In the event that such costs and fees do not exceed the deposit amount, the city shall refund any unused portion within thirty (30) days after the final permit is released or, if no final permit is released, within thirty (30) days after the city receives a written request from the applicant. If the costs and fees exceed the deposit amount, then the applicant shall pay the difference to the city before the permit is issued. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-135. Final inspection.
A certificate of completion shall only be granted upon satisfactory evidence that the WCF was installed in substantial compliance with the approved plans and photo simulations. If it is found that the WCF installation does not substantially comply with the approved plans and photo simulations, the applicant shall make any and all changes required to bring the WCF installation into compliance promptly and, in any event, prior to putting the WCF in operation. If the WCF is not brought into substantial compliance within thirty (30) days of notice of noncompliance by the city, the applicant shall remove the noncompliant components. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-136. Compliance.
(a) All WCFs shall comply with all standards and regulations of the FCC and FAA and any state or other federal government agency with the authority to regulate wireless communication facilities.

(b) The site and WCFs, including all related transmission equipment, shall be maintained at all times in a neat and clean manner and in accordance with all approved plans.

(c) All graffiti on WCFs shall be removed at the sole expense of the permittee after notification by the city to the owner/operator of the WCF.

(d) If any FCC or FAA, state, or other governmental license or any other governmental approval to provide communication services is revoked as to any site permitted or authorized by the city, the permittee shall inform the city of the revocation within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of such revocation and cease using the site. The owner of the WCF shall also be subject to the removal provisions of section 31-137 of this code. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-137. Removal of abandoned WCFs.
(a) Any WCF that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such WCF shall so notify the city in writing and remove the same within ninety (90) days of giving notice to the city of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned WCF within said ninety (90) days shall be grounds to remove the WCF at the owner’s expense, including all costs and attorneys’ fees.

(b) The city may contact the owner of the WCF to make a determination as to whether such WCF is abandoned. If the owner of such WCF does not respond within ninety (90) days, the city may remove the WCF (including its foundation) at the owner’s expense, including all costs and attorneys’ fees associated with such removal. Such notice by the city shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, or posted on or near the WCF for fifteen (15) days, or both.

(c) If there are two (2) or more users of a WCF, then this section shall not become effective until all users cease using the WCF. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-138. Indemnification.
Each permit issued for a WCF shall be deemed to have as a condition of the permit a requirement that the applicant defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents, employees, volunteers, and contractors from any and all liability, damages, or charges (including attorneys’ fees and expenses) arising out of claims, suits, demands, or causes of action as a result of the permit process, a granted permit, construction, location, performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of the WCF. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-139. Eligible facilities modification request.
(a) Purpose. This section implements Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act (47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a)), as it may be amended from time to time and as interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order No. 14-153 and Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018, which requires a state or local government to approve any eligible facilities request for a modification of an existing tower or base station that does not result in a substantial change to the physical dimensions of such tower or base station. Eligible facilities requests shall be governed solely by the provisions in this section and federal law.

(b) Application review.

(1) Application. The public works department shall prepare and make publicly available an application form, which form shall be used by the applicant. No information may be required from an applicant for any documentation intended to illustrate the need for any such wireless facilities or to justify the business decision to modify such wireless facilities.

(2) Review. Upon submission of an application for an eligible facilities request pursuant to this section, the public works department shall, within sixty (60) days (subject to the tolling provisions set forth below), review such application, make its final decision to approve or deny the application, and advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.

(3) Tolling of the time frame for review. The 60-day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement between the public works department and the applicant, or in cases where the public works department determines that the application is incomplete.

a. To toll the time frame for incompleteness, the public works department must provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application.

b. The time frame for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the public works department’s notice of incompleteness.

c. Following a supplemental submission, the public works department shall have ten (10) days to notify the applicant if the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The time frame is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices, pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.

(4) Failure to act. In the event the public works department fails to approve or deny a complete application under this section within the time frame for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted, provided the applicant notifies the public works department in writing after the review period has expired.

(c) Change in federal law. If federal law changes regarding an application for an eligible facilities request, then this section shall be deemed amended to comply with federal law without further action by the city. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-140. Small wireless facilities – Collocation on existing structures.
(a) Purpose. This section implements a shot clock that is contained in the FCC’s Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018, regarding the collocation of small wireless facilities on existing structures.

(b) Application review.

(1) Application. The public works department shall prepare and make publicly available an application form, which form shall be used by the applicant.

(2) Review. Upon submission of an application for collocation of small wireless facilities on an existing structure pursuant to this section, the public works department shall, within sixty (60) days (subject to resetting of the shot clock and the tolling provisions set forth below), review such application, make its final decision to approve or deny the application, and advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.

(3) Tolling of the time frame for review. The 60-day review period begins to run when the application is filed. The public works department shall notify the applicant in writing within ten (10) days as to whether the application is incomplete. Upon resubmission by the applicant, a new 60-day shot clock shall commence, and the public works department shall have ten (10) days to notify the applicant again of an incomplete application. The shot clock may be tolled only by mutual agreement between the public works department and the applicant, or in cases where the public works department determines upon a resubmission that the application is incomplete.

a. The time frame is tolled in the case of subsequent notices, pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.

(4) Failure to act. In the event the public works department fails to approve or deny a complete application under this section within the time frame for review (accounting for resetting the shot clock once or any tolling), the applicant may pursue judicial relief.

(c) Change in federal law. If federal law changes regarding an application for the collocation of small wireless facilities on an existing structure, then this section shall be deemed amended to comply with federal law without further action by the city. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-141. Small wireless facilities – New construction (new builds).
(a) Purpose. This section implements a shot clock that is contained in the FCC’s Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018, regarding the construction of small wireless facilities on a new structure.

(b) Application review.

(1) Application. The public works department shall prepare and make publicly available an application form, which form shall be used by the applicant.

(2) Review. Upon submission of an application for the construction of small wireless facilities on a new structure pursuant to this section, the public works department shall, within ninety (90) days (subject to resetting of the shot clock and the tolling provisions set forth below), review such application, make its final decision to approve or deny the application, and advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.

(3) Tolling of the time frame for review. The 90-day review period begins to run when the application is filed. The public works department shall notify the applicant in writing within ten (10) days as to whether the application is incomplete. Upon resubmission by the applicant, a new 90-day shot clock shall commence, and the public works department shall have ten (10) days to notify the applicant again of an incomplete application. The shot clock may be tolled only by mutual agreement between the public works department and the applicant, or in cases where the public works department determines upon a resubmission that the application is incomplete.

a. The time frame is tolled in the case of subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.

(4) Failure to act. In the event the public works department fails to approve or deny a complete application under this section within the time frame for review (accounting for resetting the shot clock once or any tolling), the applicant may pursue judicial relief.

(c) Change in federal law. If federal law changes regarding an application for the construction of small wireless facilities on a new structure, then this section shall be deemed amended to comply with federal law without further action by the city. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-142. Collocation applications for other than small wireless facilities.
(a) Purpose. This section implements, in part, 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7) of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as it may be amended from time to time and as interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order No. 14-153 and Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018. Except when a shorter time frame is otherwise required under this article, the following time frames apply to applications for collocation for other than small wireless facilities.

(b) Application review.

(1) Application. The public works department shall prepare and make publicly available an application form, which shall be used by the applicant.

(2) Review. Upon receipt of an application for a collocation request pursuant to this section, the public works department shall, within ninety (90) days (subject to the tolling provisions set forth below), review such application, make its final decision to approve or deny the application, and advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.

(3) Tolling of the time frame for review. The 90-day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement between the public works department and the applicant, or in cases where the public works department determines that the application is incomplete.

a. To toll the time frame for incompleteness, the public works department must provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application.

b. The time frame for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the public works department’s notice of incompleteness.

c. Following a supplemental submission, the public works department shall notify the applicant within ten (10) days if the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The time frame is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.

(4) Failure to act. In the event the public works department fails to approve or deny a complete application under this section within the time frame for review (accounting for any tolling), the applicant may pursue judicial relief.

(c) Change in federal law. If federal law changes regarding applications for collocation for other than small wireless facilities, this section shall be deemed amended to comply with federal law without further action by the city. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-143. New macro cell tower applications.
(a) Purpose. This section also implements, in part, 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7) of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as it may be amended from time to time and as interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order No. 14-153 and Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018.

(b) Application review.

(1) Application. The public works department shall prepare and make publicly available an application form, which shall be used by the applicant.

(2) Review. Upon receipt of an application for a request for a new macro cell tower pursuant to this section, the public works director shall review the application and make a recommendation to the city council. The city council shall render a decision within one hundred fifty (150) days of the filing of the application (subject to the tolling provisions set forth below) and notify the applicant in writing of its final decision. If the application is approved, any associated permit shall be issued and a master license agreement negotiated within the 150-day time period.

(3) Tolling of the time frame for review. The 150-day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement between the public works department and the applicant, or in cases where the public works department determines that the application is incomplete.

a. To toll the time frame for incompleteness, the public works department must provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application.

b. The time frame for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the public works department’s notice of incompleteness.

c. Following a supplemental submission, the public works department shall notify the applicant within ten (10) days if the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The time frame is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.

(4) Failure to act. In the event the city council fails to approve or deny a complete application under this section within the time frame for review (accounting for any tolling), the applicant may pursue judicial relief.

(c) Change in federal law. If federal law changes regarding applications for a new macro cell tower, this section shall be deemed amended to comply with federal law without further action by the city. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-144. Fees.
In connection with the filing of an application pursuant to this article, the applicant or provider shall pay all applicable fees, as set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-145. Laws, rules, and regulations.
This article shall be subject to all applicable laws, rules, and regulations. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

Sec. 31-146. Severability.
The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. No. 4745, § 1, 9-23-19)

1
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3726, §§ § 1, 2, adopted Oct. 22, 1984, repealed former Ch. 31, relative to streets and sidewalks, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Ch. 31 as herein set out. Former Ch. 31 was derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 2-17, 2-18, 31-1 – 31-12, 31-14, 31-16 – 31-16.9, 31-17 – 31-38, 31-41 – 31-52, and Ord. Nos. 2323, 2506, 2550, 2642, 2853, 2861, 3120, 3429, 3399, 3576, and 3656.

Cross references – Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 10; electricity, Ch. 14; manufactured homes, manufactured home parks and tourist facilities, Ch. 23; signs, Ch. 30; subdivisions, Ch. 32; traffic, Ch. 35; water and sewers, Ch. 36; zoning, Ch. 37.


Chapter 32
SUBDIVISIONS1
Art. I.    Title and Purpose, §§ 32-1 – 32-3

Art. II.    Definitions, § 32-4

Art. III.    Administration, §§ 32-5 – 32-7

Art. IV.    Preapplication Conference and Concept Plan, §§ 32-8 – 32-9

Art. V.    Development Master Plan, §§ 32-10 – 32-12

Art. VI.    Preliminary Plat, §§ 32-13 – 32-20

Art. VII.    Final Plat, §§ 32-21 – 32-26

Art. VIII.    Administrative Plats, §§ 32-27 – 32-30

Art. IX.    Subdivision Design Principles and Standards, §§ 32-31 – 32-37

Art. X.    Street and Utility Improvement Requirements, §§ 32-38 – 32-46

Art. XI.    Guarantee of Construction, §§ 32-47 – 32-48

Art. XII.    Modification, § 32-49

Art. XIII.    Prohibition Against Circumvention of Chapter, § 32-50

Art. XIV.    Violations, Penalties, and Remedies, § 32-51

Art. XV.    Validity of the Chapter, §§ 32-52 – 32-53

ARTICLE I. TITLE AND PURPOSE
Sec. 32-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Lewiston.” (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-2. Purpose and intent.
(a) The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the city of Lewiston, to insure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions, and public facilities; to achieve individual property lots of reasonable utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage, sanitary sewerage, and other health requirements; to insure consideration for adequate sites for schools, recreation areas, and other public facilities; to promote the conveyance of land by accurate legal descriptions; and to provide logical procedures for the achievement of this purpose.

(b) In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter are intended to provide a common ground of understanding and a sound equitable working relationship between public and private interests to the end that both independent and mutual objectives can be achieved in the subdivision of land. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-3. Compliance with Idaho Code.
If a piece of land is subdivided as defined in section 32-4 of this code, all subdividers of land located within the city of Lewiston shall, prior to recording of a plat, submit all plats to the city of Lewiston for approval by its city council in the manner provided by this chapter. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97; Ord. No. 4621, § 1, 2-23-15)

ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Sec. 32-4. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words, terms, and phrases are defined as follows:

Affected person: One having an interest in real property which may be affected by approval or disapproval of a proposed subdivision or development.

Agricultural purposes: The use of land primarily for the commercial production of plants, crops, animals, or livestock useful to man, including the ancillary activities essential to such production, and the preparation of the products for use.

Architect: An architect licensed to practice in the state of Idaho.

Block: A piece or parcel of land or group of lots.

City engineer: The city engineer of public works of the city of Lewiston being licensed to practice in the state of Idaho.

City master transportation plan: A part of the city comprehensive plan which provides for the development of a system of major streets and highways, including the location and alignment of existing and proposed thoroughfares.

City surveyor: The licensed land surveyor appointed or employed by the city.

Commission: The city of Lewiston planning and zoning commission, as defined in chapter 37 of the Lewiston City Code.

Comprehensive plan: A comprehensive plan, or part thereof, providing for the future growth and improvement of the city of Lewiston and for the general location and coordination of streets and highways, public utilities, schools and recreation areas, public building sites, and other physical development, which shall have been duly adopted by the city council.

Conditional approval: An affirmative action by the council that approval will be forthcoming upon satisfaction of certain specified stipulations.

Construction plans: Plans, profiles, cross-sections, specifications, estimates, reports and other required details for the construction and acceptance of public improvements, prepared by an engineer and/or architect in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and in compliance with existing standards of design and construction approved by the council.

Council: The city council of the city of Lewiston.

Development master plan (DMP): A preliminary master plan for the development of a land area, the platting of which is expected in progressive stages. A DMP, if required, shall assess the feasibility of developing the land area and shall be designed by the subdivider and shall be subject to approval of the subdivision committee.

Direct access: The access which serves as the principal access to the property and determines the street address of the property.

Easement: A grant by the owner of the use of a parcel of land by the public, corporation, or persons for a specified use and purposes and so designated on a plat.

Engineer: A professional engineer licensed to practice in the state of Idaho.

Exception: Any parcel of land which is within the boundaries of the subdivision which is not owned by the subdivider.

Final plat approval: Unconditional approval of the final plat by the council, as evidenced by certifications on the plat by the city attorney, city clerk, and city engineer, constitutes authorization to record the plat.

Irrigation facilities: Includes canals, laterals, ditches, conduits, gates, pumps, and allied equipment necessary for the supply, delivery, and drainage of irrigation water.

Lot: A piece or parcel of land separated from other pieces or parcels by descriptions, as in a subdivision or on a record survey map, or by metes and bounds, for purposes of sale, or separate use.

(1) “Corner lot”: A lot abutting on two (2) or more streets, other than an alley, at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. The front of a corner lot shall be determined at the time of building permit application.

(2) “Interior lot”: A lot having but one side abutting on a street.

(3) “Through (or double front) lot”: A lot abutting two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets or which fronts upon two (2) streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.

(4) “Reverse frontage lot”: A through lot for which the boundary abutting an arterial route or major street is established as the rear lot line.

Lot width: The length of a line at right angles to the axis of the lot at a distance equal to the front setback required for the zone in which the lot is located. The axis of a lot shall be a line joining the midpoints of the front and rear property lines.

Neighborhood plan: A plan designed by the subdivision committee to guide the platting of remaining vacant parcels in a partially built neighborhood so as to make reasonable use of all land, correlate street patterns, and achieve the best possible land use relationships.

Owner: The person or persons holding title by deed to land, or holding title as vendees under land contract, or holding any other title of record.

Pedestrian way: A dedicated public walkway.

Planner: The community development director of the city of Lewiston.

Plat: A map of a subdivision.

(1) “Preliminary plat”: A preliminary map, including supporting data, indicating a proposed subdivision development, prepared in accordance with Article VI of this chapter and the Idaho Code.

(2) “Final plat”: A map of all or part of a subdivision providing substantial conformance to an approved preliminary plat, prepared in accordance with Article VII of this chapter and Idaho Code, Sections 50-1301 through 50-1329.

(3) “Administrative plat”: A plat of ten (10) or fewer lots, all of which are in conformance with the zoning ordinance, all of which have direct access to an existing improved public street and not requiring any major improvement. The construction of curb, gutter and sidewalk and street patchback needed for street widening shall not be considered major improvements.

(4) “Recorded plat”: A final plat or administrative plat bearing all of the certificates of approval required in this chapter and duly recorded in the Nez Perce County recorder’s office.

Private street or road: A road within a subdivision plat that is not dedicated to the public and not a part of a public roadway system, meeting the design requirements for fire access.

Public improvement standards: A set of regulations setting forth the details, specifications, and instructions to be followed in the planning, design, and construction of required public improvements in the city of Lewiston, formulated by the state department of health and welfare, the North Central District Health Department, the city engineer, and other city departments.

Streets: Any public way or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway; or a street or roadway shown on a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or by official action; or a street or roadway, whether public or private; or a plat duly filed and recorded in the county recorder’s office. A street includes the land between the right-of-way lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas, and lawns.

(1) “Arterial route”: A general term including freeways, expressways, and limited access streets; and interstate, state or county highways having regional continuity.

(2) “Minor arterial”: Provides for the general inter-neighborhood traffic circulation of the community, taking priority of movement over most intersecting streets, and minimizing direct access to abutting properties.

(3) “Collector street”: Provides for traffic movement within neighborhoods of the city and between major streets and local streets and for direct access to abutting properties. (Also called “secondary street.”)

(4) “Local street”: Provides for direct access to residential, commercial, industrial, or other abutting land and for local traffic movements and connects to collector and/or major streets. (Also called a “minor street.”)

a. “Marginal access street”: A minor street parallel and adjacent to an arterial route which provides access to abutting property and intercepts local streets and controls access to an arterial route. (Also called “frontage road.”)

b. “Cul-de-sac street”: A short local street having one end terminated in a vehicular turnaround.

c. “Dead-end street”: A short local street terminating at a property line, but capable of future extension.

(5) “Alley”: A public service way used to provide secondary vehicular access to property otherwise abutting upon a street.

(6) “Improved public street”: A public street that has been paved with an all weather surface.

Subdivider: A subdivider shall be deemed to be the individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndication, trust, or other legal entity that titles the application and initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The subdivider need not be the owner of the property as defined by this chapter.

Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land within the city or area of city impact into two (2) or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land; except that:

(1) The sale or exchange of parcels of land to or between adjoining property owners where such sale or exchange does not create additional lots shall not be deemed a subdivision.

(2) The allocation of property by court decree in settling the estate of a decedent or in partitioning land among owners shall not be deemed a subdivision.

(3) The unwilling sale of land as the result of legal condemnation procedures, or the acquisition of street rights-of-way by a public agency in conformance with the comprehensive plan, shall not be deemed a subdivision.

Subdivision committee: A committee established to review subdivision plats.

Surveyor: Professional land surveyor licensed to practice in the state of Idaho.

Tract or tract of land: A parcel of land which appears on the records of the county as a single ownership as of August 23, 1971. Where two (2) or more parcels under the same ownership are contiguous, they shall be regarded for purposes of this chapter as a single tract except when no new lot lines are created for the purpose of sale.

Usable lot area: That portion of a lot usable for or adaptable to the normal uses made of property consistent with the established or proposed zoning classification, excluding any areas which may be considered wetlands, are excessively steep, or are included in certain types of easements.

Utilities: Installations or facilities, underground or overhead, furnishing public utilities including electricity, gas, steam, communications, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, sewage disposal, or flood control. Said utilities may be owned and operated by any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, or board duly authorized by state or municipal regulations. Utility or utilities as used herein may also refer to the operating persons, firms, corporations, departments, or boards.

Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97; Ord. No. 4405, § 1, 7-25-05)

ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 32-5. Subdivision committee.
(a) A subdivision committee is hereby established, to consist of the following members or their duly authorized representatives:

(1) The administrator of public works or appointed alternate(s);

(2) Community development director or appointed alternate(s);

(3) Fire chief or appointed alternate(s);

(4) Superintendents of water, sewer and streets.

(b) The subdivision committee shall examine all plats of proposed subdivisions for compliance with applicable ordinances of the city of Lewiston. The committee shall report its findings and recommendations through the community development director to the commission or council, meeting as often as necessary to report within the time limits hereinafter prescribed. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-6. Outline of procedures.
(a) The preparation, submittal, review, and approval of all subdivision plats of lands within the jurisdiction of the city of Lewiston shall proceed through the progressive stages, as described in Articles V, VI and VII of this chapter.

(b) The preparation, submittal, review, and approval of all administrative plats shall proceed as described in Article VIII of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-7. Fees.
Fees for the processing of subdivision applications shall be required prior to review of plats. The fee shall be in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97; Ord. No. 4506, § 1, 5-12-08)

ARTICLE IV. PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE AND CONCEPT PLAN
Sec. 32-8. Purpose.
The purpose of the preapplication conference and concept planning stage shall be to discuss the proposed subdivision concept, its conformity with the comprehensive plan, its relationship to surrounding development, any site conditions that may require special consideration or treatment, and the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-9. Preapplication conference.
(a) The preapplication conference stage of subdivision planning comprises an informational period which precedes actual preparation of preliminary plans by the subdivider. During this stage, the subdivider makes known his intentions to the city and is advised of specific public objectives related to the subject tract, and other details regarding platting procedures and requirements.

(b) In carrying out the purposes of the preapplication stage, the subdivider and the city shall be responsible for the following actions:

(1) Actions by the subdivider. The subdivider and/or his agents shall meet with the city at the preapplication conference to present a general outline of the proposed development, which shall include, but is not limited to:

a. Sketch plans and ideas regarding land use, street and lot arrangement, and tentative lot sizes.

b. Tentative proposals regarding required public improvements.

c. Other information needed to explain the development.

(2) Actions by the city. The city will discuss the proposal with the subdivider and advise him of procedural steps, design and improvement standards, and general plat requirements. Then, depending upon the scope of the proposed development, they will proceed with the following actions:

a. Check existing zoning of the tract and make recommendations if a zone change is necessary or desirable or if other zoning action is necessary. If it is determined that zoning action is required or a permit is required for the subject tract or any part of it, the subdivider shall initiate the necessary rezoning or permit application.

b. Check conformity with the objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan and for conformity to the city’s master transportation plan.

c. Inspect the site or otherwise determine its relationship to streets, utility systems, and adjacent land uses, and identify any unusual problems with regard to topography, utilities, flooding, or other conditions.

d. Determine if there is a need for the preparation and review of a development master plan before a preliminary plat can be considered. If the development master plan is required, the subdivider will be advised of this fact, and of the extent to which it should be prepared.

e. Review and discuss with the developer the potential need for special studies, which may include but are not limited to traffic, soil, slope stability, wetlands, foundations or other studies that may be required as a result of site conditions, and the implications of the findings of those studies, if required. The requirement of said special studies shall be determined by the city engineer.

f. Advise the subdivider of the results of these actions, and offer guidance as to any further actions which should be taken. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

ARTICLE V. DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN
Sec. 32-10. Purpose.
A development master plan may be required by the subdivision committee whenever the tract is sufficiently large as to comprise a neighborhood; the tract initially proposed for platting is only a portion of a larger land area, the development of which is complicated by size, transportation or access, unusual topographic, utility, land use, land ownership, or other conditions. The entire land area need not be under the subdivider’s control in this case. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-11. Contents of plan – Preparation.
The development master plan (DMP) shall be prepared to a scale and accuracy commensurate with its purpose and shall include:

(1) General street pattern with particular attention to collection streets and future circulation throughout the neighborhood and the goals and objectives of the city’s master transportation plan.

(2) General location and size of school sites, parks, or other proposed land uses.

(3) Location of shopping centers, multifamily residential, or other proposed land uses.

(4) Proposed improvements for sewage disposal, water supply, fire protection and storm drainage. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-12. Significance of development master plan approval.
Upon acceptance of general design approach by the subdivision committee, the DMP shall be followed by the preparation of preliminary plat(s). If development is to take place in several parts, the DMP shall be submitted as supporting data for each part. The DMP shall be kept up to date by the subdivider and the committee as modifications take place. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

ARTICLE VI. PRELIMINARY PLAT
Sec. 32-13. Purpose.
The purpose of the preliminary plat is to allow for the detailed examination of the proposed subdivision, determine conformity to land use and zoning ordinances and applicable state laws and to determine and apply appropriate development standards in conformance with this code. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-14. Preliminary plat.
The preliminary plat stage of land subdivision includes detailed subdivision planning, submittal, review, and approval of the preliminary plat. To avoid delay in processing the application, the subdivider shall provide the city with all information described in this article that is essential to determine the character and general acceptability of the proposed development. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-15. Conformance with zoning requirements.
The subdivision shall be designed to meet the specific requirements for the zoning district within which it is located. In the event that an amendment or variance of zoning is necessary, said action shall be initiated by the property owner or his authorized agent. Processing of the preliminary plat shall not proceed until the subdivision committee has determined that the commission or council has made a favorable decision regarding any proposed zoning change. In any event, any such change required in relation to the preliminary plat shall have been adopted prior to preliminary plat approval. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-16. Preliminary plat submission.
The following material and information shall be submitted by the subdivider in support of the request for preliminary plat approval. Review of the preliminary plat shall not commence until all required information is submitted.

(1) Three (3) copies of the preliminary plat and required data prepared in accordance with requirements set forth in Articles V, VI and IX of this chapter shall be filed with the community development department at least twenty-five (25) working days prior to the commission meeting at which the subdivider desires to be heard. In addition, the subdivider shall submit one (1) reduced copy of the proposed subdivision plat; said reduced copy shall be clear and readable and shall not exceed eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches in size.

(2) Reviewing fee. The subdivider shall, at the time of submitting the preliminary plat, pay to the city a reviewing fee in the amount set forth in section 32-7 of this chapter. The reviewing fee shall also cover the submittal of an amended or revised preliminary plat handled as the same case. If the preliminary plat approval expires before application for final approval, the plat shall be resubmitted for preliminary approval as a new case and the subdivider shall pay the required fee.

(3) The submittal shall be checked by the community development department for completeness and assigned a case number. If incomplete as to those requirements set forth in section 32-20, the submittal shall be rejected and the subdivider notified in writing within five (5) working days. If the specified fee has been paid, scheduling of the case for commission hearing shall be dependent upon adequacy of data presented and completion of processing.

(4) The subdivider shall submit a title report or a commitment for title insurance indicating the nature of the applicant’s ownership of the land included in the preliminary plat. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-17. Preliminary plat review.
(a) The community development department shall distribute copies of the plat and supporting data to the following review offices:

(1) City engineer;

(2) City parks and recreation division;

(3) City water and sewer divisions or the appropriate service provider;

(4) City fire marshal;

(5) City street superintendent;

(6) North Central District Health Department for satisfaction of sanitary restrictions as required by Idaho Code, Section 50-1326;

(7) Superintendent of the appropriate school district;

(8) If the land abuts a state highway, to the Idaho Highway Department; if the land abuts a county road, to the county commissioners;

(9) The city planner;

(10) Public utilities;

(11) State department of health and welfare, division of environment;

(12) Soil and water conservation district.

(b) The reviewing offices shall transmit their recommendations in writing to the community development department which receives and summarizes the recommendations and presents them to the subdivision committee. The community development department prepares the report and recommendations of the subdivision committee, and forwards them to the commission. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-18. Preliminary plat approval.
(a) The commission shall review the preliminary plat within forty-five (45) calendar days of the date a full and complete application was received. The commission shall recommend approval, denial or approval with conditions to the city council.

(b) If satisfied that all objectives of this chapter have been met, and that it is in conformance with the comprehensive plan, the council shall approve the preliminary plat, with such conditions as are appropriate. Among the conditions required by council shall be the submission of construction plans and specifications pursuant to section 32-40.

(c) If the council finds the preliminary plat requires major revision, the council may reject the plat stating the reason for the rejection. Said reasons for rejection shall be transmitted in writing by the city clerk to the subdivider within five (5) working days following the rejection of the plat by the council.

(d) If a plat is rejected by the council, the review of a new plat for the same tract or any part thereof, if submitted within ninety (90) calendar days of the date of rejection, shall be considered under the original review fee. Should the plat be submitted to the city more than ninety (90) calendar days after rejection, the subdivider shall follow the aforementioned procedure and again shall be subject to the required fee. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-19. Significance of preliminary plat approval.
Preliminary plat approval constitutes authorization for the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of the final plat, and with the construction plans and specifications for public improvements. Preliminary plat approval is based upon the following terms:

(1) The basic conditions under which approval of the preliminary plat is granted will not be changed prior to expiration date.

(2) Approval is valid for a period of twelve (12) months from date of council action. Time for completion of improvements required by the preliminary plat may, upon application by the subdivider, and upon good cause showing, be extended for a period of six (6) months by the city council or as provided for in subsection (4). Should a final plat not be submitted to the city within the specified time period, the review process shall recommence as for a new subdivision and the subdivider shall submit to the city a new reviewing fee and, if necessary, a revised plat containing any revisions required by amendments in the city code approved since the date of the original submittal.

(3) Preliminary plat approval, in itself, does not assure final acceptance.

(4) However, if circumstances require, a final plat which includes only a part of the approved preliminary plat may be submitted and processed for council approval during the twelve (12) months time period. Approval of the entire preliminary plat shall remain active as long as final plats are submitted at a minimum of twelve (12) month intervals. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-20. Information required for preliminary plat submittal.
(a) Form of presentation. The information required as part of the preliminary plat submittal shall be shown graphically or by note on plans, or by letter, and may comprise several sheets showing various elements or required data. All mapped data for the same plat, except the vicinity map, shall be drawn at the same scale of one hundred (100) feet to an inch. Whenever practical, the drawing shall measure twenty-two (22) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and should not exceed forty-two (42) inches by sixty (60) inches.

(b) Identification and descriptive data.

(1) Proposed name of the subdivision, in accordance with Idaho Code, Section 50-1307, and its location by section, township, and range; referenced to a section corner, quarter-corner, or recorded monument.

(2) Name, address, and phone number of subdivider.

(3) Name, address, and phone number of the person preparing the plat.

(4) Scale, north point, and date of preparation including dates of any subsequent revisions.

(5) Vicinity map clearly showing proposed subdivision in relationship to adjacent subdivisions, arterial routes, major streets, collectors, and other important features.

(c) Existing conditions data.

(1) Topography by contours related to USCG survey datum, or other datum approved by the city engineer, shown on the same map as the proposed subdivision layout and showing proposed contours adequate to describe future grading. Contour interval shall be such as to adequately reflect the character and drainage of the land.

(2) Soils stability analysis when required by the city engineer.

(3) Location of water wells, streams, canals, irrigation laterals, private ditches, washes, lakes, wetlands or potential wetlands or other water features; direction of flow; location and extent of areas subject to inundation whether such inundation be frequent, periodic, or occasional.

(4) Location, widths, and names of all platted streets, railroads, utility rights-of-way of public record, public areas, permanent structures to remain including water wells, and municipal corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract.

(5) Names, book, and page numbers of all recorded adjacent subdivisions having common boundaries with the tract.

(6) By note, the existing zoning classifications of the tract.

(7) By note, the acreage of the tract.

(8) Boundaries of the tract to be subdivided shall be fully dimensioned.

(d) Proposed conditions data.

(1) Street layout, including location, width and proposed names of public streets, alleys, and easements; connections to adjoining platted tract.

(2) Typical lot dimensions (scaled); dimensions of all corner lots and lots on curvilinear sections of streets; each lot numbered individually; total number of lots.

(3) Location, width, and use of easements.

(4) Designation of all land to be dedicated or reserved for public use within use indicated.

(5) If plat includes land for which multifamily, commercial, or industrial use is proposed, such areas shall be clearly designated together with existing zoning classification and status of zoning change, if any.

(e) Proposed utility methods. The subdivider shall address by note the proposed method of utility services including but not limited to:

(1) Sewage disposal.

(2) Water supply.

(3) Storm water disposal: Preliminary calculations and layout of proposed system and locations of outlets, in conformance with the city storm water management plan and subject to approval of the city engineer.

(4) Fire protection: Preliminary evaluation by the fire marshal of available water supply and pressure and required spacing of fire hydrants. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

ARTICLE VII. FINAL PLAT
Sec. 32-21. Purpose.
The purpose of the final plat is to consider and approve the necessary maps, plats and documents that demonstrate conformity to the approved preliminary plat and associated conditions of approval in accordance with provisions of this code and Idaho state statutes. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-22. Final plat.
This stage includes the final design of the subdivision, engineering of public improvements, and submittal of the plat and construction plans by the subdivider. It includes review of the final plat by the appropriate agencies, and submission for final action by the council.

(1) Zoning. Zoning of the tract shall regulate the proposed use, and any zoning amendment necessary shall have been adopted by the council prior to submittal of the final plat, and shall be noted thereon.

(2) Easements. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to provide on the final plat such easements in such location and width as required for utility purposes. Prior to filing the final plat, he shall have submitted the plat to the person(s) authorized to perform plat review for the utility interests. Prior to final plat review by the city engineer, a letter shall have been received from said interested utilities signifying that easements shown on the plat are complete and satisfactory for utility purposes.

(3) Final plat preparation. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with requirements set forth in section 32-26 of these regulations and shall conform closely to the approved preliminary plat. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-23. Final plat submittal.
The subdivider shall submit the final plat map prepared in conformance with provisions of this chapter and that information required in section 32-26 of this code to the community development department at least twenty-five (25) working days prior to the council meeting at which the subdivider desires to be heard. The community development department, upon receipt of a complete plat submittal, shall record the receipt and date of submittal and forward the submittal to the city engineer who shall then proceed with review action as specified in section 32-24 of this chapter. Should changes or corrections to the plat be found necessary, each resubmittal of the plat shall require and additional twenty-five (25) working days for review. Following the final approval of the plat by the city engineer and city surveyor, the city engineer shall forward the plat to the city council along with his recommendation for action made in writing. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-24. Final plat review.
(a) The engineer upon receipt of the final plat submittal shall immediately check it for completeness. If incomplete, the date of submittal shall be voided and the submittal shall be returned to the subdivider. If complete, the city engineer shall review drainage and flood control measures and review the plat for substantial conformity to the approved preliminary plat and refer copies of the submittal to the appropriate reviewing offices who will make known their recommendations in writing addressed to the city engineer.

(b) The engineer shall assemble the recommendations of the various reviewing offices, prepare a concise summary of recommendations, and submit said summary together with the reviewer’s recommendations to the council.

(c) At the time of submittal of the final plat to the city, the subdivider shall pay a fee as set forth in section 32-7 of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-25. Final plat approval.
(a) If the engineer concludes that the final plat is not in substantial conformity with the preliminary plat, the engineer shall report his findings to the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall then recommend approval or denial of the final plat to the city council. The city council then shall consider the final plat.

(b) If in the opinion of the engineer, the final plat is in substantial compliance with the preliminary plat, the engineer shall recommend approval to the city council. Action by the planning and zoning commission will not be required.

(c) The council or planning and zoning commission shall review and act upon the final plat within twenty-five (25) working days of the date of receipt by the engineer.

(d) Upon approval of the plat by the council, the clerk shall transcribe a certificate of approval upon the plat, first making sure that the other required certifications (see section 32-26(f)) have been duly signed, including letter of agreement between subdivider and serving utilities, that engineering plans have been approved by the engineer, the agreement between city and subdivider as provided in section 32-47(a) has been executed, and that an appropriate guarantee of construction from among those alternatives provided in section 32-48 covering said approved plan improvements has been posted with the engineer. The city shall also record the final plat with the office of the Nez Perce County recorder.

(e) Should the council reject the plat, in whole or in part, it shall advise the subdivider in writing of the reasons for the denial. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-26. Information required for final plat submittal.
(a) Method and medium of presentation.

(1) The subdivider shall provide a record copy of the final plat prepared as described in Idaho Code, Section 50-1304.

(2) Copies of the recorded plat shall be reproduced in the form of blueline or blackline prints on a white background.

(3) The plat shall be drawn to an accurate scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch, or multiple thereof, unless a different scale is previously approved by the engineer.

(b) Identification data required.

(1) A title which includes the name of the subdivision and its location by number of section, township, range, and county. Titles shall comply with Idaho Code, Section 50-1307.

(2) Name, address, and registration number of the seal of the professional engineer or land surveyor, registered in the state of Idaho, preparing the plat.

(3) Scale, north arrow, and date of plat preparation.

(c) Survey data required.

(1) Boundaries of the tract to be subdivided which shall close within tolerances prescribed by Idaho Code, showing all bearings and distances determined by an accurate survey in the field. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof.

(2) Any excepted parcel(s) within the plat boundaries shall show all bearings and distances determined by an accurate survey in the field. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof.

(3) Location and description, and Idaho State plane coordinates of cardinal points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on the plat shall be referenced; each of two (2) corners of the subdivision traverse shall be tied by course and distance to separate section corners, quarter-section corners, or to existing recorded monuments.

(4) Location of all permanent physical encroachments upon the boundaries of the tract.

(d) Descriptive data required.

(1) Name, right-of-way lines, courses, length, width of all existing and proposed public streets, alleys, utility easements, radii, points of tangency, and central angles of all curvilinear streets and alleys, and radii of all rounded street line intersections.

(2) All drainageways shall be shown on the plat. The rights-of-way of all major drainageways, as designated by the city engineer, shall be dedicated to the public.

(3) All easements for rights-of-way provided for public services or utilities and any limitations of the easements. Construction within the easement shall be limited to utilities and wood, wire, or removable section-type fencing.

(4) Location and all dimensions of all lots.

(5) All lots shall be numbered by consecutive numbers throughout the plat. “Exceptions,” “tracts,” and “private parks” shall be so designated, lettered, or named and clearly dimensioned.

(6) All sites to be dedicated to the public will be clearly indicated, the boundaries and dimensions accurately shown, and the intended uses specified.

(7) Location of all adjoining subdivisions with date, book, and page number of recording noted, or, if unrecorded, so marked.

(8) Any proposed private deed restrictions to be imposed upon the plat or any part or parts thereof pertaining to the intended use of the land shall be typewritten and attached to the plat and to each copy submitted.

(9) Sanitary restrictions required by Idaho Code, Section 50-1326.

(e) Dedication and acknowledgment.

(1) Dedication: Statement of dedication of all streets, alleys, crosswalks, drainageways, pedestrian ways, and other easements for public use by the person holding title as vendees under a land contract, and by spouses of said parties. If lands dedicated are mortgaged, the mortgagee shall also sign the plat.

(2) Dedication shall include a written location by section, township, and range of the tract. If the plat contains private streets, public utilities shall have the right to install and maintain utilities in the street right-of-way.

(f) Required certifications.

(1) Certificate signed by the owner or owners, containing a correct legal description of the land, together with a statement of their intention to include the same in the plat, and making dedication of all streets and alleys shown on the plat. This certificate shall be notarized.

(2) Certificate signed by an Idaho-licensed engineer or surveyor that the plat is correct and accurate, and that the monuments described in it have been located as described. This certificate shall include the seal of the engineer or surveyor.

(3) Certificate and seal of the city engineer and of the city or county surveyor that the plat complies with the requirements of Title 50, Chapter 13, Idaho Code, and with this chapter.

(4) Certificate signed by the city clerk that the city council has approved and accepted the plat.

(5) Certificate, signed by the owner or owners, on the provision of water service to the lots within the subdivision, as provided by Idaho Code, Section 50-1334.

(6) Certificate of satisfaction of the sanitary restrictions, to be endorsed by the county recorder at the time of filing, or subsequent thereto, when the sanitary restrictions shall have been satisfied as required by Idaho Code, Section 50-1326.

(7) Certificate of recording, to be signed by the county recorder at the time of filing. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97; Ord. No. 4475, § 1, 7-9-07)

ARTICLE VIII. ADMINISTRATIVE PLATS
Sec. 32-27. Purpose.
The administrative plat process is intended to provide a streamlined means of subdividing property in those instances in which no public improvements are required, all property fronts upon an improved, publicly dedicated street and ten (10) or fewer lots are being created in conformance with the zoning ordinance. Administrative plats may not contain more than one flag lot as defined in Lewiston City Code section 37-124. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-28. Administrative plat procedure.
When the proposed land division includes ten (10) or fewer lots, all of which have direct access to a pre-existing improved public street, and not requiring any major improvements as provided in the definition of an administrative plat, the administrative plat procedure may be used. The procedure shall be as follows:

(1) Preapplication conference as required by section 32-9 of this chapter.

(2) The subdivider shall submit to the city a plat map prepared in conformance with provisions of this chapter and that information required in section 32-29 of this code to the community development department at least twenty-five (25) working days prior to the council meeting at which the subdivider desires to be heard. The community development department, upon receipt of a complete plat submittal, shall record the receipt and date of submittal and forward the submittal to the city engineer who shall then proceed with review. Should changes or corrections to the plat be found necessary, each resubmittal of the plat shall require an additional twenty-five (25) working days for review. Following the final approval of the plat by the city engineer and city surveyor, the city engineer shall forward the plat to the community development department with his recommendation for council action made in writing. The community development department shall forward the completed plat, along with the city engineer’s recommendation to the city council for final action.

(3) At the time of submittal to the city, the subdivider shall pay a fee in the amount set forth in section 32-7 of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-29. Administrative plat submittal.
(a) Administrative plat application and plat drawings:

(1) The plat shall be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-seven (27) inches in size and shall comply with the other requirements of the Idaho Code, Section 50-1304.

(2) The scale of the drawing may be either one (1) inch to fifty (50) feet or one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet, as best suits the particular case.

(3) The information required by subsections (b)(2) through (b)(4) and (b)(6) of this section shall be included on the plat.

(4) The subdivider shall submit the reproducible plat and three (3) copies of the plat.

(b) In addition to the required subdivision plat map, the applicant shall submit the following material:

(1) Request for administrative plat review and approval.

(2) A statement from the state department of health and welfare that the volume and quality of the proposed water supply is adequate and satisfactory.

(3) Letters from the serving utility companies as required by section 32-45(j) of this chapter.

(4) Evidence from the city fire marshal that adequate fire protection is available within the distances required by the Uniform Fire Code and with adequate pressure for the uses intended on the property.

(5) Acknowledgment that curbs, gutters and sidewalks are required pursuant to chapter 31.

(6) The subdivider shall submit a title report or a commitment for title insurance indicating the nature of applicant’s ownership of the land included in the administrative plat.

(c) For administrative plats that are located on existing public rights-of-way of less than fifty (50) feet in width, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate an additional five (5) feet along that existing right-of-way to the city. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-30. Administrative plat approval and filing.
(a) The council, upon receipt of the plat and written recommendation of the city engineer and community development department, shall proceed as specified in section 32-25 of this chapter.

(b) The city shall file the approved administrative plat with the county recorder. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

ARTICLE IX. SUBDIVISION DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS
Sec. 32-31. General.
(a) Every subdivision shall conform to the requirements and objectives of the city comprehensive plan or any parts thereof, as adopted by the commission and the city council, to the zoning ordinance, to other ordinances and regulations of the city, and to the Idaho statutes.

(b) The subdivision shall include the entire tract of land unless an approved preliminary plat, planned unit development or approved development master plan shows development in phases. When development is planned in phases, a schedule will be submitted with the preliminary plat showing the anticipated completion time for each stage.

(c) Where the tract to be subdivided contains all or any part of the site of a proposed park, school, flood control facility, or other public area as shown by the city’s comprehensive plan or future acquisitions map the city shall comply with the provisions of Idaho Code, Section 37-6517.

(d) Land which is within a known floodplain, land which cannot be properly drained, or other land which, in the opinion of the subdivision committee, is unsuitable for residential use shall not be subdivided; except that the subdivision of such land upon receipt of evidence from the North Central District Health Department and/or city engineer that the construction of specific improvements can be expected to render the land suitable; thereafter, construction upon such land shall be prohibited until the required improvements have been planned and approval gained from the Idaho Department of Water Resources and the Army Corps of Engineers and construction guaranteed in conformance with the provisions of Article XI of this chapter.

(e) Where the tract to be subdivided is located in whole or in part in terrain having an average slope exceeding ten (10) percent, design and development shall conform to the findings of a suitability study as required by the city engineer. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-32. Street location and arrangement.
(a) Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces any part of a street designated in the adopted city master transportation plan and/or bike and pedestrian way designated in the adopted comprehensive plan such street, bike way or pedestrian way shall be platted in conformance therewith.

(b) Street layout shall provide for the continuation of such street as the subdivision committee may designate.

(c) Whenever a tract to be subdivided is located within an area for which a neighborhood plan has been approved by the commission, the street arrangement shall conform substantially to said plan.

(d) Certain proposed streets and utilities, as designated by the subdivision committee, shall be extended to the tract boundary to provide future connections with adjoining unplatted land.

(e) Local streets shall be so arranged as to discourage their use by through traffic.

(f) If a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial route, the subdivision committee may recommend, and the commission may require, marginal access streets or reverse frontage with access control along the arterial route, or such other treatment as may be justified for protection of abutting properties from the nuisance and hazard of high volume traffic, and to preserve the traffic function of the arterial route.

(g) If a subdivision abuts or contains the right-of-way of a railroad, a limited access road, an irrigation canal, drainage facilities or abuts a commercial or industrial land use, the subdivision committee may recommend location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distance shall be determined with due regard for approach grades, drainage, bridges, or future grade separations.

(h) Streets shall be so arranged in relation to existing topography as to be in conformance with city standards.

(i) Either alleys or utility easements along rear lot lines may be required. The subdivision committee shall decide which is required in individual cases. Its decision shall be made in conference with the subdivider, and shall be based on all relevant circumstances such as topographic traits, lot sizes, and continuity of existing alleys and easements.

(j) Half streets within the subdivision boundaries shall be discouraged, except where essential to provide right-of-way, to complete a street pattern already begun, or to insure reasonable development of a number of adjoining parcels. Where there exists a platted half street abutting the tract to be subdivided and said half street furnishes the sole access to residential lots, the remaining half shall be platted within the tract. Where the half street has had no improvement or construction, the subdivision committee may recommend that the subdivider provide a full right-of-way to serve his development. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-33. Street design.
Street design shall be in based upon the classification of the street and shall be in conformance with adopted city standards. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-34. Block design.
(a) The desirable maximum length of block measured along the center line of the street and between intersecting street center lines shall be nine hundred (900) feet; except that in developments with lot areas averaging one-half (1/2) acre or more, or where extreme topographic conditions warrant, the maximum may be exceeded by four hundred twenty (420) feet.

(b) Maximum length of cul-de-sac streets shall be six hundred sixty (660) feet measured from the intersection of right-of-way lines to the extreme depth of the turning circle along the street center line. An exception may be made where topography or property ownership justifies, but shall not be made merely because the tract has restrictive boundary dimensions, wherein provision should be made for extension of street pattern to the adjoining unplatted parcel and a temporary turnaround installed.

(c) Bicycle and pedestrian ways. Bicycle and pedestrian ways with a right-of-way width as recommended by the city engineer may be required by the commission for circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities. Pedestrian ways may be used for utility installation purposes. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-35. Lot planning.
(a)(1) Lot width, depth, and area shall comply with the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance and shall be appropriate for the location and character of development proposed, and for the type and extent of street and utility improvements being installed. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines, except where other treatment may be justified in the opinion of the subdivision committee.

(2) Where steep topography, unusual soil conditions, or drainage problems exist or prevail, the commission may recommend special lot width, depth, and area requirements of the particular zoning district.

(b) Proposed streets shall be arranged in close relation to existing topography and shall conform to adopted city standards. Where steep topography prevails, the design shall conform to the findings of any special study required by the city engineer.

(c) Single-family residential lots extending through the block and having frontage on two (2) parallel streets shall not be permitted; reverse frontage shall be prohibited except where expressly permitted in accordance with section 32-32(f) of this chapter or where justified in the opinion of the subdivision committee. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-36. Easement planning.
Easements shall be provided for all utilities and shall be in conformance with the standards of the utility providing service.

(1) Easements for utilities shall be provided as follows:

a. Where alleys are provided: Four (4) feet for aerial overhead on each side of alley shall be provided by dedication but need not be delineated on plat.

b. Along side lot lines: Five (5) feet on each side of lot lines for distribution facilities and one foot on each side of lot lines for street lighting as may be designated.

(2) For lots facing on curvilinear streets, utility easements or alley may consist of a series of straight lines with points of deflection not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet apart. Points of deflection should always occur at the junction of side and rear lot lines on the side of the exterior angle. Curvilinear easements or alleys may be provided, providing that the minimum radius for the alley or easement shall not be less than eight hundred (800) feet.

(3) Where a stream or surface water drainage course abuts or crosses the tract, dedication of a public drainage easement of a width sufficient to permit widening, deepening, relocating, or protecting said watercourse shall be required.

(4) Land within a public street or drainage easement or land within a utility easement for major power transmission (tower) lines or pipelines shall not be considered a part of the minimum lot area except where lots exceed one-half (1/2) acre in area. This shall not be construed as applicable to land involved in utility easements for distribution of service purposes. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-37. Street naming.
Subdivider shall propose the street names, subject to approval by the city council, at the preliminary plat stage. Street names shall conform to section 31-85 of this code. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97; Ord. No. 4570, § 1, 11-14-11)

ARTICLE X. STREET AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 32-38. Purpose.
The purpose of the article is to establish in outline the minimum acceptable standards for improvement of public streets and utilities, to define the responsibility of the subdivider in the planning, construction, and financing of public improvements, and to establish procedures for review and approval of construction plans. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-39. Developer’s responsibility.
All improvements required as a condition of preliminary plat approval shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-40. Construction plans and specifications.
(a) The subdivider shall submit to the city engineer construction plans and specifications pursuant to the approved preliminary plat as required by Articles X and XI for his approval. Said construction plans shall be prepared by an engineer licensed to practice in the state of Idaho.

(b) In the event the subdivider wishes to file the final plat prior to the construction of public improvements, the subdivider shall enter into a public improvement agreement with the city for the construction of the public improvements. The council’s approval of the public improvement agreement shall constitute approval of the construction plans and specifications.

(c) In the event the subdivider wishes to complete the public improvements prior to submitting the final plat for approval, the subdivider shall submit the necessary construction plans and specifications to the city engineer for review and approval prior to commencing any construction. Upon completion of said public improvements in conformance with the approved plans, the subdivider shall submit the “as built drawings” of the improvements along with the final plat map for review and action by the city. In this case, no public improvement agreement is necessary save for certification that the subdivider shall provide the city with evidence of compliance with the one year warranty period as required in section 32-42, Warranty of Improvements. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-41. As built drawings.
Upon completion of the construction and prior to the acceptance by the city of the required public improvements, the developer shall submit to the city engineer a set of “as built drawings” which accurately depict the grade, alignment size and other pertinent features of the installation as actually constructed. Said “as built drawings” shall be stamped by an engineer licensed to practice in the state of Idaho who shall certify that the drawings accurately depict the installation as actually constructed. The city of Lewiston shall not accept the improvements for public maintenance or ownership without said “as built drawings.” (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-42. Warranty of improvements.
Upon completion of the required public improvements and prior to the acceptance of said improvements by the city, the developer shall provide to the city as written warranty that the improvements shall perform as designed for a period of one (1) year. Any flaw or defect found or encountered within the year warranty period shall be the financial responsibility of the developer who shall promptly repair said flaw or defect to the satisfaction of the city and shall provide an additional warranty period for the repair as specified by the city engineer, said additional warranty period not to exceed one (1) year in duration. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-43. Grading and erosion control during construction.
Construction grading and erosion control during construction shall conform to city standards as prepared by the city engineer and adopted by the city council. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-44. Construction and inspection.
(a) Prior to the construction or installation of any required public improvements for water supply or sewerage systems, for any site grading, construction of storm water detention systems or parking areas, the developer shall apply for and receive the appropriate permits from the city of Lewiston for said improvements.

(b) All relocation, tiling, and reconstruction of irrigation facilities shall be constructed to standards of the owning utility and the city engineer.

(c) All improvements in the public right-of-way shall be constructed under the inspection and approval of the city department having jurisdiction.

(d) All underground utilities to be installed in streets shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such streets. Service stubs to platted lots within the subdivision shall be placed to such length as not to necessitate disturbance of street improvements when service connections are made. If connected to a city-owned system, application and fee shall be the responsibility of the subdivider in accord with city requirements. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-45. Required improvements.
The subdivider shall design and construct all improvements in conformance with adopted city standards and codes. Should unique conditions exist such that these standards cannot reasonably be met, the subdivider may petition the council for amendments to the specific standard. Said request for amendment shall be accompanied by an engineering report which identifies the standard proposed and the reasons justifying such request.

The subdivider is responsible for the design and installation of the following improvements:

(a) Streets and alleys. All streets and alleys within the subdivision shall be graded and surfaced to cross-sections, grades and standards approved by the city engineer. Where there are existing streets adjacent to the subdivision, subdivision streets shall be improved, and, if necessary, feathered to the center of such existing streets. Dead-end streets serving more than four (4) lots shall be provided a graded and surfaced temporary turning circle.

A traffic report may be required to document the traffic impacts of the subdivision; the subdivider shall be responsible for the installation of both off-site and on-site improvements recommended in the traffic report.

(b) Curbs. Portland cement concrete curb and gutter or roll curb, as designated by the city engineer, shall be installed in accordance with approved city standards.

(c) Sidewalks. Portland cement concrete sidewalks shall be required on all streets in all zones. They shall be constructed to a width, line, and grade approved by the city engineer in accordance with approved city standards. Where unique topographical characteristics exist and the installation of sidewalks is not practical, the commission may recommend that certain portions of sidewalks within the subdivision be waived.

(d) Pedestrian and bicycle ways. Pedestrian and bicycle ways shall be constructed to a line and grade approved by the city engineer. Paving, fencing, and/or landscaping may be required by the commission as recommended by the subdivision committee. Appropriate means shall be provided to prevent the use of the pedestrian ways as thoroughfares for bicycles and motorcycles.

(e) Storm drainage. Proper and adequate provision shall be made for disposal of storm waters; this shall apply equally to grading of private properties and to public streets. Existing watercourses shall be maintained and dedicated as drainage ways. The type, extents, location, and capacity of drainage facilities shall be determined for the individual subdivision by the engineer for approval by the city engineer and shall be constructed in accordance with approved city standards.

(f) Sanitary sewage disposal. Sewage disposal facilities shall be installed to serve each lot and shall be subject to the following standards and approvals:

(1) Individual systems may be constructed only in areas not reasonably accessible to a public sewer system, and then, only when the following conditions are met, to the satisfaction of the state department of health and welfare and subject to the approval of the public works administrator:

a. Soil absorptivity is adequate for drainfields.

b. Construction complies with approved standards for sewerage systems.

c. Location of septic tanks and seepage pits or leach lines or disposal beds in relation to property lines, buildings, water supply wells and water lines are acceptable to the department. Location shall be such that efficient and economical connection can be made to a future public sewer.

d. Lots of one (1) acre and larger.

(2) Public sanitary sewers shall be installed in areas which are reasonably accessible to an existing sewer system and shall be constructed to plans, profiles, and specifications approved by the state department of health and welfare and city departments having jurisdiction.

(3) In areas where public sanitary sewers are not reasonably accessible, but where the city, or independent sewer district having jurisdiction, agrees to provide temporary disposal of sewage, or where an engineering design for a sewer system for the area in which the subdivision is located has been adopted by the city, the subdivider shall plan and construct sewers within and for the subdivision for connection with a future public system.

(g) Water supply. Each lot shall be supplied with potable water in sufficient volume and pressure for domestic use and adequate water, in pressure and volume, for fire protection, in accordance with city standards.

(h) Monuments. Permanent monuments shall be installed in accordance with current city standards at all corners, angle points, points of curve, and at all intersections. After all improvements have been installed, an Idaho registered land surveyor shall check the location of monuments and certify their accuracy and conformance to Idaho Code, Section 50-1303.

(i) Lot corners. Iron pipe or pins shall be set at all corners, angle points, and points of curve for each lot within the subdivision prior to the recording of the plat in conformance with Idaho Code, Section 50-1303.

(j) Utilities.

(1) The subdivider shall be responsible for the requirements of this section and shall make the necessary arrangements with each of the serving utility companies involved for the installation of underground utilities. Letters from each of the serving utility companies indicating that such arrangements have been made shall be submitted to the city engineer at the time the final plat is submitted for approval.

(2) New utility lines, including, but not limited to, electric, communication, and television transmission lines, shall be installed underground in accordance with the standards of the current edition of the National Electric Safety Code. When facilities are installed in the public right-of-way, the location shall be approved by the city engineer.

(3) When overhead utility lines exist within the property being platted, said existing lines shall be removed and replaced by new underground installations.

(4) When overhead utility lines exist on the periphery of the property being platted, said existing lines and any additions or improvements needed to increase capacity or improve service reliability may remain overhead. New service drops from said overhead lines into the platted area shall be placed underground.

(5) When, as a result of the subdivision development, it is necessary to relocate, renew, or expand existing facilities within the platted area, the subdivider shall arrange with the serving utility for the installations to be placed underground.

(6) The subdivider shall arrange with the serving utility for, and be responsible for the cost of, underground service lines to approved street light locations a specified in subsection (k) of this section.

(7) When, due to subsurface soil conditions, rock, and/or other special conditions, it is determined by the city engineer that it is impractical to construct facilities underground, the planning and zoning commission may recommend approval of the overhead installation of facilities.

(8) Those electrical transmission lines of greater than three thousand (3,000) kva (kilovolt-amperes), as rated by the American Standards Association, are excluded from the requirements of this section.

(k) Street lights.

(1) In all subdivisions or commercial or industrial developments, street lights and their required electrical service lines shall be installed as directed by the public works administrator. The street light type, size and locations shall be indicated on the approved construction plans and specifications. All fixtures, poles, conduit and other facilities shall meet the specifications and standards of the utility providing service.

(2) If required, the developer will reimburse the city for all installation costs and monthly street light service fees in accordance with the current utility provider fee schedule and the subdivision improvement agreement, until such time as the subdivision or development is approved and accepted by the city council.

(3) Once the subdivision or development has been approved and accepted by the city council, the monthly street light service cost will be borne by the city. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-46. Review fee and approval of construction plans.
A fee for review of the construction plans shall be paid to the city prior to the time review of the plans is conducted by city personnel. The review fee shall be in the amount set forth in section 32-7 of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

ARTICLE XI. GUARANTEE OF CONSTRUCTION
Sec. 32-47. Public improvement agreement.
(a) Agreement between city and subdivider. Prior to the approval by the city council of the final plat, the subdivider shall execute an agreement between himself and the city which shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney and shall address the following points:

(1) Planned increments of improvements: The subdivision improvements may be constructed in practical increments of lots, as specified by the subdivider, subject to provisions for satisfactory drainage, traffic movements, and other services as determined by the city engineer.

(2) Planned construction schedule: The improvements, including those specified in section 32-45(j) of this chapter, shall be completed within an agreed upon time period for each increment, provided that an extension of time may be granted under such conditions as may be specified in the agreement.

(3) Adherence to approved plans and city construction standards: The improvements, except for those specified in section 32-45(j) of this chapter, shall be completed in accordance with the plans approved by the city engineer.

(4) Abandoned or uncompleted improvements: Any work abandoned or not completed by the subdivider may be completed by the city, and the city shall recover the costs thereof from the subdivider or his surety.

(5) Inspection of completed work: Construction of all improvements within streets and easements, except those utility facilities specified in section 32-45(j) of this chapter, shall be subject to inspection by the city engineer. A fee may be charged for this inspection. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-48. Financial guarantee of construction.
(a) To reasonably insure construction of the required improvements, as set forth in Chapter 32, Article IX of this code, except for those utility facilities specified in section 32-45(j) of this chapter, the subdivider shall post with the city prior to the recording of the final plat, one or a combination of the following, which shall be subject to review and approval of the city attorney:

(1) A performance and completion bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state of Idaho;

(2) Cash; or

(3) An appropriate agreement between the applicable title insurance and trust company or a city-approved financial institution and the city of Lewiston committing the amount referred to in subsection (b) of this section for installing said improvements.

(b) For each subdivision increment, the total amount posted by methods (1), (2), and/or (3) above shall be equal to one hundred thirty-five (135) percent of the entire estimated costs of installing the said improvements, the engineering and inspection costs for that increment, and the cost of replacement or repair of any existing streets or improvements damaged by the subdivider in the course or development of the subdivision, except for those utility facilities specified in section 32-45(j) of this chapter. All public improvements for which a financial security has been provided pursuant to this section shall be constructed within one (1) year after the city council approval of the subdivision improvement agreement. In the event the improvements are not constructed by the subdivider within one (1) year as herein provided, the city shall have the authority to execute on the financial security to construct the public improvements.

(c) There shall be no lots released for sale from the indicated increment of lots until either the bond, cash, or agreement referred to above has been posted with and accepted by the city clerk and a written statement issued by the city clerk to the title company within five (5) working days of receiving the agreement that the requirements of subsection (b) of this section have been met.

(1) No construction of residential units shall be permitted until all required public improvements have been accepted by the city and/or other serving utility and the approved plat has been filed by the city in the courthouse. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97; Ord. No. 4518, § 1, 11-24-08)

ARTICLE XII. MODIFICATION
Sec. 32-49. Modifications generally.
(a) Where there exist extraordinary conditions of topography, land ownership, adjacent development, or other circumstances not provided for in these regulations, and where it can be shown that the public interest would be best served by such action, the council may modify the application of these regulations in a particular case in such a manner and to such an extent as it may deem appropriate for public health, welfare, or safety.

(b) When modification of these regulations, as provided for in subsection (a), is considered necessary, the subdivider or the subdivision committee shall make application to the planning and zoning commission specifying the desired modifications and the reasons therefor. The commission shall consider the application and justification and make a recommendation thereon to the council, who may approve, approve in part, or disapprove the request.

(c) In modifying the standards or requirements of these provisions as outlined above, the council may make such additional requirements as appear necessary, in its judgment, to secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

ARTICLE XIII. PROHIBITION AGAINST CIRCUMVENTION OF CHAPTER
Sec. 32-50. Prohibition against circumvention of chapter generally.
No person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity shall, for the purpose of circumventing any of the provisions of this chapter, hereafter sell, or offer for sale any lot, piece, or parcel of land which is within a subdivision as defined in section 32-4 of this chapter without having first recorded a plat thereof in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

ARTICLE XIV. VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES, AND REMEDIES
Sec. 32-51. Violations, penalties and remedies generally.
(a) Any person or any member or officer of any firm, corporation, or other legal entity who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, may be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of these regulations.

(b) The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. In addition to any other remedy, either criminal or civil, provided by this chapter or by the laws of the state of Idaho, any condition existing in violation of any provision of this chapter may be abated by action in law or equity before any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

ARTICLE XV. VALIDITY OF THE CHAPTER
Sec. 32-52. Validity of the chapter.
Severability. If any provision of this chapter is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provision which can be given effect without the invalid provision, and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

Sec. 32-53. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage, approval, and publication. (Ord. No. 4177, § 1, 2-10-97)

1
Editor’s note – Ord. 4177, § 1, adopted 2-10-97, extensively renumbered this chapter. As a result, the following ordinances are still codified in this chapter but have been removed from the history notes: Ord. No. 3430, §§ 100 – 900, adopted Mar. 20, 1978; Ord. No. 3472, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 6, 1978; Ord. No. 3474, §§ 1 – 5, adopted Nov. 6, 1978; Ord. No. 3555, § 1, adopted Dec. 8, 1980; Ord. No. 3736, § 1, adopted May 7, 1984; Ord. No. 3745, §§ 1– 12, adopted Feb. 19, 1985; Ord. No. 3772, § 1, adopted May 20, 1985; Ord. No. 3785, §§ 1 – 3, adopted July 15, 1985; Ord. No. 3980, § 1, adopted Sept. 10, 1990; Ord. No. 4057, §§ 1 – 4, adopted Dec. 7, 1992; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, adopted Apr. 19, 1993; and Ord. No. 4132, § 1, adopted June 26, 1995.

Cross references – Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 10; electricity, Ch. 14; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 15; flood insurance, Ch. 16; garbage, rubbish and weeds, Ch. 17; gas, Ch. 18; manufactured homes and tourist facilities, Ch. 23; oil burning equipment, Ch. 25; parks and recreation, Ch. 26; plumbing, Ch. 27; poles and wires, Ch. 28; signs, Ch. 30; public right-of-way, Ch. 31; swimming pools, Ch. 33; traffic, Ch. 35; water and sewers, Ch. 36; zoning, Ch. 37.

State law reference – Plats and vacations, Idaho Code, § 50-1301 et seq.


Chapter 33
SWIMMING POOLS1
1
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4557, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, repealed Ch. 33, swimming pools, in its entirety. Former § 33-1 derived from Code 1960, § 32A-1, as amended by Ord. No. 3090, §§ 1 – 6, adopted June 5, 1972, Ord. No. 3573, § 1, adopted May 26, 1981, and Ord. No. 4024, § 3, adopted Jan. 6, 1992.


Chapter 34
TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE1
Sec. 34-1. Definitions.
When used in this chapter the following words shall have the meaning indicated:

Taxicab or vehicle for hire shall mean any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of not more than seven (7) people, but shall not include any vehicle operated by a transportation network company (TNC) driver to provide TNC services, as set forth in Idaho Code Section 49-3703.

State operator’s license shall mean the class of operator’s license required by the state of Idaho for the operation of a motor vehicle used as a taxicab or vehicle for hire. (Ord. No. 4273, § 2, 9-25-00; Ord. No. 4652, § 1, 2-8-16)

Sec. 34-2. Business license, application fee, required.
(a) It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in section 34-10 of this code for any person to conduct, operate or maintain, or permit to be conducted, operated or maintained, or to participate in the conduct or operation of a taxicab or vehicle for hire within the city unless a valid business license therefor has been issued as herein provided and which is in full force and effect.

(b) Application for such business license shall be made to the city of Lewiston community development department, business licensing division. A fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city council during the annual budgetary process shall be assessed for each application. The application shall include the name and address of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names and addresses of each partner, and if a corporation or association, the name and address of the operating manager; a list of vehicles to be operated as taxicabs or vehicles for hire, a telephone number, such other information that may be required and shall be on a form and in a manner as may be prescribed by the business licensing division. To determine the suitability of prospective applicants for taxicab drivers or drivers of vehicles for hire, the business licensing office shall require an applicant to provide information and fingerprints necessary to obtain criminal history information from the Idaho State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Pursuant to the authority of Idaho Code, Section 67-3008, and congressional enactment Public Law 92-544, the city shall submit the applicant’s personal information, fingerprints and required fees to appropriate state and federal agencies, including the Federal Bureau of Investigation, if applicable, for a criminal records check of state and national databases. The submission of fingerprints and information required by this section shall be on forms prescribed by the Idaho State Police. The business licensing office is authorized to receive criminal history information from the Idaho State Police and from the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of applicants for taxicab drivers or drivers of vehicles for hire. As required by state and federal law, further dissemination or other use of the criminal history information is prohibited.

(c) No person shall be issued a license to own, lease or maintain a taxicab business if such person:

(1) Is under the age of eighteen (18) years;

(2) Is not the bona fide owner or lessee of vehicles to be used as taxicabs or vehicles for hire;

(3) Has a conviction for any felony involving a crime of a violent or sexual nature. (Ord. No. 4273, § 2, 9-25-00; Ord. No. 4302, § 4, 4-22-02; Ord. No. 4330, § 3, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 4339, § 4, 9-22-03)

Sec. 34-3. State operator’s license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or have charge of a taxicab unless a valid state operator’s license is held by the operator of the taxicab. (Ord. No. 4273, § 2, 9-25-00)

Sec. 34-4. Display of operator’s license required.
Every operator of a vehicle licensed under the provisions of chapter shall display the appropriate state of Idaho operator’s license for taxicabs and vehicles for hire at all time when driving said vehicle and shall affix the license in a conspicuous place where it shall be in full view of the passengers of the vehicle. (Ord. No. 4273, § 2, 9-25-00)

Sec. 34-5. Insurance.
(a) Each taxicab operating within the city shall be insured under a motor vehicle liability insurance policy, issued by an insurance carrier licensed to do business in the state of Idaho, which provided minimum coverage in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00).

(b) Every taxicab licensee shall tender to the business licensing division a certificate of insurance for each vehicle being operated as a taxicab and certifying the insurance as provided above. Said certificate of insurance shall name the insured and shall name the city of Lewiston as an additional insured. The failure of any licensee to tender such certificate to the city or to fail to keep said certificate in effect shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of the taxicab license.

(c) Every taxicab licensee shall immediately notify the business licensing division and cease all operations if and when the licensee’s liability insurance is cancelled, suspended or terminated. (Ord. No. 4273, § 2, 9-25-00)

Sec. 34-6. Vehicle inspection, display.
(a) No taxicab shall be offered for service to the public until such vehicle has been inspected by the city of Lewiston fleet maintenance division or other licensed automotive repair facility and is found to be in acceptable condition. A request for inspection shall be issued to the applicant by the business licensing division and presented to the fleet maintenance division supervisor or private automotive repair facility at the time of the inspection.

(b) The person making the vehicle inspection shall certify:

(1) That all mechanical systems are functioning according to manufacturer’s standards and all federal and state laws;

(2) The exterior is clean and well maintained;

(3) The interior is clean, free of litter; seats and upholstery are clean and free of holes, tears and stains; floorboards are complete and without holes;

(4) Compliance with identification and designated color scheme as provided in section 34-7 of this code;

(5) That there is no condition which would place users of the taxicab or the general public at risk.

(c) After the inspection and if the vehicle is in compliance with the standards set forth above, the vehicle will receive a certificate of inspection compliance. Said certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the vehicle.

(d) Inspections required hereunder shall be performed prior to issuance of a taxicab license and shall be repeated semiannually thereafter.

(e) The fleet maintenance division shall assess an inspection fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city council during the annual budgetary process for each inspection performed hereunder. If an inspection results in the need for a reinspection of a vehicle, a reinspection fee shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city council during the annual budgetary process for each reinspection performed hereunder. All fees shall be paid prior to the inspection. (Ord. No. 4273, § 2, 9-25-00; Ord. No. 4339, § 4, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 4375, § 1, 11-22-04)

Sec. 34-7. Common scheme, name and number.
Each licensed taxicab operator shall provide taxicabs with a designated color scheme, uniformly painted. The designated scheme shall not conflict with or imitate any color scheme, monogram, name or insignia used by another taxicab company. The body of each taxicab shall have, either painted upon or permanently affixed, the trade name and car number of the taxicab. All lettering shall not be less than two (2) inches in height. Each vehicle shall have the word “TAXI” painted in three (3) inch letters on the doors and truck of each vehicle. Magnetic, removable signs shall not be allowed. An overhead, roof-mounted, illuminated “TAXI” sign is required for each vehicle. If any of the identification markings, including the common color scheme is damaged, the same shall be restored within fourteen (14) days. (Ord. No. 4273, § 2, 9-25-00)

Sec. 34-8. Vehicles licensed in other jurisdictions.
Taxicabs licensed in jurisdictions other than the city of Lewiston may transport passengers from outside the city to a destination inside the city. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any such taxicab to seek or accept passengers within the city. (Ord. No. 4273, § 2, 9-25-00)

Sec. 34-9. Revocation.
Any license or certificate issued hereunder may be revoked, after proper notice to the license or certificate holder for:

(a) A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;

(b) Operating or permitting the operation of a taxicab without a valid state of Idaho operator’s license. (Ord. No. 4273, § 2, 9-25-00)

Sec. 34-10. Penalty.
Every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a civil infraction and be fined up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day. (Ord. No. 4273, § 2, 9-25-00)

1
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4002, § 1, adopted June 6, 1991, repealed Ch. 34, pertaining to taxicabs and other vehicles for hire, substantive sections being 34-1, 34-16 – 34-38, 34-43 – 34-51, 34-57 – 34-67, 34-73 – 34-76, 34-87 – 34-93, 34-99 – 34-107, and 34-112 – 34-115, as derived from the 1960 Code §§ 33-1, 33-9.2, 33-9.4 – 33-9.35, 33-9.38 – 33-9.54, 33-10 – 33-12, and 33-15 – 33-22 as well as the following:

Ord.

No.    Date    Section

2478         1 – 12, 14 – 32    

3178    10-29-73    1, 2    

3332    10-18-76    1

3471    11-20-78    1

3717    12-5-83    1

3808    2-24-86    1

3889    12-7-87    43 – 46, 48, 49, 51 – 53

Sections 2 – 13 enacted new provisions dealing with taxicabs and vehicles for hire, designated as §§ 34-1 – 34-12. Section 14, effective date, has been omitted from codification.

Ord. No. 4273, § 1, adopted Sept. 25, 2000, repealed §§ 34-1 – 34-12 established by Ord. No. 4002 above.

Cross reference – Traffic, Ch. 35.


Chapter 35
TRAFFIC1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 35-01 – 35-31

Art. II.    Speed Regulations, §§ 35-32 – 35-44

Art. III.    Traffic Control Devices, §§ 35-45 – 35-64

Art. IV.    Stopping, Standing and Parking, §§ 35-65 – 35-98

Div. 1.    Definitions, § 35-65

Div. 2.    General Parking Regulations, §§ 35-66 – 35-71.1

Div. 3.    Commercial and Truck and Bus Parking, §§ 35-72 – 35-75

Div. 4.    Miscellaneous Parking Restrictions, §§ 35-76 – 35-79

Div. 5.    Penalties and Procedures, §§ 35-80 – 35-98

Art. V.    Truck Routes, §§ 35-99 – 35-110

Art. VI.    Reserved, §§ 35-111 – 35-131

Art. VII.    Bicycles, Motor Bicycles, Motor Scooters, Skateboards, Roller Skates, Go-Carts and Scooters, §§ 35-132 – 35-166

Div. 1.    Generally, §§ 35-132 – 35-147

Div. 2.    Reserved, §§ 35-148 – 35-166

Art. VIII.    Pedestrians, §§ 35-167 – 35-174

Art. IX.    Special Events, §§ 35-175 – 35-185

ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 35-01. Idaho Motor Vehicle Laws, Rules of the Road, Chapters 6, 7, and 8, Title 49, Idaho Code, adopted by reference; filing; conflicts; severability; effective date.
(a) Chapters 6, 7, and 8 of Title 49 of the Idaho Code relating to the operation of motor vehicles, are hereby adopted by reference as part of the traffic ordinance of the city as authorized by Idaho Code, Sections 49-208 and 50-901.

(b) Not less than three (3) copies of the Idaho Motor Vehicle Laws, Rules of the Road, being Chapters 6, 7, and 8 , Title 49, Idaho Code, shall be filed at the office of the city clerk and shall be available for inspection by the public during normal business hours, all as provided by Idaho Code, Section 50-901.

(c) All ordinances of the city which conflict with the provisions of Chapters 6, 7, and 8 , Title 49, Idaho Code, as adopted by reference hereunder, be, and the same are hereby, to the extent of such conflict, repealed.

(d) All other ordinances of the city, contained in Chapter 35, Lewiston City Code, 1974, except to the extent that they conflict with the provisions of Chapters 6, 7, and 8 , Title 49, Idaho Code, and with the provisions of this section, be, and the same are hereby, reenacted, ratified, and confirmed in all respects.

(e) Should any sentence, clause, paragraph, or section of this section be declared, by any court of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid for any reason, then it is the intent of the Lewiston city council that said partial invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this section.

(f) This section shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage, approval, and publication. (Ord. No. 3392, §§ 1 – 6, 8-29-77; Ord. No. 3588, § 1, 8-17-81; Ord. No. 4003, § 2, 2-3-92)

Editor’s note – Section 35-01 is derived from Ord. No. 3392, §§ 1 – 6, which ordinance was nonamendatory of this code.

Sec. 35-1. Applicability of chapter.
(a) Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving an animal or operating any nature of conveyance or drawing any vehicle upon the streets of the city shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter relating to the operation of vehicles and applicable to the operator of the vehicle except those provisions hereof which, by their nature, can have no application.

(b) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply in the following cases:

(1) To any authorized emergency vehicle properly equipped as required by law and actually responding to an emergency call or in immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, within the purpose for which such emergency vehicle has been authorized; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not relieve the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle of the duty to operate with due regard for the safety of all persons using the public highway, nor shall it protect the operator of any such emergency vehicle from the consequence of a reckless disregard for the safety of others; and provided further, that the provisions of this section shall in no event extend any special privilege or immunity in operation of any authorized emergency vehicle for any purpose other than that for which the same has been authorized.

(2) To any person, vehicle or other equipment while actually engaged in authorized work upon the surface of a public highway insofar as suspension of the provisions of this chapter are reasonably necessary for the carrying on of such work; provided, that reasonable precautions are taken to apprise and protect the users of such public highway, but such provisions shall not apply to such persons, vehicles and other equipment when traveling to and from such work.

(3) To any persons, vehicles or otherwise, insofar as the same may be specifically exempted from any provisions of this chapter. (Code 1960, § 19-1)

Sec. 35-2. Compliance with state laws.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon the streets of the city without first having complied with the laws of the state governing the licensing and driving of motor vehicles. (Code 1960, § 19-3)

Sec. 35-3. Regulation of traffic by police.
Officers of the police department are hereby authorized and empowered to direct, control, restrict and regulate, in the interest of public safety and convenience, the movement of pedestrians, vehicles and traffic of every kind within the city and may, when necessary, divert or exclude all such traffic on any street or highway within the city. (Code 1960, § 19-4)

Sec. 35-4. Obedience to police.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer. (Code 1960, § 19-4)

Sec. 35-5. Avoiding intersections prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person driving a motor vehicle to drive said vehicle across or through a private corner lot for the sole purpose of avoiding a traffic control device at an adjacent intersection. (Ord. No. 4003, § 13, 2-3-92)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4003, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, repealed § 35-5, eluding, fleeing from police. Former § 35-5 derived from the 1960 Code, § 19-5.1, and Ord. No. 3041, § 1, adopted July 26, 1971.

Sec. 35-6. Obedience to barriers, warning signals and flagmen.
No person shall disregard warning signals or barriers lawfully placed in any street or the warning signal of a flagman stationed near any railroad crossing or other dangerous place or where authorized workmen are employed upon the streets. (Code 1960, § 19-6)

Sec. 35-7. Effect of missing or illegible signs.
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. (Code 1960, § 19-7)

Sec. 35-8. Driving over sidewalks.
No vehicle shall be ridden or driven on any sidewalk, except over a permanent driveway therefor, constructed for such purpose; provided, that on written application, stating the place and purpose of a proposed temporary crossing, the director of public works may issue a permit for a temporary crossing for a period of time to be stated in such permit. For such temporary crossing, the sidewalk, edge and curb thereof shall be protected by planks and timbers of sufficient thickness and length as will prevent any injury thereto. Such planks and timbers shall be promptly removed as soon as such temporary crossing is not in actual use. (Code 1960, § 19-27)

Sec. 35-9. Riding on rear of vehicles.
No person shall ride upon the rear of any vehicle without the consent of the driver and, when so riding, no part of his body shall protrude beyond the limits of such vehicle. (Code 1960, § 19-28)

Sec. 35-10. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4003, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, repealed § 35-10, quiet zones. Former § 35-10 derived from the 1960 Code, § 19-31.

Chapter 35
TRAFFIC1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 35-01 – 35-31

Art. II.    Speed Regulations, §§ 35-32 – 35-44

Art. III.    Traffic Control Devices, §§ 35-45 – 35-64

Art. IV.    Stopping, Standing and Parking, §§ 35-65 – 35-98

Div. 1.    Definitions, § 35-65

Div. 2.    General Parking Regulations, §§ 35-66 – 35-71.1

Div. 3.    Commercial and Truck and Bus Parking, §§ 35-72 – 35-75

Div. 4.    Miscellaneous Parking Restrictions, §§ 35-76 – 35-79

Div. 5.    Penalties and Procedures, §§ 35-80 – 35-98

Art. V.    Truck Routes, §§ 35-99 – 35-110

Art. VI.    Reserved, §§ 35-111 – 35-131

Art. VII.    Bicycles, Motor Bicycles, Motor Scooters, Skateboards, Roller Skates, Go-Carts and Scooters, §§ 35-132 – 35-166

Div. 1.    Generally, §§ 35-132 – 35-147

Div. 2.    Reserved, §§ 35-148 – 35-166

Art. VIII.    Pedestrians, §§ 35-167 – 35-174

Art. IX.    Special Events, §§ 35-175 – 35-185

Sec. 35-11. Duties upon death or injury to a dog or other animal.
The operator of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to a dog or other animal shall immediately stop the vehicle at or as near to the scene of the accident as possible, return thereto, give to the owner or other competent person having custody of the animal the name and address of the operator of the vehicle and the registration number of the vehicle involved in the accident and shall further make report of such accident as is in the case of other accidents upon the public highways. If the owner or such competent person having custody of the animal is not present at the scene of the accident, the operator of such vehicle shall take reasonable steps to locate the owner or custodian of such animal and supply the information hereinabove required to be given. If the animal is injured to the extent that it requires immediate medical attention and there is no owner or custodian present to look after it, the operator of such vehicle shall immediately call the police department of the city and report the situation fully to that department. (Code 1960, § 19-35)

Sec. 35-12. Glass or debris from wrecked vehicle to be removed from highway.
When there has been any accident or any wrecked or damaged vehicle is removed from the roadway of a public highway, any glass, debris or other injurious substance dropped from such vehicle shall be removed from the roadway by the operators involved unless they are incapacitated. (Code 1960, § 19-36)

Secs. 35-13 – 35-16. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4003, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, repealed §§ 35-13 – 35-16. The aforesaid sections were concerned with general traffic regulations and derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 19-42, 19-44, 19-47 and 19-48.

Chapter 35
TRAFFIC1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 35-01 – 35-31

Art. II.    Speed Regulations, §§ 35-32 – 35-44

Art. III.    Traffic Control Devices, §§ 35-45 – 35-64

Art. IV.    Stopping, Standing and Parking, §§ 35-65 – 35-98

Div. 1.    Definitions, § 35-65

Div. 2.    General Parking Regulations, §§ 35-66 – 35-71.1

Div. 3.    Commercial and Truck and Bus Parking, §§ 35-72 – 35-75

Div. 4.    Miscellaneous Parking Restrictions, §§ 35-76 – 35-79

Div. 5.    Penalties and Procedures, §§ 35-80 – 35-98

Art. V.    Truck Routes, §§ 35-99 – 35-110

Art. VI.    Reserved, §§ 35-111 – 35-131

Art. VII.    Bicycles, Motor Bicycles, Motor Scooters, Skateboards, Roller Skates, Go-Carts and Scooters, §§ 35-132 – 35-166

Div. 1.    Generally, §§ 35-132 – 35-147

Div. 2.    Reserved, §§ 35-148 – 35-166

Art. VIII.    Pedestrians, §§ 35-167 – 35-174

Art. IX.    Special Events, §§ 35-175 – 35-185

Sec. 35-17. One-way streets – Authority of director of public works.
(a) The director of public works is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof.

(b) The director of public works may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the roadway.

(c) No person shall operate any vehicle in violation of such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance with this section. (Code 1960, § 19-49; Ord. No. 2125, § 1)

Sec. 35-18. Same – Obedience to signs; schedule.
Upon those streets, parts of streets and alleys described in Schedule I, which is on file in the office of the clerk, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Code 1960, § 19-50; Ord. No. 2125, § 1)

Sec. 35-19. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4003, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, repealed § 35-19, load limits. Former § 35-19 derived from the 1960 Code, § 19-51.

Chapter 35
TRAFFIC1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 35-01 – 35-31

Art. II.    Speed Regulations, §§ 35-32 – 35-44

Art. III.    Traffic Control Devices, §§ 35-45 – 35-64

Art. IV.    Stopping, Standing and Parking, §§ 35-65 – 35-98

Div. 1.    Definitions, § 35-65

Div. 2.    General Parking Regulations, §§ 35-66 – 35-71.1

Div. 3.    Commercial and Truck and Bus Parking, §§ 35-72 – 35-75

Div. 4.    Miscellaneous Parking Restrictions, §§ 35-76 – 35-79

Div. 5.    Penalties and Procedures, §§ 35-80 – 35-98

Art. V.    Truck Routes, §§ 35-99 – 35-110

Art. VI.    Reserved, §§ 35-111 – 35-131

Art. VII.    Bicycles, Motor Bicycles, Motor Scooters, Skateboards, Roller Skates, Go-Carts and Scooters, §§ 35-132 – 35-166

Div. 1.    Generally, §§ 35-132 – 35-147

Div. 2.    Reserved, §§ 35-148 – 35-166

Art. VIII.    Pedestrians, §§ 35-167 – 35-174

Art. IX.    Special Events, §§ 35-175 – 35-185

Sec. 35-20. Operation of heavy vehicles, etc., on paved streets.
No person shall run or cause to be run any traction engine, road roller or roadmaking machine or other heavy vehicle of a similar character upon, along or across any paved street or bridge in the city without first having removed from the wheels thereof any and all ice or mud lugs and any and all blunt, sharp or pointed lugs of any description whatsoever, which may be fixed or attached to such wheels. If impossible to remove such lugs, it shall be the duty of the person running or operating such vehicle to place or cause to be placed along or beneath the wheels thereof, when crossing any pavement in the city, planks of at least three (3) inches in thickness, sufficient in width and length to protect the pavement and prevent injury thereto. Any person who shall run any such vehicle, as above described, over, upon or across any paved street, except in the manner herein provided, shall be liable to the city for all damages which may result to paving by reason thereof, which damage, together with costs, shall be recoverable of and from the owner or any such person running or operating the same, in addition to the penalties provided in this code. (Code 1960, § 19-52)

Sec. 35-21. Throwing injurious materials on streets, sidewalks and paths; liability for damage.
No person shall throw, drop, place, or cause to be thrown, dropped or placed, in or upon any bicycle path, street, avenue, sidewalk or other thoroughfare any glass, tacks, nails, pieces of metal or other substance which might injure or puncture any tire on a bicycle or which might wound, disable or injure any person riding a bicycle. Any person violating this section shall in addition to any penalty imposed under the provisions of this code, pay all damages caused thereby. (Code 1960, § 19-56)

Sec. 35-22. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4003, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, repealed § 35-22, duty of drivers in event of accident. Former § 35-22 derived from Ord. No. 3318, § 4, adopted July 19, 1976.

Secs. 35-23 – 35-31. Reserved.
Chapter 35
TRAFFIC1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 35-01 – 35-31

Art. II.    Speed Regulations, §§ 35-32 – 35-44

Art. III.    Traffic Control Devices, §§ 35-45 – 35-64

Art. IV.    Stopping, Standing and Parking, §§ 35-65 – 35-98

Div. 1.    Definitions, § 35-65

Div. 2.    General Parking Regulations, §§ 35-66 – 35-71.1

Div. 3.    Commercial and Truck and Bus Parking, §§ 35-72 – 35-75

Div. 4.    Miscellaneous Parking Restrictions, §§ 35-76 – 35-79

Div. 5.    Penalties and Procedures, §§ 35-80 – 35-98

Art. V.    Truck Routes, §§ 35-99 – 35-110

Art. VI.    Reserved, §§ 35-111 – 35-131

Art. VII.    Bicycles, Motor Bicycles, Motor Scooters, Skateboards, Roller Skates, Go-Carts and Scooters, §§ 35-132 – 35-166

Div. 1.    Generally, §§ 35-132 – 35-147

Div. 2.    Reserved, §§ 35-148 – 35-166

Art. VIII.    Pedestrians, §§ 35-167 – 35-174

Art. IX.    Special Events, §§ 35-175 – 35-185

Chapter 35
TRAFFIC1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 35-01 – 35-31

Art. II.    Speed Regulations, §§ 35-32 – 35-44

Art. III.    Traffic Control Devices, §§ 35-45 – 35-64

Art. IV.    Stopping, Standing and Parking, §§ 35-65 – 35-98

Div. 1.    Definitions, § 35-65

Div. 2.    General Parking Regulations, §§ 35-66 – 35-71.1

Div. 3.    Commercial and Truck and Bus Parking, §§ 35-72 – 35-75

Div. 4.    Miscellaneous Parking Restrictions, §§ 35-76 – 35-79

Div. 5.    Penalties and Procedures, §§ 35-80 – 35-98

Art. V.    Truck Routes, §§ 35-99 – 35-110

Art. VI.    Reserved, §§ 35-111 – 35-131

Art. VII.    Bicycles, Motor Bicycles, Motor Scooters, Skateboards, Roller Skates, Go-Carts and Scooters, §§ 35-132 – 35-166

Div. 1.    Generally, §§ 35-132 – 35-147

Div. 2.    Reserved, §§ 35-148 – 35-166

Art. VIII.    Pedestrians, §§ 35-167 – 35-174

Art. IX.    Special Events, §§ 35-175 – 35-185

ARTICLE II. SPEED REGULATIONS
Sec. 35-32. Maximum speed limits.
Pursuant to Idaho Code, Sections 49-207(2), 49-208, and 50-314, no person shall operate any vehicle at a speed in excess of the following:

(1) Twenty-five (25) miles per hour upon any public street or highway within the city, including O’Conner Road from Bryden Avenue to Southport Avenue, except:

(2) As determined and properly posted by the Idaho Transportation Department for that portion of U.S. Highway 12/95 from the east city limits to the junction of the north bound ramp of U.S. Highway 95/U.S. Highway 12;

(3) Forty-five (45) miles per hour for that portion of State Highway 128 (Down River Road), from the Washington State Line to 0.03 miles west of 18th Street North; that portion of U.S. Highway 12 (Dike Bypass Route) from the intersection of 18th Street and Main Street westerly to its junction with “D” Street; that portion of Bryden Canyon Road 0.11 miles east of the west city limit line to 0.13 west of its junction with 4th Street;

(4) Thirty-five (35) miles per hour on that portion of State Highway 128 (Down River Road) from 0.03 miles west of 18th Street North to the junction of U.S. Highway 12, and the portion of U.S. Highway 12, from the U.S. Highway 12 and U.S. Highway 95 interchange; that portion of U.S. Highway 12 (Dike Bypass Route) from its junction with “D” Street to its junction with Snake River Avenue; Main Street, between 21st Street and Mill Road; 21st Street, between Main Street and 19th Avenue; 17th Street, between 16th Avenue and Stewart; 8th Street, between 19th Avenue and Mayfair Court; 16th Avenue, between 8th Street and 13th Street; Southway, between 8th Street and Snake River Avenue; Snake River Avenue, between the city limits and U.S. Highway 12; 5th Street between Stewart and Bryden Avenue; Bryden Avenue, between 0.13 miles west of 4th Street and Thain Road; Warner Avenue between Thain Road and 16th Street; Burrell Avenue, between 14th Street and Lindsay Creek Road; Duthie Boulevard, between Snake River Avenue and 0.1 miles downhill of Ridgewater Drive; Grelle Avenue, between Thain Road and the east city limits; Powers Avenue, between 16th Street and the east city limits; 10th Street, between Ripon Avenue and Cedar Avenue; 10th Street, from Thain Road north to the city limits; Thain Road, from Stewart Avenue to 14th Street; 14th Street from Thain Road to Ripon Avenue; Ripon Avenue, from 10th Street to Barr Street; Country Club Drive, from its intersection with Snake River Avenue to its intersection with Reservoir Drive; Thain Grade, between 19th Avenue and Stewart Avenue; Nez Perce Grade; Lapwai Road from East Main to city limits; Barr Street to east city limits; Old Spiral Highway from the Nez Perce County Lewiston city limits line south to the intersection of Old Spiral Highway and Idaho State Highway 128 (Down River Road) shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour.

(5) Fifteen (15) miles per hour when traversing an uncontrolled intersection of streets when the operator’s view is obstructed. The operator’s view shall be deemed to be obstructed when, at any time during the last fifty (50) feet of his approach to an intersection, he does not have a clear and uninterrupted view of such intersection and of streets entering such intersection for a distance of one hundred (100) feet from such intersection.

(6) Twenty (20) miles per hour within designated school zones, designated safety zones or when crossing any marked crosswalk designated to be reduced speed zones where signs “When Children Are Present” or “Where Pedestrians Are Present” exist.

(7) Twenty (20) miles per hour for all trucks proceeding downhill on all grades exceeding five (5) percent and five hundred (500) feet in length, except those grades located on U.S. 95, U.S. 12 and Barr Street.

(8) Twenty (20) miles per hour. That portion of 4th Street D south of Bryden Avenue and providing access to the airport terminal; that portion of Burrell Avenue west of 4th Street D and providing access to the airport terminal; and that portion of Main Street east of Snake River Avenue and west of 11th Street.

Compliance with the speeds set forth in this section under the circumstances set forth herein shall not relieve the operator of any vehicle from the further exercise of due care and caution as further circumstances shall require. (Code 1960, § 19-59; Ord. No. 3017, § 1, 3-29-71; Ord. No. 3056, § 1, 11-22-71; Ord. No. 3224, § 1, 7-29-74; Ord. No. 3274, § 1, 6-16-75; Ord. No. 3278, § 1, 7-28-75; Ord. No. 3420, § 1, 1-3-78, Ord. No. 3451, § 1, 7-31-78; Ord. No. 3497, §§ 1 – 3, 8-20-79, Ord. No. 3572, § 1, 5-26-81; Ord. No. 3633, § 1, 3-22-82, Ord. No. 3695, § 1, 5-31-83; Ord. No. 3750, § 1, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 3805, § 1, 4-21-86, Ord. No. 3828, § 1, 8-4-86; Ord. No. 3892, § 1, 11-16-87; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 3924, § 1, 5-9-88; Ord. No. 4003, § 3, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 4044, § 1, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 4059, § 1, 3-8-93; Ord. No. 4139, § 1, 8-21-95; Ord. No. 4214, § 1, 4-6-98; Ord. No. 4288, § 1, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 4577, § 1, 3-26-12; Ord. No. 4615, § 1, 10-27-14; Ord. No. 4702, § 1, 8-21-17; Ord. No. 4711, § 1, 10-9-17)

Sec. 35-33. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4003, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, repealed § 35-33, increase of speed limits on through streets. Former § 35-33 derived from the 1960 Code, § 19-60.

Chapter 35
TRAFFIC1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 35-01 – 35-31

Art. II.    Speed Regulations, §§ 35-32 – 35-44

Art. III.    Traffic Control Devices, §§ 35-45 – 35-64

Art. IV.    Stopping, Standing and Parking, §§ 35-65 – 35-98

Div. 1.    Definitions, § 35-65

Div. 2.    General Parking Regulations, §§ 35-66 – 35-71.1

Div. 3.    Commercial and Truck and Bus Parking, §§ 35-72 – 35-75

Div. 4.    Miscellaneous Parking Restrictions, §§ 35-76 – 35-79

Div. 5.    Penalties and Procedures, §§ 35-80 – 35-98

Art. V.    Truck Routes, §§ 35-99 – 35-110

Art. VI.    Reserved, §§ 35-111 – 35-131

Art. VII.    Bicycles, Motor Bicycles, Motor Scooters, Skateboards, Roller Skates, Go-Carts and Scooters, §§ 35-132 – 35-166

Div. 1.    Generally, §§ 35-132 – 35-147

Div. 2.    Reserved, §§ 35-148 – 35-166

Art. VIII.    Pedestrians, §§ 35-167 – 35-174

Art. IX.    Special Events, §§ 35-175 – 35-185

Sec. 35-34. Use of radar and electrical devices to check speed of vehicles.
(a) The speed of any motor vehicle may be checked by the use of radio microwaves or any other electrical device. The results of such checks shall be accepted as prima facie evidence of the speed of such motor vehicle in the police magistrate court or legal proceedings when the speed of the motor vehicle is at issue.

(b) The driver of any such motor vehicle may be arrested without warrant under this section; provided, that the arresting officer is in uniform or displays his badge of authority; and provided further, that such officer has observed the record of the speed of such motor vehicle by the radio microwaves or other electrical device or has received a radio message from the officer who observed the speed of the motor vehicle recorded by the radio microwaves or other electrical device. (Code 1960, § 19-61; Ord. No. 2304, § 1)

Sec. 35-35. Temporary construction or work zone speed limits.
(a) The director of public works or the city engineer shall determine maximum speed limits to be posted in a temporary construction zone or temporary work zone.

(b) No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of the posted maximum speed limit established for a temporary construction zone or temporary work zone. The temporary construction zone or temporary work zone and the maximum speed limit shall be clearly designated by appropriately placed signs conforming to the standards of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.

(c) As used in this section, temporary construction zone and temporary work zone mean a construction or maintenance area that is located on or adjacent to public right-of-way and marked by appropriate warning signs. (Ord. No. 4326, § 1, 3-10-03)

Secs. 35-36 – 35-44. Reserved.
Chapter 35
TRAFFIC1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 35-01 – 35-31

Art. II.    Speed Regulations, §§ 35-32 – 35-44

Art. III.    Traffic Control Devices, §§ 35-45 – 35-64

Art. IV.    Stopping, Standing and Parking, §§ 35-65 – 35-98

Div. 1.    Definitions, § 35-65

Div. 2.    General Parking Regulations, §§ 35-66 – 35-71.1

Div. 3.    Commercial and Truck and Bus Parking, §§ 35-72 – 35-75

Div. 4.    Miscellaneous Parking Restrictions, §§ 35-76 – 35-79

Div. 5.    Penalties and Procedures, §§ 35-80 – 35-98

Art. V.    Truck Routes, §§ 35-99 – 35-110

Art. VI.    Reserved, §§ 35-111 – 35-131

Art. VII.    Bicycles, Motor Bicycles, Motor Scooters, Skateboards, Roller Skates, Go-Carts and Scooters, §§ 35-132 – 35-166

Div. 1.    Generally, §§ 35-132 – 35-147

Div. 2.    Reserved, §§ 35-148 – 35-166

Art. VIII.    Pedestrians, §§ 35-167 – 35-174

Art. IX.    Special Events, §§ 35-175 – 35-185

ARTICLE III. TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Sec. 35-45. Obedience to official traffic control devices.
No operator of any vehicle shall fail to obey the instructions of any official traffic control device or signal applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. (Code 1960, § 19-62)

Sec. 35-46. Placement, maintenance of traffic control devices; standards, specifications and requirements.
Traffic control devices shall be placed and maintained on the streets of the city at the direction, and under the control, of the director of public works or his authorized employees or agents. Such traffic control devices shall conform to the standards, specifications, and requirements set forth in the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, and adopted for use in the state of Idaho by the Idaho Department of Highways, pursuant to Idaho Code, Section 49-201, as said Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices now exists or amendments to it may hereafter be adopted for use in Idaho by the Idaho Department of Highways. (Code 1960, § 19-62.1; Ord. No. 3108, § 1, 8-28-72; Ord. No. 4003, 4, 2-3-92)

Sec. 35-47. Traffic signs – Installation.
(a) To inform users of the streets of the provisions of this chapter relative to parking, traffic and travel, the director of public works, in cooperation with the police, shall provide and have placed on or about the streets and alleys of the city suitable signs and markings whenever deemed necessary.

(b) No person, other than the director of public works or police or their duly authorized agents, shall direct, place or exhibit any traffic sign or standard upon any public street of the city or attempt by signs, markings or written or printed instructions or inhibitions to regulate traffic or the parking of vehicles. (Code 1960, § 19-63; Ord. No. 4003, § 12, 2-3-92)

Sec. 35-48. Same – Obedience required.
Whenever authorized speed limit signs, stop signs, no-parking signs or other signs intended to control traffic are placed upon the streets of the city, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to disobey the direction of such signs and indicators. (Code 1960, § 19-64)

Sec. 35-49. Same – Injury, removal, destruction, etc.
No person shall maliciously remove or injure any public traffic sign erected upon any street or any inscription on same, deface the same in writing or in any other manner or remove any light placed upon a disabled vehicle or upon an obstruction or defect in the highway. (Code 1960, § 19-65)

Sec. 35-50. Obedience to turn signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or “U” turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. (Code 1960, § 19-66)

Sec. 35-51. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4003, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, repealed § 35-51, yield signs defined. Former § 35-51 derived from the 1960 Code, § 19-68.

 

Chapter 35
TRAFFIC1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 35-01 – 35-31

Art. II.    Speed Regulations, §§ 35-32 – 35-44

Art. III.    Traffic Control Devices, §§ 35-45 – 35-64

Art. IV.    Stopping, Standing and Parking, §§ 35-65 – 35-98

Div. 1.    Definitions, § 35-65

Div. 2.    General Parking Regulations, §§ 35-66 – 35-71.1

Div. 3.    Commercial and Truck and Bus Parking, §§ 35-72 – 35-75

Div. 4.    Miscellaneous Parking Restrictions, §§ 35-76 – 35-79

Div. 5.    Penalties and Procedures, §§ 35-80 – 35-98

Art. V.    Truck Routes, §§ 35-99 – 35-110

Art. VI.    Reserved, §§ 35-111 – 35-131

Art. VII.    Bicycles, Motor Bicycles, Motor Scooters, Skateboards, Roller Skates, Go-Carts and Scooters, §§ 35-132 – 35-166

Div. 1.    Generally, §§ 35-132 – 35-147

Div. 2.    Reserved, §§ 35-148 – 35-166

Art. VIII.    Pedestrians, §§ 35-167 – 35-174

Art. IX.    Special Events, §§ 35-175 – 35-185

Sec. 35-52. Yield signs – Engineer.
The city engineer shall determine and designate street intersections at which yield signs shall be installed. (Code 1960, § 19-68; Ord. No. 4003, § 5, 2-3-92)

Sec. 35-53. Same – Drivers to yield right-of-way.
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow to a speed necessary for the conditions and yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching from the right or left on the intersecting street which are so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. (Code 1960, § 19-69; Ord. No. 4003, § 6, 2-3-92)

Sec. 35-54. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4003, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, repealed § 35-54, collision prima facie evidence of violation. Former § 35-54 derived from the 1960 Code, § 19-70.

Secs. 35-55 – 35-64. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING2
DIVISION 1. DEFINITIONS

Sec. 35-65. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

Alley means a street intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.

Boat means any vessel or hull designed to float upon or in the water with dimensions that permit it to be taken over highways on attached wheels, on a trailer or as a self-propelled vehicle, including any trailer used for transporting the same.

Bus means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.

Bicycle means every vehicle propelled primarily by human power upon which any person may ride, having one, two (2) or three (3) wheels.

Commercial vehicle means any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds used to carry or transport any goods, wares, merchandise, fuel, produce, persons or other matter for sale, profit or gain, or any vehicle with a gross weight of more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds which is utilized either directly or indirectly in the process of providing a service to any persons, corporations, business enterprises or any other entity for profit or gain.

Commercial zone means all of those areas designated as commercial zones, industrial zones, airport zones, PUD zone and port zones in the city zoning ordinance and as set forth on the official city zoning map.

Crosswalk means either of the following:

(1) That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connection of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the travelable roadway; and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of the roadway, that part of a roadway included within the extension of the lateral lines of the existing sidewalk at right angles to the centerline.

(2) Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.

Loading zone means a space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or property.

Manufactured home means a structure built on a chassis designed and constructed for transportation to a site for installation and use when connected to required utilities. May also be commonly referred to as “mobile home” or “modular home”.

Motorcycle means a two-wheeled or three-wheeled vehicle propelled by an internal combustion engine.

Official means established, created, set up, installed, constructed, placed, or caused by the city of Lewiston, or its authorized agents and employees.

Oversize vehicle means any vehicle or combination of vehicle and trailer that is too large to be parked within a standard nine-foot by twenty-foot parking space.

Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers.

Pickup truck means every motor vehicle eight thousand (8,000) pounds gross weight or less which is designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.

Planting strip means that portion of the public right-of-way between the curb or edge of pavement and the sidewalk or property line.

Recreational vehicle means a vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The basic entities are: travel trailer, camping trailer, fifth-wheel camper and motor home.

Regular commercial delivery vehicle means any vehicle with an overall vehicle length of forty (40) feet or less used to deliver goods, supplies, wares, produce or fuel.

Residential zone means all of those areas designated as R-1, R-2, R-3, PUD and R-4 zones as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city and set forth in the official city zoning map.

Roadway means the paved portion of the public right-of-way used for vehicular traffic.

School bus means every motor vehicle that complies with the color and identification requirements set forth in the most recent edition of “Minimum Standards for School Buses” and is used to transport children to or from school or in connection with school activities, but not including buses operated by common carriers in urban transportation of school children.

Sidewalk means the concrete or asphalt surface which runs generally parallel to the street or roadway in the public right-of-way and which is intended for use by pedestrians.

Stand or standing means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.

Stop or stopping. Stop means the act of or complete cessation from movement. Stopping means the act of any halting even momentarily of a vehicle.

Street means the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

Support services commander means the city of Lewiston police department’s support services commander or designee.

Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes of travel.

Truck means every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property, and with a gross vehicle weight of more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds.

Trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.

Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, street, alley or thoroughfare excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4003, § 7, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 4059, § 2, 3-8-93; Ord. No. 4738, § 1, 2-25-19)

DIVISION 2. GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS

Sec. 35-66. Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places.
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall:

(1) Stop, stand or park a vehicle:

a. On a crosswalk;

b. Within an intersection;

c. Upon a sidewalk, except that the provisions of this subpart shall not apply to bicycles; provided, that said bicycles shall not obstruct pedestrian traffic;

d. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;

e. Upon or within any bridge, overpass, underpass, subway, tunnel or viaduct;

f. Upon any railroad tracks;

g. Upon any portion of any city park or recreation area, except within any officially designated parking area within city parks and recreation areas, and except that the provisions of this subpart shall not apply to bicycles; provided, that said bicycles shall not obstruct pedestrian traffic;

h. Within or upon any street, alley, lane or railroad right-of-way where the stopping, standing or parking of such vehicle will block, obstruct or prevent the free passage of other vehicles or railroad traffic within or upon said street, alley, lane or railroad right-of-way;

i. At any place where official traffic control devices or signs prohibit stopping or parking.

(2) Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:

a. In front of any driveway;

b. Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;

c. Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;

d. Within any mail-drop zone, except for the purpose of making deposits of mail in mailboxes within or directly adjacent to such zones; provided, however, that any standing or parking of any vehicle in any mail-drop zone which exceeds five (5) minutes shall be a violation of this subpart;

e. Within thirty (30) feet of any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;

f. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station;

g. Within one (1) block of any place where a fire department is in the process of fighting a fire;

h. On the roadway edge of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of a street or highway (double parking);

i. Within any officially designated loading zone, except that this subpart shall not apply to any vehicle when such vehicle is actually engaged in loading or unloading goods, wares, merchandise, materials or passengers; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not authorize the parking or standing of any vehicle in violation of section 35-75 of this code;

j. Within any officially designated bus stop or taxi stand zone, except that the provisions of this subpart shall not apply to any bus, taxi or limousine which is properly licensed by all city, state and federal authorities and is being operated in the ordinary course of business;

k. Within five (5) feet of the intersection of an alley with another alley or street;

l. Within twenty (20) feet of the intersection or any combination of intersections of streets or railroad rights-of-way;

m. Upon any city-owned or city-operated property officially designated for use for vehicle parking by authorized city personnel only, except that this subpart shall not apply to the standing or parking of vehicles in such areas by authorized city personnel;

n. Within or upon any street, alley or railroad right-of-way where the standing or parking of such vehicle will block, obstruct or prevent any other vehicles from turning from a street, alley, lane or driveway onto another street, alley, lane or driveway;

o. At any place where official traffic control devices, signs or red painted curb prohibit stopping or parking.

(3) Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily, for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers:

a. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;

b. At any place where official traffic control devices or signs prohibit stopping or parking.

(4) Park or store a vehicle upon any public right-of-way, street or alley, whether occupied or not, that is not currently registered by the state of Idaho or other competent jurisdiction.

(5) Park or store a vehicle that is not operable upon any public right-of-way, street or alley, whether occupied or not, for a period of forty-eight (48) hours.

(6) Park or store a vehicle upon any public right-of-way, street or alley, while performing repairs or alterations thereon, except for temporary, emergency repairs not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours.

(7) Park, stop or stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, in a designated handicapped parking space, marked and signed, in conformance with section 37-148 of this code or Idaho Code, Section 49-213, unless a disabled occupant displays, on the vehicle, a special license plate or a special card for a person with a disability as provided for in Idaho Code, Section 49-410. Violations of this subsection shall be punishable as provided in Idaho Code, Section 49-213. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person who owns, leases or is in control of property where handicapped parking spaces are designated to allow any debris, merchandise, shopping carts or other items to accumulate so as to make a handicapped parking space unusable. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 3728, § 1, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 4003, § 8, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 4059, § 3, 3-8-93; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 4205, § 1, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 4280, § 4, 4-23-01; Ord. No. 4314, § 1, 9-9-02)

Sec. 35-67. Modes, manners and types of parking prohibited.
No person shall stop, stand or park any automobile, pickup truck, tractor, truck, truck trailer, travel-all, travel trailer, motorcycle, bicycle, moped, recreational vehicle, motor home or any other vehicle upon any street or alley in the city of Lewiston except when the stopping, standing or parking of such vehicle complies with all of the following requirements:

(1) In all areas where there are curbs all vehicles shall be parked parallel to the curb and not more than eighteen (18) inches therefrom except in such areas where official traffic control devices, signs, painting or curb markings specifically provide for other modes or manners of parking; and

(2) In all areas where there are no curbs all vehicles shall be parked parallel to the center line of the roadway; and

(3) No persons driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway;

(4) Wherever the city has divided portions of the roadway surface by curb markings, street paint or other traffic control device into individual parking stalls, each vehicle standing or parked within such portion of the roadway shall be standing and/or parked solely within one individual parking stall;

(5) All vehicles which are parked or standing upon any city street or alley shall be parked or standing in such a manner that the vehicle is pointed in the same direction as the traffic which is in the traffic lane directly next to the vehicle. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95)

Sec. 35-68. Limited parking zones.
(a) Certain streets or portions of certain streets in the city of Lewiston may be designated as limited parking zones. Designation shall be by the public works administrator and shall become effective when appropriate signs denoting such limitations are installed.

(b) The public works administrator may designate temporary no parking areas for the purposes of street cleaning, plowing, maintenance or construction. When the public works administrator designates temporary no parking areas he shall cause to be placed temporary no parking signs on the streets or portions of streets to be cleaned, plowed, maintained or constructed giving reasonable notice of the temporary no parking areas. Parking shall be restricted only for the time necessary for cleaning, plowing, maintenance or construction. Vehicles parking in the temporary no parking areas so designated may be towed if vehicles will delay the cleaning, plowing, maintenance or construction. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 4234, § 1, 5-24-99)

Sec. 35-69. Parking in municipal and airport parking lots.
Except for those provisions of section 35-66 and the provisions hereinafter, municipal parking lots shall be designated as unlimited parking zones. Certain areas within municipal parking lots and all areas within airport parking lots may be designated as restricted or limited parking zones. Designation shall be by the city council by resolution and shall become effective when appropriate signs denoting such areas are installed. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in a municipal or airport parking lot contrary to posted limitations. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95)

Sec. 35-70. Bicycle parking prohibited.
Bicycles are prohibited from parking in spaces designed for motorized vehicles. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95)

Sec. 35-71. Municipal and airport parking lots, general regulations.
(a) No person shall park any automobile, truck, truck trailer, travel-all, travel trailer, motorcycle, bicycle, moped, recreational vehicle, motor home, mobile home or other vehicle in any place within a municipal or airport parking lot except when such parking complies with the following regulations:

(1) Vehicles shall be parked only within officially designated parking spaces;

(2) All vehicles shall be parked in such a manner that each vehicle occupies only one parking space;

(3) Only trucks and oversize vehicles shall park within those parking spaces designated for trucks and oversize vehicle parking.

(b) Each vehicle parked, stopped or left to stand in a city parking lot shall be parked, stopped or left to stand in such a manner that it does not block, obstruct or impede the free flow of traffic through the parking lot. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95)

Sec. 35-71.1. Disabled parking spaces – Downtown.
The following parking spaces shall be designated and identified as parking spaces for persons with a disability as provided in Idaho Code, Section 49-213:

(1) One space on the south side of D Street, directly east of the Lewiston Plaza entrance;

(2) One space on the north side of D Street, directly in front of 301 D Street;

(3) One space on the south side of D Street, directly west of 5th Street;

(4) One space on the north side of Main Street, directly west of 5th Street;

(5) One space on the south side of Main Street, directly in front of 520 Main Street;

(6) One space on the north side of Main Street, directly in front of 623 Main Street;

(7) One space on the south side of Main Street, directly in front of 630 Main Street;

(8) One space on the north side of Main Street, directly in front of 815 Main Street;

(9) One space on the south side of Main Street, directly in front of 838 Main Street;

(10) One space on the west side of New Sixth Street, directly in front of 124 New Sixth Street;

(11) One space on the north side of F Street, directly east of 5th Street;

(12) One space on the west side of 2nd Street near its intersection with C Street. (Ord. No. 4164, § 1, 8-19-96; Ord. No. 4300, § 1, 2-5-02; Ord. No. 4363, § 1, 9-27-04)

DIVISION 3. COMMERCIAL AND TRUCK AND BUS PARKING

Sec. 35-72. Bus and taxicabs.
No driver of a bus or taxicab shall stand or park upon any street in a business district at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively; provided, that this section shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95)

Sec. 35-73. Parking of commercial vehicles in residential zones; restrictions.
No person shall park any commercial vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the streets in any residential zone within the city for a period in excess of four (4) hours, except:

(1) For the purpose of loading and unloading passengers, materials or merchandise; or

(2) For any purpose incident to any lawful construction project or street maintenance project located within the immediate vicinity of such parked vehicle; or

(3) For those vehicles used in private enterprise on night-time calls as provided for in section 35-105(f). (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95)

Sec. 35-74. Loading and unloading.
Any person who shall load or unload from or into any vehicle designed for the carrying of goods, wares and merchandise any goods, wares or merchandise at or from any building situated within the city shall load or unload such vehicle only upon the street or alley at the rear of such building, in all cases where the rear of such building is accessible to a street or alley. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95)

Sec. 35-75. Establishment of loading zones during certain hours.
(a) The director of public works is hereby authorized to determine the location of and establish loading zones where traffic conditions indicate a need for such zones.

(b) Commercial vehicle loading zones: Commercial vehicle loading zones shall be identified by appropriate posted signs. Said loading zones shall be used only for parking by regular commercial delivery vehicles. Commercial vehicles shall park in said zones only while being loaded and unloaded and only during such hours as the director of public works allows.

(c) Other loading zones: Where the director of public works determines that a need exists for other loading zones than the commercial vehicle loading zone specified in subsection (b) hereof, the director shall designate and establish such loading zones in such locations and in such lengths and for such time limits as he shall deem necessary. Parking therein may be limited to regular commercial delivery vehicles by the director of public works. The director shall cause appropriate signs or markings to be installed to identify said zones and the limits placed on parking, stopping and standing therein. Such zones may be altered or terminated from time to time by the director of public works.

(d) Loading zones shall be available for public parking at all times when the loading zone restrictions are not in effect, according to the same rules and subject to the same time restrictions as required in adjacent parking spaces. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95)

DIVISION 4. MISCELLANEOUS PARKING RESTRICTIONS

Sec. 35-76. Storage, parking of trucks, trailers, buses, boats and other vehicles in certain areas.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having control of any truck or trailer in excess of five-ton capacity, or truck-powered unit, or tractor in excess of one-half-ton in weight, or bus, utility trailer, boat, snowmobiles or all-terrain vehicles to park the same upon any street, alley, lane, roadway or public way (within fifteen (15) feet of the pavement of any street, alley, lane, roadway or public way) in any residential zone of the city or upon any street, avenue or public way in front of or adjacent to any residence, church, school, multiple dwelling, hospital or playground in any zone. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the lawful parking of such vehicles upon any street, avenue or public way in the city for the actual loading or unloading of goods, wares, merchandise or passengers or for any purpose incidental to a lawful construction project or street maintenance project located within the immediate vicinity of such parked vehicle. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 4280, § 3, 4-23-01; Ord. No. 4473, § 3, 7-9-07)

Sec. 35-76.1. Temporary parking of unoccupied manufactured homes or recreational vehicles.
Temporary parking of unoccupied manufactured homes or recreational vehicles shall be permitted on streets, alleys, or highways within the city for not more than seventy-two (72) hours subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or highway; provided, however, that no water or sanitary facilities are used in any manufactured home or recreational vehicle so parked. (Ord. No. 4473, § 4, 7-9-07)

Sec. 35-77. Use of streets in lieu of off-street parking or storage prohibited.
(a) No person in charge of a public parking business or an auto sales or repair business shall permit a vehicle to be parked on a street or public right-of-way while that vehicle is in the custody of the business for the purpose of being parked, offered for sale or repaired. As used in this section, “person in charge” means an owner, operator or employee who is physically present and actually supervising operation of the business; “public parking business” means a business offering public off-street parking as a service; and “auto sales or repair business” means a business offering new or used vehicles for sale or offering vehicle repair service.

(b) If a vehicle is parked on the street while in the custody or possession of a public parking business or an auto sales or repair business it is prima facie evidence that the person in charge permitted the vehicle to be parked on the street. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4003, § 9, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95)

Sec. 35-78. General exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the stopping, standing or parking of any ambulance, fire engine, police car or other emergency vehicle when such vehicle is under the control of authorized city, county, state or federal employees; or to the stopping, standing or parking of any city vehicle when such stopping, standing or parking occurs in the course of city maintenance. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95)

Sec. 35-79. Cumulative effect.
The parking restrictions in this article are in addition to parking restrictions contained in other sections of the city code. The effect of all city code parking restrictions shall be cumulative and in order for a vehicle to stop, stand or park in a particular location or in a particular manner the stopping, standing or parking must comply with all applicable city code parking regulations. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95)

DIVISION 5. PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES

Sec. 35-80. Continuing violations.
Unless a shorter time period is specified by a particular section, each consecutive twenty-four-hour period that a vehicle is parked, stopped or left standing in any manner contrary to the provisions of this article shall constitute a new offense and the police department shall issue additional parking citations for each such period in which the vehicle is improperly parked, stopped or left standing. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95)

Sec. 35-81. Parking violation notice and procedures.
The police department shall have authority to issue parking violation notices.

(1) The notice shall state the amount of the required payment, instructing the owner or operator of such vehicle to make payment to the city treasurer’s office. The violation notices shall be numbered consecutively, shall state the time, date and location that the violation notice was issued, the name of the issuing officer, the number of the city code section which has been violated, a brief description of the violation and the make and license number of the vehicle. The violation notice shall be affixed to the vehicle that has been improperly parked, stopped, or left standing. If the vehicle is a vehicle meant to be towed, such as a house trailer, tent trailer, utility trailer, travel trailer, boat, or snowmobile, then the violation notice shall be affixed to said vehicle and either hand-delivered to the record owner thereof or mailed to the last-known address of the record owner as appears on the vehicle registration records of the state of Idaho. Each person violating the provisions of this article shall make payment to the city treasurer’s office within thirty (30) calendar days of the date the parking violation notice was issued. The payment required for each notice of improper parking in violation of the provisions of this article shall be as follows:

For any violation of Division 2, except section 35-66(2)(o) – Ten dollars ($10.00);

For any violation of section 35-66(2)(o) – Twenty-five dollars ($25.00);

For any violation of Division 3 – Ten dollars ($10.00);

For any violation of Division 4 – Fifteen dollars ($15.00);

For any violation of the Normal Hill Residential Parking Program as adopted by Resolution 2006-53 or any other neighborhood or residential parking program authorized by the city council – Fifty dollars ($50.00).

(2) The failure of any operator or owner to make such payments to the city treasurer’s office within the time prescribed above shall render the operator thereof subject to the penalties as provided by sections 35-82 and 35-84 of this code.

(3) All payments for violations as provided above shall be doubled if not paid within thirty (30) calendar days of the date the parking violation notice was issued. The city may attempt to recover any unpaid amounts through city bill collection procedures.

(4) If any vehicle is found stopped, standing, or parked in any manner violative of the provisions of this article and the identity of the driver of the vehicle cannot be determined, the owner or person or corporation in whose name said vehicle is registered or the named lessee in a rental or lease agreement of said vehicle shall be held prima facie responsible for said violation. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 4262, § 1, 4-24-00; Ord. No. 4452, § 1, 8-21-06; Ord. No. 4476, § 1, 8-13-07; Ord. No. 4738, § 2, 2-25-19)

Sec. 35-82. Infraction penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article, or who shall counsel, aid or abet any such violation or failure to comply, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and subject to the issuance of an infraction citation in the magistrate’s court of the second judicial district and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95)

Sec. 35-83. Parking violations declared nuisances.
Considering the safety, health, welfare and general well-being of the inhabitants of the city, the council hereby declares that any vehicle parked upon or within any public street, alley, thoroughfare or city parking lot in the city in violation of any portion of this article constitutes a nuisance. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95)

Sec. 35-84. Vehicle towing or booting authorized in certain circumstances.
Any vehicle parked, stopped or left standing in violation of the provisions of this article, which vehicle impedes traffic, blocks access into any parking lot or driveway, which poses a traffic hazard, or any vehicle unlawfully parked, stopped or left standing in a designated handicapped parking space, or which has been issued three (3) separate parking violations that remain unpaid after the time set forth in section 35-81, may be, without notice to the owner of such vehicle, towed by the chief of police, his officers, agents, or employees, to an impoundment area, and kept at such impoundment area or booted, until all towage charges, impoundment fees, booting charges and unpaid tickets are paid by the owner or person entitled to possession of said vehicle. (Ord. No. 3606, § 1, 11-30-81; Ord. No. 4125, § 1, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 4205, § 2, 11-17-97)

Sec. 35-85. Appeal of parking violation notice.
(a) An owner or operator of a vehicle issued a parking violation notice may appeal such parking violation notice to the support services commander by filing a written notice of appeal with the Lewiston police department on a form prescribed by the Lewiston police department within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date such parking violation notice was issued. The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for appeal.

(b) The support services commander shall review the appeal and make a decision regarding the appeal within ten (10) calendar days of the date the notice of appeal was filed. The support services commander may grant the appeal or deny the appeal. The support services commander’s decision shall be final.

If the support services commander grants the appeal, then the appellant shall be notified of such decision. If an appeal is granted, then the parking violation notice shall be voided and the appellant shall not be required to pay the violation fee.

If the support services commander denies the appeal, then the appellant shall be notified of such denial, in writing, which may be delivered by: (1) personal delivery; (2) first class, certified, or registered mail, addressed to the appellant’s last known address; or (3) e-mail. If an appeal is denied, then the parking violation notice shall be deemed valid and the violation fee shall be paid within the time and in the manner set forth in section 35-81 of this code. Late payments shall be subject to the penalty provided for in section 35-81(3) of this code. (Ord. No. 4738, § 3, 2-25-19)

Secs. 35-86 – 35-98. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. TRUCK ROUTES
Sec. 35-99. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

Truck means a vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property and for which body weight or combined body and load weight exceeds eight thousand (8,000) pounds.

Deviating truck means a truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling to a specific destination for delivery or pickup.

Local truck means any truck originating either outside or inside the city limits that has as its immediate destination some point within the city limits.

Through truck means any truck originating outside the city and destined for points beyond or outside the city.

Truck route means a way over certain streets, as designated in this article, over and along which trucks coming into and going out of the city must operate. Such streets are generally designed to withstand heavier than usual vehicle loads. (Code 1960, § 19-89; Ord. No. 2229, § 1; Ord. No. 3378, § 1, 7-11-77; Ord. No. 3518, § 2, 9-22-80)

Sec. 35-100. Designated.
(a) Those trucks that are considered through trucks shall traverse the following routes to arrive at their destination:

(1) Grelle Avenue east of Lindsey Creek Road.

(2) Lindsey Creek Road.

(3) Lapwai Road.

(4) Main Street from 21st Street to Lapwai Road.

(5) All of U.S. 12 in the city limits.

(6) All of U.S. 95 in the city limits.

(7) Dike Bypass.

(8) Snake River Avenue.

(9) State Highway 128 known as Down River Avenue.

(10) Old Spiral Highway.

(11) “G” Street from 18th Street to 21st Street.

(12) 18th Street from Main Street to “G” Street.

(b) All local trucks up to the maximum weights and lengths as set forth in Idaho Code, Sections 49-1001 and 49-1010, shall be permitted to traverse the following established truck routes:

(1) Lapwai Road.

(2) Lindsey Creek Road.

(3) Southway and 16th Avenue from Snake River Avenue to 21st Street.

(4) Bryden Avenue from 4th Street to Thain Road.

(5) Grelle Avenue east of Lindsey Creek Road.

(6) 17th and 5th Streets routes from 16th Avenue to Bryden Avenue.

(7) Bryden Canyon Road from the Southway Bridge to 4th Street.

(8) Main Street east of 18th Street.

(9) Mill Road.

(10) Snake River Avenue.

(11) All of U.S. 12 within the city limits.

(12) All of U.S. 95 within the city limits.

(13) 21st Street from U.S. 12 to 19th Avenue.

(14) Thain Grade from 19th Avenue to Stewart Avenue.

(15) Thain Road.

(16) 14th Street from Powers Avenue to Ripon Avenue.

(17) Ripon Avenue from 14th Street to Barr Road.

(18) Barr Road.

(19) Gun Club Road from Lapwai Road to 10th Street.

(20) 10th Street from Stewart to Thain Road.

(21) State Highway 128 known as Down River Road.

(22) Dike Bypass from 18th and Main Streets to the Interstate Bridge.

(23) Old Spiral Highway.

(24) 6th Avenue North from Highway 128 to 12th Street North.

(25) 20th Street North from the Old Spiral Highway to 3rd Avenue North.

(26) “G” Street from 18th Street to 21st Street.

(27) 18th Street from Main Street to “G” Street.

(28) 15th Street North from 3rd Avenue North to 6th Avenue North.

(29) 3rd Avenue North from 6th Avenue North to 20th Street North.

(30) 18th Street North from 3rd Avenue North to Highway 128.

(31) 28th Street.

(32) Frontage Road.

(c) Truck travel or traffic is prohibited on Main Street between Fifth Street and Ninth Street between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. All deliveries to properties located on Main Street between Fifth and Ninth Streets during prohibited hours shall be made using “F” Street or “D” Street. (Code 1960, § 19-90; Ord. No. 2229, § 3; Ord. No. 3378, § 2, 7-11-77; Ord. No. 3518, § 3, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 3622, § 1, 2-1-82; Ord. No. 3858, § 1, 4-6-87, Ord. No. 4003, § 10, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 4377, § 1, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 4458, § 1, 11-27-06; Ord. No. 4472, § 1, 6-25-07)

Sec. 35-101. Deviations from truck routes.
(a) Outside origin.

(1) One inside destination point. All trucks entering the city for a destination point in the city shall proceed only over an established truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which such traffic is permitted nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route.

(2) Multiple inside destination points. All trucks entering the city for multiple destination points shall proceed only over established truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which such traffic is permitted nearest to the first destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point a deviating truck shall proceed to other destination points by the shortest direction and only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted. Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route.

(b) Inside origin.

(1) Outside destination point. All trucks on a trip originating within the city and traveling in the city for a destination point outside the city shall proceed by the shortest direction over streets on which such traffic is permitted to a truck route as herein established.

(2) Inside destination points. All trucks on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for destination points in the city shall proceed only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted.

(c) Temporary truck routes. The city council may, by resolution, provide for temporary truck routes on streets within the city not otherwise designated as truck routes. Any temporary truck route so designated shall have a duration of no longer than six (6) months. (Code 1960, § 19-91; Ord No. 2229, §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 4238, § 1, 6-14-99)

Sec. 35-102. Maps.
The clerk shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted. Such maps shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk and shall be available to the public. (Code 1960, § 19-92; Ord. No. 2229, § 5)

Sec. 35-103. Signs.
(a) The director of public works shall cause all truck routes and those streets upon which truck traffic is permitted to be clearly signed to give notice that the provisions of this article are in effect.

(b) Street signs shall show “Through Truck Route,” “Local Truck Route,” or “Trucks over 8,000 lbs. Prohibited.” (Code 1960, § 19-93; Ord. No. 2229, § 5; Ord. No. 3378, § 3, 7-11-77; Ord. No. 3518, § 4, 9-22-80; Ord. No. 3858, § 2, 4-6-87)

Sec. 35-104. Weighing authorized.
The police shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a truck route or street over which truck traffic is permitted to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this article has been complied with. (Code 1960, § 19-94; Ord. No. 2229, § 5; Ord. No. 4003, § 11, 2-3-92)

Sec. 35-105. Applicability of article.
All trucks within the city shall be operated only over and along the truck routes established in this article and on the other designated streets over which truck travel is permitted; provided, that nothing in this article shall prohibit:

(1) Operation on street of destination. The operation of trucks upon any street where necessary to the conduct of business at a destination point; provided, that streets upon which such traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point.

(2) Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city.

(3) Trucks owned by city, public utilities, etc. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, public utilities, any contractor or material man while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the city.

(4) Detoured trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which such detour is established.

(5) Franchisees or contractors. The operation of trucks by franchisees or contractors with the city when operating over truck routes expressly approved by the franchise agreement or contract with the city.

(6) Private enterprise on nighttime calls. The operation and parking of trucks not to exceed twenty-five thousand (25,000) pounds in gross weight, including the weight of the vehicle, in residential zones for those businesses that provide a twenty-four-hour service to require a person and a truck to perform that business’s services.

(7) Trucks licensed for weights over seventy-nine thousand (79,000) pounds gross weight. Any truck licensed by the state of Idaho for weight exceeding seventy-nine thousand (79,000) pounds gross weight, including the weight of the vehicle, shall be permitted to traverse those routes outlined in section 35-100. (Code 1960, § 19-95; Ord. No. 2229, § 2; Ord. No. 3378, § 4, 7-11-77; Ord. No. 3518, § 5, 9-22-80)

Sec. 35-106. City to honor special permits issued by state.
All special permits issued by the state of Idaho to the trucks wishing to traverse through or destined for the city of Lewiston shall be honored by the city over those streets outlined in section 35-100. (Ord. No. 3518, § 6, 9-22-80)

Sec. 35-107. Deviation from truck route – Infraction.
It is hereby declared to be an infraction for a truck as defined in section 35-99 of this code to travel on or traverse over a route not identified in section 35-100 of this code as a truck route or for a truck to travel on or traverse Main Street between Fifth Street and Ninth Street. (Ord. No. 3858, § 3, 4-6-87)

Secs. 35-108 – 35-110. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. RESERVED3
Secs. 35-111 – 35-131. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. BICYCLES, MOTOR BICYCLES, MOTOR SCOOTERS, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, GO-CARTS AND SCOOTERS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY

Sec. 35-132. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

Bicycle means a vehicle operated by human power and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground.

Motor bicycle means a bicycle to which there has been attached a motor to propel the same by a mechanical means.

Motor scooter means a motor-propelled vehicle having two (2) or more wheels in contact with the ground, the wheels being twelve (12) inches or less in diameter, and not classified as a motorcycle. (Code 1960, § 19-109)

Sec. 35-133. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4003, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, repealed § 35-133, obedience to traffic laws. Former § 35-133 derived from the 1960 Code, § 19-110.

Sec. 35-134. Riding on handlebars, etc., prohibited.
The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street, shall not carry any other person upon the handlebar, frame or tank of any such vehicle, nor shall any person so ride upon any such vehicle. (Code 1960, § 19-111)

Secs. 35-135, 35-136. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4003, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, repealed § 35-135 and § 35-136. The aforesaid sections were concerned with age limit operators and number of persons on machine, and derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 19-112 and 19-113.

Sec. 35-137. Operation generally.
No person shall coast any bicycle, motor bicycle or scooter upon any hill of the city, ride without at least one (1) hand on the handlebar or operate the same without proper brakes. (Code 1960, § 19-114)

Sec. 35-138. Riding bicycle on sidewalk prohibited.
No person shall ride a bicycle upon the sidewalks in the central business district as defined by Lewiston City Code section 37-145. The foregoing shall not prohibit sworn police officers in the performance of their duties as police officers on bicycle patrol from using city sidewalks. (Ord. No. 4042, § 1, 7-6-92; Ord. No. 4519, § 1, 10-27-08)

Secs. 35-139 – 35-140. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4003, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, repealed §§ 35-138 – 35-140 which concerned riding bicycles and impoundment. The aforesaid derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 19-115, 19-117 and 19-118 respectively.

Sec. 35-141. Mufflers required.
No person shall operate any motor scooter or motor bicycle in the city without having the same equipped with a muffler. (Code 1960, § 19-119)

Sec. 35-142. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4003, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, repealed § 35-142 concerning lights, which derived from the 1960 Code, § 19-120.

Sec. 35-143. Skateboards, roller skates, go-carts, street luges and scooters prohibited.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to ride on or propel any skateboard, roller skates, go-carts, street luges or scooters on any public sidewalk adjacent to the following public streets:

Main Street beginning on the Interstate Bridge and running to 9th Street;

The south sidewalk along D Street between 1st Street and 9th Street;

F Street between 5th Street and 9th Street;

1st Street between D Street and Main Street;

2nd Street between D Street and Main Street;

3rd Street between D Street and Main Street;

4th Street between D Street and Main Street;

5th Street between D Street and 2nd Avenue;

6th Street between D Street and Main Street;

7th Street between D Street and Main Street;

8th Street between D Street and Main Street;

Temple Lane;

9th Street between D Street and Trevitt Park;

Bryden Canyon Road;

Sidewalks adjacent to State Highway on the Clearwater Memorial Bridge;

(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on or propel any skateboard, roller skates, go-cart, street luge or scooter in Brakenbury Square, Rettig Plaza, Civic Center Plaza, Pioneer Park, or on any of the following public streets:

Prospect Avenue between 3rd Avenue and Main Street;

5th Street between 3rd Avenue and Main Street;

9th Street between Trevitt Park and Main Street;

Miller Street between 7th Avenue and Idaho Street;

13th Street between 8th Avenue and Main Street;

14th Street between Stewart Avenue and 8th Avenue;

17th Street between Stewart Avenue and 9th Avenue;

18th Street between 9th Avenue and Main Street;

The entire length of 21st Street;

Vineyard Drive;

The entire length of Thain Road;

Memorial Bridge;

11th Avenue between Prospect Avenue and Snake River Avenue;

Bryden Canyon Road;

Or within a parking lot owned by the city of Lewiston, except parking lots in Kiwanis Park. (Ord. No. 3947, § 1, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-23-90; Ord. No. 4236, § 1, 6-28-99)

Sec. 35-144. Definitions.
For the purposes of sections 35-143, 35-145 and 35-146, the terms herein are defined as follows:

Go-cart means a small vehicle distinguished by small wheels, usually four (4), capable of carrying one (1) or two (2) persons, propelled by an engine and designed for use as a sport or toy rather than on-street transportation.

Roller skates means skates with small wheels, usually four (4), for use on a smooth surface.

Scooter means small-wheel carts or wagons upon or in which one (1) or two (2) persons may ride, having no engine, but is usually propelled by foot power, pushed by another or allowed to coast downhill.

Skateboard means any short board composed of wood, plastic or other material to which is attached roller-skate-type wheels upon which a person sits, stands, kneels or lies while the device is in motion. (Ord. No. 3947, § 2, 8-21-89)

Sec. 35-145. Skateboarding on private property.
No person shall ride or propel any skateboard, roller skates, go-cart or scooter upon the land of another without the permission of the landowner or the tenant in possession where such land has been posted in a conspicuous manner upon or near the boundaries of such land with signs legibly printed informing persons of said prohibition. (Ord. No. 3947, § 3, 8-21-89)

Sec. 35-146. Penalty.
A violation of sections 35-143 and 35-145 of this division shall be an infraction as defined by Idaho Code, Section 18-111 and shall be punishable by a civil penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. No. 3947, § 4, 8-21-89)

Sec. 35-147. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. RESERVED4

Secs. 35-148 – 35-166. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. PEDESTRIANS
Sec. 35-167. Subject to traffic control signals; right-of-way in crosswalks.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals at intersections and the directions of officers directing traffic at intersections. Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the operator of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be, to so yield to any pedestrian crossing the roadway within a marked crosswalk or within any crosswalk at any intersection. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a crosswalk to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle approaching from the rear to overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. (Code 1960, § 19-130)

 

Sec. 35-168. Jaywalking prohibited.
No pedestrian shall cross any roadway within the city except at intersections or marked crosswalks. (Code 1960, § 19-131)

Sec. 35-169. Walking on left where no sidewalk provided.
Pedestrians on any street or highway of the city, where no sidewalk is provided, shall proceed on the extreme left-hand side of the roadway. Upon the approach of an oncoming vehicle, pedestrians shall step to their left and clear of the roadway. (Code 1960, § 19-132)

Secs. 35-170 – 35-174. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. SPECIAL EVENTS5
Sec. 35-175. Definition of special event.
Special event: Any organized activity upon any public street, sidewalk or alley that requires the closure of all or part of any public street, sidewalk or alley. Such events shall include, but not necessarily be limited to parades, motorcades, block parties, dances, runs, bicycle races, sidewalk and/or street sales, displays of transportation devices, showing of any product, goods, wares, merchandise, or events. (Ord. No. 4036, § 1, 4-26-93)

Sec. 35-176. Permits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a special event on or upon any public street, sidewalk or alley in the city or knowingly participate in any such special event unless and until a permit to conduct such special event has been obtained from the public works director. (Ord. No. 4036, § 1, 4-26-93)

Sec. 35-177. Special events for commercial purpose prohibited.
No permit shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a special event which the public works director finds is proposed to be held for the sole purpose of advertising a single or limited amount of products, goods, wares, or merchandise, and is designed to be held purely for private profit. The foregoing is not intended to prohibit an event where businesses within a geographic area combine to sponsor a community function designed to increase business within the city. (Ord. No. 4036, § 1, 4-26-93)

Sec. 35-178. Interference with special event.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly join or participate in any special event conducted under permit from the public works director in violation of any of the terms of said permit, nor knowingly join or participate in any permitted special event without the consent and over the objection of the permittee, nor in any manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct. (Ord. No. 4036, § 1, 4-26-93)

Sec. 35-179. Application for permit.
Any person who wants to conduct a special event shall apply to the permit center of the city for a permit at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the proposed special event. The public works director may in his discretion consider any application for a permit to conduct a special event which is filed less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date such special event is to be conducted. The application for such permit shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city and shall be forwarded to all appropriate departments for comments. In order that adequate arrangements may be made for the proper policing of the special event, the application shall contain the following information:

(1) The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, the special event chairman and the addresses and telephone numbers of each.

(2) The purpose of the special event, the date when it is proposed to be conducted, the location of any assembly area, the location of any disbanding area, any routes to be traveled and the approximate time when the special event will start and terminate.

(3) Such other information as the chief of police and fire chief may deem reasonably necessary. (Ord. No. 4036, § 1, 4-26-93)

Sec. 35-180. Issuance or denial of permit.
(a) Standards for issuance. The public works director shall issue a special event permit conditioned upon the applicant’s written agreement to comply with the terms of such permit unless the public works director finds that:

(1) The time, location, route and size of the special event will disrupt, to an unreasonable extent, the movement of other traffic.

(2) Allowing the special event would deny reasonable police protection or public safety access to the city.

(3) Such special event will interfere with another special event for which a permit has been issued.

(b) Standards for denial. The public works director shall deny an application for a special event permit and notify the applicant of such denial where:

(1) The public works director makes any finding contrary to the findings required to be made for the issuance of a permit.

(2) The information contained in the application is found to be false or nonexistent in any material detail.

(3) The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all conditions of the permit.

(4) The public works director makes a finding that the proposed special event would cause an unreasonable hazard to public safety. (Ord. No. 4036, § 1, 4-26-93)

Sec. 35-181. Contents of permit.
In each permit the public works director shall specify when applicable:

(1) The assembly area and time therefor;

(2) The starting time and ending time;

(3) Streets and/or alleys special event is to occur on;

(4) The maximum number of platoons or units and the maximum and minimum intervals of space to be maintained between the units of any parade or motorcade;

(5) The maximum length of any parade or motorcade in miles or fractions thereof;

(6) The disbanding area, and disbanding time;

(7) The number of persons required to monitor any parade or motorcade;

(8) The number and type of vehicles, if any;

(9) The material and maximum size of any sign, banner, placard or carrying device therefor;

(10) The permittee shall advise all participants in any parade or motorcade either orally or by written notice, of the terms and conditions of the permit, prior to the commencement of such parade or motorcade;

(11) That the amplification of sound permitted to be emitted from sound trucks, or bull horns, be fixed and not variable; and operated pursuant to sections 24-37 through 24-45 of this code;

(12) That any parade or motorcade continue to move at a fixed rate of speed and that any willful delay or willful stopping of said parade or motorcade, except when reasonably required for the safe and orderly conduct of any parade or motorcade, shall constitute a violation of the permit; and

(13) Such other requirements as are found by the chief of police or fire chief or community development director to be reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or property. (Ord. No. 4036, § 1, 4-26-93)

Sec. 35-182. Liability insurance.
A certificate holding the city harmless from all damages resulting from accidents occurring during the special event will be required from an applicant. (Ord. No. 4036, § 1, 4-26-93)

Sec. 35-183. Officials to be notified.
Immediately upon the granting of a permit for a special event, the public works director shall send a copy thereof to the following:

(1) The chief of police.

(2) The fire chief.

(3) The community development director.

(4) The city manager. (Ord. No. 4036, § 1, 4-26-93)

Sec. 35-184. Revocation of permit.
(a) Violation. Any permit for a special event issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the public works director for a violation of the conditions of the permit. Notice of such action revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing to the permittee by personal service or by certified mail.

(b) Emergency. Any permit for a special event issued pursuant to this chapter may be summarily revoked by the chief of police at any time when by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the chief of police determines that the safety of the public or property requires such revocation. Notice of such action revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing to the permittee by personal service or by certified mail. (Ord. No. 4036, § 1, 4-26-93)

Sec. 35-185. Right-of-way use permit.
It shall be unlawful to use city right-of-ways for a special event as defined herein without first obtaining a permit. (Ord. No. 4036, § 1, 4-26-93)

1
Cross references – Motor vehicles at airport, § 5-50 et seq.; manufactured homes, manufactured home parks and tourist facilities, Ch. 23; excessive noise in operation of vehicle, § 24-28; traffic in parks, § 26-36; public right-of-way, Ch. 31; subdivisions, Ch. 32; taxicabs and other vehicles for hire, Ch. 34; zoning, Ch. 37.


2
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3606, § 1, enacted Nov. 30, 1981, repealed former Art. IV, containing regulations relative to stopping, standing and parking, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Art. IV as herein set out. Former Art. IV was derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 19-75, 19-77 – 19-84, 19-87 – 19-88.1, 19-88.6 – 19-88.11; Ord. No. 2454; Ord. No. 2678; Ord. No. 2725; Ord. No. 2728; Ord. No. 3042, adopted July 26, 1971; Ord. No. 3109, adopted Oct. 24, 1972; Ord. No. 3116, adopted Oct. 30, 1972; Ord. No. 3128, adopted Jan. 2, 1973; Ord. No. 3159, adopted Aug. 27, 1973; Ord. No. 3336, adopted Dec. 6, 1976; Ord. No. 3438, adopted April 3, 1978; Ord. No. 3439, adopted April 10, 1978; Ord. No. 3441, adopted April 24, 1978; Ord. No. 3442, adopted April 24, 1978; Ord. No. 3518, adopted Sep. 22, 1980; and Ord. No. 3528, adopted July 7, 1980.


3
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4003, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, repealed §§ 35 -111 – 35-131 which comprised Art. VI. Former Art. VI was concerned with abandoned vehicles, and derived from Ord. No. 3525, adopted July 7, 1980; Ord. No. 3563, adopted March 23, 1981; and Ord. No. 3637, adopted April 19, 1982.


4
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4003, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, repealed §§ 35-148 – 35-156 which comprised Div. 2, bicycle registration. Former Div. 2 derived from the 1960 Code, §§ 19-121 – 19-129.


5
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4036, § 1, adopted April 26, 1993, added Article VIII to Chapter 35. This has been editorially changed to Article IX to avoid duplication of article numbers.


Chapter 35.5
VEGETATION
Art. I.    In General, §§ 35.5-1 – 35.5-15

Art. II.    Trees and Shrubbery, §§ 35.5-16 – 35.5-27

ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 35.5-1. Compliance with tree pruning practices.
All action ordered to be taken by the director of public works under this chapter shall conform with the tree pruning practices approved by the city. (Ord. No. 3776, § 3, 7-1-85)

Cross references – Tree pruner’s license, § 21-199 et seq.; street trees, § 26-39 et seq.

Secs. 35.5-2 – 35.5-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. TREES AND SHRUBBERY1
Sec. 35.5-16. Purview of the city; responsibility for maintenance.
The city council of the city of Lewiston, Idaho, hereby finds and declares that the maintenance of trees and shrubs within the city and the removal of dangerous trees affects the public safety and welfare and is therefore a proper subject of regulation by the city. The city council further finds and declares that trees and shrubs which are located within street parking, alleys and other public rights-of-way primarily benefit the abutting properties and the responsibility for maintenance of such trees and shrubs should properly be upon the owners of such abutting properties. (Ord. No. 3280, § 1, 9-15-75)

Sec. 35.5-17. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the term “owner” shall include every person, including lessees, agents and representatives, in possession, charge, custody or control of any real property within the city of Lewiston. “Director” means the public works director of the city of Lewiston or his designated employees. (Ord. No. 3280, § 2, 9-15-75)

Sec. 35.5-18. Trimming at property owner’s expense; specifications.
All brush, landscaping and trees, including dead trees and branches or limbs thereof, which are in, adjacent to or overhang the public right-of-way of any street, roadway, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way, shall be kept trimmed by the owner of the adjacent property, at the owner’s expense, in a neat and orderly manner, all pursuant to the authority provided in section 31-33 of this code. (Ord. No. 3280, § 3, 9-15-75; Ord. No. 3588, § 2, 8-17-81; Ord. No. 4019, § 1, 10-7-91)

Sec. 35.5-19. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3776, § 4, adopted July 1, 1985, repealed § 35.5-19 pertaining to removal of trees and shrubs on public rights-of-way by the abutting property owners, and derived from Ord. No. 3280, § 4, enacted Sep. 15, 1975.

Sec. 35.5-20. Notice to property owner to correct condition; abatement by city at cost of owner; lien for nonpayment.
Whenever the director shall determine that conditions in violation of section 35.5-18 of this article exist, or that any tree located within or overhanging any public right-of-way is top-heavy, split, shattered, broken, dead or diseased so as to require removal for the protection of the public safety, he shall cause written notice to be served upon the owner of the abutting property to correct such condition or to remove said tree within fifteen (15) days. Service of notice in person or by mail to the person in whose name the property stands according to the records of the assessor of Nez Perce County shall be sufficient service. If the required work is not substantially completed within said fifteen (15) days or within such extension of time as the director, in the reasonable exercise of his discretion, may allow, then the director may cause the work to be performed and the cost thereof to be assessed against the owner of the abutting property. Said cost shall be a lien against the abutting property, fileable within the time and enforceable in the manner provided for liens of laborers and materialmen under the laws of the state of Idaho. (Ord. No. 3280, § 5, 9-15-75)

Sec. 35.5-21. Emergency removal due to immediate danger; cost to be incurred by property owner.
Nothing contained in the foregoing sections of this article shall prevent the city from removing any tree, brush or landscaping or portions of trees, brush or landscaping in or overhanging any public right-of-way without notice to the owner of the abutting property where, in the sound discretion of the director, there exists an immediate danger to life or property due to the condition of said trees, brush or landscaping or for the necessary operation of a fire hydrant. Such action shall not relieve the owner of the abutting property from responsibility for the costs of removal which costs shall be a lien on the abutting property enforceable in the manner set forth in section 35.5-20 of this article. (Ord. No. 3280, § 6, 9-15-75; Ord. No. 4019, § 2, 10-7-91)

Secs. 35.5-22 – 35.5-25. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3776, § 4, adopted July 1, 1985, repealed §§ 35.5-22 – 35.5-25 in their entirety. Said former sections, detailing the responsibilities of property owners to disinfect trees harboring pests and diseases, were derived from Ord. No. 3280, §§ 7 – 10, enacted Sep. 15, 1975.

Sec. 35.5-26. Administration of provisions.
The administration of the provisions of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the director of public works or his designated employees. (Ord. No. 3280, § 11, 9-15-75)

Sec. 35.5-27. Appeal.
Any order of the director may be appealed by the owner to whom the order is directed. The appeal shall be in writing and addressed to the city council, and shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days of receipt of the written notice or order. The council shall afford such appellant a reasonable opportunity to be heard, but the decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. No. 3280, § 12, 9-15-75)

1
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3280, §§ 1 – 12, adopted Sep. 15, 1975, did not specifically amend the code. Codification herein as Ch. 35.5, Art. II, §§ 35.5-16 – 35.5-27 was, therefore, at the discretion of the editor.


Chapter 36
WATER, WASTEWATER, AND STORMWATER1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 36-1 – 36-30

Art. II.    Water, §§ 36-31 – 36-100

Div. 1.    Generally, §§ 36-31 – 36-60

Div. 2.    Meters, §§ 36-61 – 36-100

Art. III.    Wastewaters, §§ 36-101 – 36-250

Div. 1.    Generally, §§ 36-101 – 36-130

Div. 2.    Connections from Property Outside District, §§ 36-131 – 36-150

Div. 3.    Industrial Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution, §§ 36-151 – 36-250

Subdiv. A.    General Provisions, § 36-151

Subdiv. B.    Definitions, § 36-152

Subdiv. C.    Regulations, §§ 36-153 – 36-155

Subdiv. D.    Fees, §§ 36-156, 36-157

Subdiv. E.    Administration, §§ 36-158 – 36-163

Subdiv. F.    Enforcement, §§ 36-164 – 36-171

Subdiv. G.    Penalties, §§ 36-172 – 36-175

Subdiv. H.    Reserved, § 36-176

Subdiv. I.    Records Retention, § 36-177

Subdiv. J.    Miscellaneous Provisions, §§ 36-178, 36-179

Subdiv. K.    Severability, § 36-180

Subdiv. L.    Conflict, §§ 36-181 – 36-185

Subdiv. M.    Septage Haulers, §§ 36-186 – 36-197

Subdiv. N.    Waste Pumpers/Haulers, §§ 36-198 – 36-250

Art. IV.    Stormwater Utility Ordinance, §§ 36-251 – 36-265

ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 36-1. No structures on utility easements.
(a) No structure shall be constructed on, over or in any public water, wastewater, or stormwater easement. Where construction is proposed on, over or in a public water, wastewater, or stormwater easement, the property owner shall provide for the relocation of easements at the property owner’s expense if, at the sole discretion of the public works director, said easement is negatively impacted. The public works director, in his or her sole discretion, may permit said relocation if the easement and existing or future water, wastewater, or stormwater service will not be adversely affected.

(b) The city shall require the relocation of public easements and/or utilities or the removal of any structure constructed on a public water, wastewater, or stormwater easement where it is determined such structure was constructed without the prior approval of the city. All costs for relocation of the easement and/or public utilities or the removal of any structure shall be the responsibility of the property owner.

(c) All water, wastewater, and stormwater easements shall be constructed and maintained so as to allow permanent access for maintenance equipment to maintain water, wastewater, and stormwater lines located in said easement.

(d) No excavations or fill shall be performed within rights-of-way or easement without a plan approved by the public works director. The public works director may or may not approve said plan. (Ord. No. 4006, § 32, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4080, § 1, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-2. Utility service outside city limits.
(a) The city council may allow connections to city water and wastewater utilities for real property located outside the city limits. An applicant shall submit a written application to the public works director describing the location of the private property outside of the city limits proposed to be serviced by a city water or wastewater utility service. Said application shall include a vicinity map and the proposed water and/or wastewater capacity needed. A technical evaluation of the application shall be done by the city staff and a recommendation made to the city council. Said technical evaluation shall include an evaluation of the city’s annexation policy and a recommendation on annexation of the real property.

(b) In the event the city council approves connections to city water and wastewater utilities for real property located outside the city limits, all utility main line extensions shall be up to and beyond the private property being developed for loop closures and/or future development. Owners of real property located outside the city limits and adjacent to the city limits shall apply for annexation into the city prior to extension of utility service. Owners of real property located outside the city limits, not adjacent to the city limits and connecting to city water and/or wastewater utilities shall agree to apply for annexation into the city of Lewiston of the real property connected to city water and/or wastewater utilities when said real property becomes adjacent to the city limits and eligible for annexation. Said agreement shall provide that the city may annex the real property being served by the city water and/or wastewater utility service at any time, in the city council’s sole discretion, after said real property becomes adjacent to the city limits and eligible for annexation. In the event the city council chooses to annex said real property and the owner of said real property does not agree to said annexation, then water and/or wastewater utility service shall be terminated. Said agreement shall be in writing, in a form acceptable to the city, executed by all legal owners of the real property and recorded with the Nez Perce County recorder as an encumbrance on the real property serviced by city water and/or wastewater utilities. (Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Secs. 36-3 – 36-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. WATER
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY

Sec. 36-31. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

City-owned property: Any property owned, operated or controlled by the city of Lewiston and used for the enjoyment and/or recreation of the citizens of Lewiston.

Director: The public works director of the city or other officials or persons duly designated to perform the duties thereof.

Irrigation usage: Water used for maintaining shrubs, grass or landscaping of property which is not returned to the city sanitary wastewater system for treatment.

Standard city service connections: A three-quarter-inch nominal internal diameter or one-inch internal diameter for lots of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, extending from the main to the property line, and including the necessary tap or shutoff, tapping saddle, pipe, fittings, curb cock and curb box, meter and meter box where the latter is necessary.

Any act or thing in this article required or authorized to be done by such official or by any official of the city may be done on behalf of such official by an authorized officer or employee of the city. (Code 1960, § 36-32; Ord. No. 3517, § 2, 2-11-80; Ord. No. 3788, § 5, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 9, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-32. Application for water connection – Generally.
(a) Any person desiring to have premises connected with the water supply system of the city shall present at the office of the public works director, or other place provided for the conduct of such business, the following information: If a new building, a copy of the building permit therefor; in any case, a description of the premises desired to be served by addition, block, lot and official house number as assigned to such premises by the public works department, together with an application for water service, prepared upon a printed form to be supplied for that purpose by the city.

(b) In addition to the description of the premises, such application shall state fully all purposes for which such water is to be used, the number of families to be supplied or other indication of the probable consumption, the size of the service pipe or connection believed to be necessary therefor, the name and address of the applicant and whether the applicant is the owner, authorized agent or contractor, and mailing address for billing purposes. (Code 1960, § 36-33; Ord. No. 3788, § 6, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 10, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-33. Private fire lines and automatic sprinkler systems.
(a) All fire lines into a structure must be separate from any other water service lines. When adequate sized fire lines exist, a fire line may serve more than one (1) structure as provided by subsection (j) of this section.

(b) The minimum annual charge for any structure served by a private fire line shall be established by resolution adopted by the city council.

(c) All fire lines hereinafter installed in any structure in the city shall be painted red.

(d) These minimum charges shall apply in all cases where automatic sprinklers are installed and where fire gates and other outlets are sealed.

(e) No charge will be made for water used in extinguishing fire.

(f) The inside diameter of the pipe leading to a fire hydrant shall determine the size of the hydrant.

(g) Should the water division find that water not metered is used through a fire connection for any purpose other than the extinguishing of fire upon the premises, the owner and occupant will be notified. If such improper conditions are not corrected within five (5) days, the water shall be shut off until proper adjustments are made. The owner of said property shall be subject to a fine as established by city council.

(h) If any fire protection service is installed outside the city, the same may be discontinued at the will of the city council and the connection with the main removed at the expense of the owner or occupant of the property served.

(i) All fire service connection between water mains and property lines shall be installed and maintained by the owner or occupant of the premises served, and shall be the property of the owner.

(j) At the time of making application for such services, the applicant shall file with the water division detailed plans showing all piping installed or to be installed for fire protection, all fire gates, automatic sprinklers and all other outlets, gates or appurtenances. Each fire service connection shall have a gate valve with an adequate valve box for maintenance by the property owner. Applications for a private fire line to serve more than one (1) structure shall be accompanied by a maintenance agreement providing for the maintenance obligation of the parties thereto and identifying the legal descriptions of the structures to be served. If the application meets the requirements of the fire and public works departments, the application shall be approved and any required maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the Nez Perce County recorder’s office at the applicant’s expense.

(k) All new and remodeled fire line connections, all change in flow fire line connections and all change in condition fire line connections shall have an approved backflow assembly, to be installed and located in an accessible area for annual testing, as provided in section 36-56 of this code (cross-connections). Such connections shall include a detector assembly alongside the backflow prevention assembly to determine unauthorized use of water.

(l) No fire service connection larger than six (6) inches in diameter shall be installed without special permission from the director.

(m) The city will perform the tap only, unless the tap is of equal size as the main, then the city will monitor the tie-in. All materials and labor except for tapping the main line shall be the responsibility of the owner. Such charge shall be paid prior to the installation.

(n) Such charge shall be paid by the applicant. (Code 1960, § 36-43; Ord. No. 2325, § 2; Ord. No. 3338, § 1, 12-6-76; Ord. No. 3788, § 7, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 11, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4080, § 17, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4123, § 1, 4-3-95; Ord. No. 4226, § 1, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 4335, § 9, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-34. Service connections – Required.
(a) Each commercial building or residence shall have a separate service connection; however, this requirement may be waived as provided hereafter or upon submission of an alternate plan approved by and thereafter constructed under the direction of the public works director. In those areas of the city zoned R-2, R-3 or R-4, one (1) water service line for one (1) or more water meter connections will be allowed when a condominium or townhouse development is intended for individual ownership; however, if ownership changes from individual to multi then each unit shall be required to have an individual meter connection. The size of the service line shall be determined by the public works director based on the number of residential units to be served. A residential accessory use building as allowed in Lewiston City Code shall not be required to have a separate water service connection to the public water main on lots where the accessory use building cannot be split off and sold separately from the principal use building.

(b) No other service connections shall be allowed within the city’s water service area except to the city’s potable water supply. Those commercial services in existence shall be subject to inspection for a backflow prevention assembly installed as warranted. Such service connection will be subject to an annual inspection fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council and testing of all sources as determined by the city. All residential connections from other sources shall be discontinued.

(c) No person whose premises are supplied with city water shall furnish water to additional persons or premises.

(d) No individual water service under eight (8) inches will be allowed on city water feeder mains. Individual customer services three-quarter (3/4) inch to four (4) inches and fire line taps from four (4) inches to six (6) inches will be allowed on city supply mains only. Eight-inch taps will be allowed for looped systems, subdivisions and fire hydrants and shall be approved by the public works director and any other appropriate authorities. (Code 1960, § 36-44; Ord. No. 3788, § 8, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 12, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4116, § 1, 11-14-94; Ord. No. 4207, § 7, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 4246, § 5, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-35. Service connection – Charges.
(a) Before a service connection is installed, the property owner shall pay the city both an “equity buy-in” fee and a service connection charge as hereinafter set forth; provided, that the minimum meter size on all new service connections shall be three-fourths (3/4) inch on lots less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area and one (1) inch on all lots over ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area, or as required by fixture unit load of the currently adopted Idaho Plumbing Code.

(b) The equity buy-in and service connection fee shall be established by resolution adopted by the city council. (Code 1960, § 36-45; Ord. No. 3155, § 4, 7-30-73; Ord. No. 3304, § 2, 3-8-76; Ord. No. 3788, § 9, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 3898, § 20, 1-4-88; Ord. No. 4006, § 13, 3-20-92; Ord. No. 4080, § 18, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4096, § 2, 3-28-94; Ord. No. 4109, § 5, 8-29-94; Ord. No. 4116, § 2, 11-14-94; Ord. No. 4143, § 3, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 4168, § 4, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 4207, § 8, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 4223, § 3, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 4246, § 6, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 4267, § 5, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 4295, § 5, 8-27-01; Ord. No. 4317, § 5, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 4335, § 10, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 4358, § 2, 9-13-04; Ord. No. 4407, § 2, 8-22-05; Ord. No. 4447, § 2, 8-28-06; Ord. No. 4483, § 1, 8-27-07; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-36. Connection when premises not abutting on water main.
(a) In case of application for water service from premises not abutting upon a city water main, the city may lay its service connection from the main toward the premises a distance equal to the distance from the main to the property line at right angles thereto, but in no case a greater distance than sixty (60) feet, and there permit connection to be made with a union to a private water main laid and maintained by the owner of the premises desired to be served, or

(b) The city may, upon the payment into the operating fund of the water division by the applicant of a sufficient sum to cover one-half (1/2) of the cost thereof, extend the service main toward the premises of the applicant along and beneath any street, alley or highway of the city, but not elsewhere, to a total distance of not exceeding three hundred (300) feet.

(c) In case of application for the relocation or extension of an existing water service from premises not abutting upon a city water main, the city may, at the city’s cost, lay the service connection a maximum of sixty (60) feet from the main line toward the premises. Where the service line extension or relocation exceeds sixty (60) feet, the property owner shall reimburse the city for the cost of the relocation or extension in excess of sixty (60) feet. Prior to relocation or extension of an existing water service not abutting a water main, the city shall determine whether a main line extension is warranted. When it is determined that extension of the main line is justified, the provisions in subsection (b) of this section shall apply.

(d) The payment by the applicant of such portion of the cost of such extension shall not vest in such person any right or claim to ownership of the extension. (Code 1960, § 36-46; Ord. No. 3788, § 10, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 14, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4147, § 1, 10-30-95; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-37. Check or pressure valves.
(a) Where it is deemed necessary to protect the city’s water meter from hot water or steam, the public works director or authorized representative shall have the right to order the owner or water user to install an approved backflow prevention assembly, as provided in section 36-56 of this code.

(b) After the effective date of this code all new construction within the city shall have an approved pressure-regulating valve installed at the property owner’s expense on the owner’s water system. (Code 1960, § 36-47; Ord. No. 2552, § 6; Ord. No. 3788, § 11, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 3898, § 21, 1-4-88; Ord. No. 4006, § 15, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-38. Private water lines within the public right-of-way.
(a) All persons connecting to a city-owned water line and laying their own private water lines thereto shall use approved type K copper pipe up to and including two (2) inches in nominal diameter and ductile iron pipe in cases of larger sizes for installations in public right-of-way (refer to section 36-35 of this code for details of pipe size in relation to meter size).

(b) All such private lines shall be laid not less than four (4) feet below the surface of the ground or equal distance below the established grade of any street where such grade is established.

(c) If any such private main be laid in a street or highway where no grade has been established and such grade is established at some later date, the public works director may require the consumer using such private main at that time to relay such private main in such manner as to protect it from frost damage. (Code 1960, § 36-49; Ord. No. 2552, § 7; Ord. No. 3788, § 12, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 16, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4080, § 19, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4096, § 3, 3-28-94; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-39. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4080, § 20, adopted Aug. 30, 1993, repealed § 36-109, Stop and waste cocks. Former § 36-109 derived from Code 1960, § 36-50, as amended by Ord. No. 3788, § 13, adopted June 24, 1985. Ord. No. 4603, adopted Sept. 23, 2013, renumbered § 36-109 as 36-39.

Sec. 36-40. Connections and repairs to be made by licensed plumbers.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person except a licensed plumber shall carry on the business of plumbing, insofar as it comprises the making of connections to any service connection or the making of any repairs, additions or alterations of any pipe, stop and waste cock or any other assembly connected with or designed to be connected with the city water supply system. (Code 1960, § 36-51; Ord. No. 3788, § 14, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 17, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4080, § 21, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-41. Connections by owners – Permitted.
The public works director may permit the owner of any premises to make his own connections with a service connection within the property line if convinced that the owner is properly equipped to safely do the work so that the city is not likely to suffer loss thereby. The city may require a reasonable deposit to ensure the character of the work done. (UPC 27-19.) (Code 1960, § 36-52; Ord. No. 3788, § 15, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 18, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4080, § 22, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-42. Connections by owners – Trench to be left open for inspection.
(a) Whenever the owner or duly authorized agent of any premises connected to the city water supply system shall desire to use the water, they shall request the public works director to have the water turned on and service begun.

(b) The owner or duly authorized agent shall leave his portion of the trench containing the service connection open until the same has been properly inspected and the water turned on, when he shall immediately and properly cover such pipe. (Code 1960, § 36-53; Ord. No. 3788, § 16, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 19, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-43. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4080, § 23, adopted Aug. 30, 1993, repealed § 36-113, Building official to report inspections. Former § 36-113 derived from Code 1960, § 36-54, as amended by Ord. No. 3788, § 17, adopted June 24, 1985, and Ord. No. 4006, § 20, adopted March 30, 1992. Ord. No. 4603, adopted Sept. 23, 2013, renumbered § 36-113 as 36-43.

Sec. 36-44. Use of street key for shutoffs.
(a) No person, other than a licensed plumber or authorized city employees, shall possess or use any street key for the purpose of shutting off the city curb cock.

(b) All plumbers shall leave the city curb cock shutoff on all premises which are newly connected with the city water supply system and in all other cases in the condition in which it was found.

(c) This requirement shall not be construed in any way to relieve any plumber from making the necessary applications and from complying in all respects with the other requirements of this article.

(d) In case of the failure of any plumber to properly conform to the applicable requirements of this chapter, the public works director may cause the same to be remedied and shall cause the cost of the same, together with any fees or penalties which may have accrued thereon, to be charged to the plumber.

(e) No further permit shall be issued to such plumber until all costs charged to the plumber shall be paid in full.

(f) If the payment of all costs charged to a plumber is not forthwith made and after due hearing before the city council, no further permit shall be issued to such plumber to make water connections for a period of one (1) year thereafter. (Code 1960, § 36-55; Ord. No. 3788, § 18, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 21, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4080, § 24, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-44.1. Meter tampering.
Where it is determined by the water division that the city curb cock shutoff has been tampered with and damaged and is not in the “on” or “off” position as recorded by the city, the property owner of the premises in question shall be assessed a fee of the actual costs of repair or a minimum fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council per occurrence to be charged with the regular utility billing. (Ord. No. 3952, § 2, 7-24-89; Ord. No. 4006, § 22, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4080, § 25, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4335, § 11, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-45. Director shall give notice before shutoff for violations.
In the case of violation of any of the sections of this chapter, the public works director shall serve a written notice of the violation to the owner of the premises in violation. If the violation has not been corrected to the satisfaction of and in accordance with the standard of the city water division within twenty-four (24) hours after the service of said notice, the public works director shall turn off the water to the premises. The water shall not be turned on until the noticed violation is corrected and a turn on fee and any other applicable fees have been paid in full. In case of a public health or safety emergency the public works director may turn off the water immediately and without notice. (Code 1960, § 36-62; Ord. No. 3542, § 7, 9-15-80; Ord. No. 3788, § 19, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 23, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4080, § 26, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4335, § 12, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-46. Hydrants – Interference with, connection, etc.
(a) No person, except one (1) duly authorized by the public works director or the fire department, shall open, close, operate, turn on, turn off, interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to or connect anything with any fire hydrant, standpipe, stop valve, stopcock, or meter belonging to the city; nor shall any person make any connection with any water main or water pipe belonging to the city water supply system without due authority first having been obtained from the public works department.

(b) An approved backflow prevention assembly or appropriate air gap will be required on any vehicle or equipment that will be connecting to any hydrant or any appurtenances of the city’s whether it is metered or not.

(c) For other than fire suppression and fire hydrant testing, a hydrant meter permit is required of any person desiring to use a fire hydrant. The minimum charge shall be as established by resolution adopted by the city council plus the actual cost of the water consumed. A deposit fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council shall be required before a hydrant meter permit is issued. The deposit fee shall be refundable upon removal by the city of the undamaged meter and backflow prevention assembly and upon finding the fire hydrant undamaged. If damage is found to either the meter, backflow prevention assembly or fire hydrant, the deposit fee shall be forfeited. When an installed hydrant meter is not being used for the period of one (1) month, it shall be removed by the city or payment of the minimum charge for that month shall be required.

(d) Anyone found using a hydrant, hydrant meter or an approved backflow prevention assembly without a permit shall be assessed a fee and shall be levied on the next billing period, to the business/property owner using the water illegally. (Code 1960, § 36-64; Ord. No. 3788, § 20, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 24, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4080, § 27, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4335, § 13, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-47. Hydrants – Obstructions, drawing water; damage to same.
(a) No person shall obstruct the ready access to any fire hydrant by placing around or thereon any stone, brick, lumber, dirt or other material, attempt to draw any water therefrom or willfully or carelessly damage the same.

(b) In the event that any person shall willfully, carelessly or otherwise damage or break any fire hydrant, street standpipe, public drinking fountain, water main or other appurtenance connected with the city water supply system, he/she shall at once report the occurrence to the public works director or police with his/her name and address and he/she will pay the cost of the repairs or replacements made necessary thereto. (Code 1960, § 36-65; Ord. No. 3788, § 21, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 25, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-48. Water for construction operations.
(a) Water for construction operations may be supplied only at schedule rates. The owner or contractor desiring the service may be required to make such a deposit with the public works director as will, in the latter’s opinion, secure the city against the nonpayment of all charges and penalties.

(b) Should no service connection be available at the desired point, the public works director may make a special service connection therefor and shall charge the cost of such work of installation and removal, less the salvage of the material recovered, to the account of the applicant or deduct it from any deposit made as above prescribed. (Code 1960, § 36-66; Ord. No. 3788, § 22, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 26, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4080, § 28, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-49. Taking water from other premises after shutoff prohibited.
When water has been shut off at any premise for lack of payment of charges or penalties or for any other cause, no one occupying such premises shall take water from any other premises connected with the city water supply system, nor shall any person permit such taking of water. (Code 1960, § 36-68; Ord. No. 3788, § 23, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-50. Sprinkling persons on streets and sidewalks.
No person shall willfully place or permit any automatic sprinkling device or hold any hose in such position or manner that water therefrom falls on any person while on any public street, alley, highway or sidewalk. The public works director may shut off the water of any person violating this section. (Code 1960, § 36-69; Ord. No. 3788, § 24, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 27, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-51. Right of city to shut off water.
For repairs or other necessary purposes the city water may be shut off from any or all water mains, without notice. The city shall not be liable for any damages for terminating the water supply. (Code 1960, § 36-70; Ord. No. 3788, § 25, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4080, § 29, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-52. Steam boiler connections.
Water for high pressure or other steam boilers shall not be drawn directly from the city mains, but shall in all cases be first fed into a suitable tank of sufficient capacity to supply needed water for at least one-half (1/2) day. (Code 1960, § 36-71; Ord. No. 3788, § 26, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-53. Connections for ice and cold storage plants.
(a) No ice machine or cold storage plant shall be connected in any manner with the city water supply system, so that water which has been used in any part of such machine or plant will or may be returned after use into the city mains.

(b) All water so used shall be at once discharged into the wastewater lines or other proper place of disposal. (Code 1960, § 36-72; Ord. No. 3788, § 27, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-54. Wasting water prohibited.
(a) No person shall waste water or allow it to be wasted by imperfect or leaking stop valves; check valves; other valves, faucets, pipes, fittings, fixtures or devices of any kind for the utilization and control of water supply or allow any faucet or valve to run wholly or partly open for the prevention of freezing or for any other reason or use the water for any purpose other than those upon which his contract is based or use water in any way in violation of any provision of this article. In case of the neglect or failure to comply with these requirements for the proper maintenance of plumbing and fixtures and the proper use of water, the public works director may shut off the water until proper repairs are made and the required penalty paid.

(b) In addition to other penalties imposed by this code upon the conviction of any person for the violation of the provisions of this section, the water on such premises shall be shut off and shall not be again turned on until all penalties incurred have been fully paid. (Code 1960, § 36-73; Ord. No. 3788, § 28, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 28, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4080, § 30, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-55. Pollution, destruction, etc., of water supply prohibited.
(a) No person shall place or cause to be placed any offal, garbage, refuse, matter or other unwholesome, injurious or poisonous substance in any part of the city water supply system or over the sources of water supply, pipes, reservoirs or water plants. No person shall wash or bathe in any city water source, reservoir or plant. Nor shall any person injure or offer or attempt to injure the water supply of the city or any part of the plant or equipment maintained for that purpose.

(b) Any physical arrangement whereby the city’s domestic water supply is connected directly or indirectly with any other water supply system, wastewater line, drain, conduit, pool, storage or reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which contains, or may contain contaminated water, wastewater, or other waste or liquid which would be capable of imparting contamination to the domestic supply as a result of backflow is prohibited.

(c) The consumer has the responsibility of preventing actual and potential contamination of the city water system and the consumer’s own system. The consumer’s responsibility begins at the point of delivery from the city and includes all of the consumer’s water system. The consumers, at their own expense, shall install and maintain USCEC approved backflow prevention assemblies as directed by the city. Backflow prevention assemblies installed on lawn sprinkler or irrigation systems may be installed, upon obtaining proper permits, by the property owner, plumber or other lawn sprinkler or irrigation system installer. Backflow prevention assemblies installed on all other systems shall be installed by a certified plumber. A list of approved backflow prevention assemblies and certified plumbers shall be maintained at the public works department. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested by a licensed tester certified by the state of Idaho, before being placed into service. (Code 1960, § 36-74; Ord. No. 3788, § 29, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4039, § 1, 4-20-92; Ord. No. 4080, § 31, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-56. Cross-connections.
(a) Responsibility of city. The city of Lewiston has the primary responsibility to protect the city-owned potable water system from actual and potential contamination by objectionable and hazardous liquids, solids and gases. The city’s responsibility includes the total water system and extends from the source of supply to the point of delivery to the consumer’s water system. It is also the city’s responsibility to ensure that the consumer has taken proper steps to protect the city’s potable water system from actual and potential contamination from the consumer’s water system.

(b) Prohibited. Except as approved by the State Department of Health of the state of Idaho, hereinafter referred to as the Health Department, all cross-connections as herein defined, whether or not cross-connections are controlled by automatic devices such as check valves or by hand-operated mechanisms, such as gate valves or stopcocks, are hereby prohibited.

(c) Definitions. For the purpose of this regulation, cross-connections are defined as follows:

(1) Any bypass, being defined as any physical arrangement whereby water may be diverted around any feature of the purification process of the city.

(2) Any emergency intake or secondary intake being defined as an intake or other device capable of introducing water into the public water system from a source of supply which, because of its unsafe characteristics, has not been approved for drinking and culinary purposes by the Health Department.

(3) Any other cross-connection as defined in the Manual of Cross-Connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control Research, University of Southern California, current edition.

a. A cross-connection is a point in a plumbing system where the potable water supply is connected directly or can be connected directly to a nonpotable source.

b. Air gap separation means the vertical physical separation between a supply line and the overflow rim of a receiving vessel. This separation must be at least twice the inside diameter of the supply line, but never less than one (1) inch.

c. Auxiliary supply means any water source or system, other than the public water supply, that may be available in the building or premises.

d. Backflow means the flow other than the intended direction of flow, of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the distribution system of a public water supply.

e. Back pressure means backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, or other means that could create pressure within the system greater than the supply pressure.

f. Back siphonage means a form of backflow due to a negative or sub-atmospheric pressure within a water system.

g. Backflow prevention assembly means an assembly to counteract back pressures or prevent back siphonage.

h. Double-check valve assembly means an assembly composed of two (2) single, independently acting check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water tightness of each check valve.

i. Reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly means an assembly incorporating two (2) or more check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two (2) checks, two (2) shutoff valves, and equipped with necessary appurtenances for testing.

j. A water purveyor is the owner or operator of the public potable water system supplying water for public use.

k. Approved means approved in writing by the Department of Health and Welfare, Department of Environmental Quality or other agency having jurisdiction.

l. Atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB) means an assembly which contains a float check (poppet), a check seat, and an air inlet port. When water pressure is reduced to gauge pressure of zero (0) or below, air enters the device preventing back siphonage. An atmospheric vacuum breaker is designed to protect against back siphonage only.

m. Pressure vacuum breaker (PVB) means an assembly consisting of a spring-loaded check valve (three (3) inches and larger consisting of two (2)), an independently operating air inlet valve, inlet and outlet shutoff valves and properly installed test cocks. The air inlet valve is internally loaded to the open position, normally by the means of a spring. This internal loading allows the device to be installed on the pressure side of a shutoff valve. It is designed to protect against back siphonage only.

n. Internally loaded check valve means a check valve, which is internally loaded, either weighted or spring loaded, to the extent it will be drip tight in the direction of flow with a one (1) psi differential.

(4) The provisions of this section shall apply to all existing and all new construction utilizing the city’s water system.

(d) Inspection.

(1) The city shall review all water service connections and evaluate the degree of hazard and the type of protection needed to comply with the requirements of the State of Idaho Rules for Public Drinking Water Systems (Section 58.01.08). Where potential or actual cross-connections exist, the city shall notify the water consumer of the type of backflow prevention assembly that must be installed to provide adequate protection to the city’s water system. The consumer shall proceed with the installation of the assembly at the location recommended by the city. When possible, the assembly shall be installed at the point of service delivery.

A state of Idaho-certified backflow assembly tester shall test all backflow prevention assemblies a minimum of one (1) time each twelve (12) months. A list of approved certified backflow assembly testers will be available through the public works department. When a defective assembly is discovered, the consumer shall repair the defective assembly within time limits specified by the city.

The tester shall be responsible for the accuracy of all tests and reports prepared by the tester. The water division must receive a copy of all test reports within ten (10) days of the final test, and a “TAG” containing the tester’s name and date of satisfactory test shall be attached to the assembly. Any backflow prevention assembly left in a failed (nonpassing) condition, creating a potential threat to the potable water supply, must be reported to the water division within twenty-four (24) hours. The registration issued to any assembly tested may be revoked or suspended by the water division for improper testing or reporting.

A report sheet shall be filled out and completed by the certified backflow assembly tester after each test and upon completion of any repairs. Each test result shall be submitted to the city. A report sheet shall be filled out and completed by the certified backflow assembly tester after installation, upon completion of any repairs, and annually. Test reports shall be sent to the city cross-connection control specialist.

An old assembly no longer on the lists will be accepted, as long as it passes its annual test or can be repaired to pass the annual test.

(2) No underground sprinkling device will be installed without an approved backflow prevention assembly at the point at which the water for irrigation is taken from the domestic water system. Atmospheric vacuum breakers will not be approved for this type of installation.

Where there may be a separate system for irrigation purposes, it should never enter the consumer’s residence or structure. Said system should terminate at least two (2) feet outside the residence or structure.

(3) An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer’s water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist:

a. In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply that is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and that is not acceptable as an additional source by the health department, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line, appropriate to the degree of hazard.

b. In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substances are handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line, appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system that have been subject to deterioration in quality.

c. In the case of premises having (1) internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or (2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line.

(4) The type of protective assembly required under subsections (3)(a), (b), and (c) of this section shall depend upon the degree of hazard that exists as follows:

a. In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection (3)(a) of this section and is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system will be protected by an approved air-gap separation of an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.

b. In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double-check valve assembly.

c. In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health that is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants.

d. In the case of any premises where there are “uncontrolled” cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection.

e. In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly for each service to the premises.

f. In the case of any premises where, in the opinion of the water division, an undue health threat is posed because of the presence of extremely toxic substances, the water division may require an air-gap at the service connection to protect the public water system. This requirement will be at the discretion of the water division and is dependent on the degree of hazard.

(5) Existing structures. Annual inspections shall be made of all buildings, structures or improvements of any nature, now receiving water through the city’s system for the purpose of ascertaining whether any cross-connections exist. Such inspections shall be on a continuing, rotating basis and shall be made by city authorized personnel certified by the Idaho Bureau of Occupational Licenses or the Health Department.

Such inspections shall be for the purpose of establishing the water uses on the premises, the existence of any possible cross-connections, the availability of pollutants, contaminants and other liquid, solid or gaseous substances which may be used industrially for stabilization of water supplies, and may also include such other inspections and/or processes as are necessary for determining whether a health hazard exists upon the premises.

(6) Representatives of the State Health Department or the U.S. Public Health Service or Idaho DEQ or EPA shall have the right to accompany city personnel on any inspection and may request inspections or may reinspect as they may deem necessary.

(7) The city water system may be required to be protected by either a double-check valve assembly or a reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly whenever a consumer’s water system incorporates only atmospheric vacuum breakers to prevent back siphonage.

(e) Correction, reinspection. If the city determines that by reason of a cross-connection a health hazard exists upon any premises inspected, the same shall be corrected by the landowner, at the landowner’s expense.

The city has the right to direct the landowner as to a minimum acceptable procedure for correcting the situation. Standards shall be based upon the latest edition of the Cross-Connection Control Manual, Accepted Procedures and Practice.

The time limit as to the installation of a newly required assembly will be dependent upon the degree of health hazard that is present to the city’s water supply. The higher the hazard, the shorter the time limits.

The representative of the city, in cooperation with the Idaho State Health Department, shall determine a reasonable time within which the property owner shall complete such correction and shall reinspect the premises after the expiration of such period of time.

(f) Penalties. If the department of public works determines that a parcel or lot within the city of Lewiston has an improper cross-connection, the public works director shall provide notice to the property owner that the cross-connection problem must be remedied and give the owner time to correct the problem. If the owner refuses to allow department personnel access to the property to assess the extent of the problem or if the owner refuses to timely correct the problem, the director may shut off water to the parcel or lot and all premises on that land. The water will not be restored until all problems are corrected and the owner has paid all fees and/or costs incurred by the city in enforcing the provisions of this section.

(1) When an assembly has been required and installed and tested, it is not to be removed or tampered with in any way except by an authorized plumber with prior approval by the city’s authorized personnel. Any violation shall be a misdemeanor and punishable as follows:

First violation:

$500.00 fine

Second violation:

$750.00 fine and possible jail (3-month sentence)

Third violation:

$1,000.00 fine and possible jail (6-month sentence)

Any violation will result in immediate termination of water service until said violation is corrected. Any fine will be levied on the next billing schedule or may be required to be paid prior to having service reestablished.

(2) Assemblies that have been installed on lawn sprinkling or irrigation systems for the purpose of protecting the domestic water supply may be tested by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester with the original copy of the form results being sent to the city. These assemblies are to be tested annually, preferably prior to the irrigation or sprinkling season. Faulty assemblies will be required to be corrected within seven (7) days of the failed test.

Anyone who files a fraudulent form or fails to perform the physical test shall be assessed a civil penalty as follows:

First violation:

$500.00

Second violation:

$750.00

Third violation:

$1,000.00

(g) Attorney’s fees. In the event it shall become necessary for the city to incur any attorney fees or court costs in order to enforce the provisions of this section concerning cross-connections, the amount of such fees and costs shall be paid by the property owner before water service is restored to the premises.

(h) Installation. Whereas it is deemed necessary for a reduced-pressure backflow assembly (RPBA) to be installed for protection of the public system, said assembly shall never be placed below ground level or in a vault/pit or other structure except with these minimum requirements:

(1) Twelve (12) inches plus the nominal diameter of the assembly clearance below the assembly.

(2) Area is able to be drained to daylight, with a line at least twice the size of the assembly.

(3) Drain line to be unrestricted in flow characteristics. Drain line is to have magnetic door to prevent rodents from entering and to prevent plugs from occurring.

(4) Will not be subjected to flood conditions/submerged.

(5) At least twelve (12) inches’ clearance from the walls of the vault or structure.

(6) Access to the area of the assembly by an authorized employee of the city is unrestricted and attainable (e.g., not covered in any way for beautification’s sake). (Code 1960, § 36-74.1; Ord. No. 3011, §§ 1 – 4, 2-8-71; Ord. No. 3788, § 30, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4039, § 2, 4-20-92; Ord. No. 4080, § 32, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-57. Right of entry of water division employees.
No person shall refuse, neglect or fail to afford any duly authorized representative of the water division free access at all reasonable hours to any and all parts of buildings or premises supplied with water from the city water supply system for the purpose of making records, readings and inspections of the location, condition and sufficiency of pipes, fittings, valves, cocks, fixtures and appliances and noting the amount of water used and the manner in which it is used. Violation of this section or the abuse, threatening or attempted intimidation of any employee of the water division may result in the shutting off of the water and the imposition of penalties, in addition to punishment for violation of this section as provided in this code. (Code 1960, § 36-75; Ord. No. 3788, § 31, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-58. Domestic water conservation.
(a) Due to the general drought conditions and the heavy demands being made upon the city’s water treatment and transmission facilities, the city council of the city of Lewiston hereby finds and declares that steps must be taken to conserve the city’s supply of domestic water. The city council further finds and declares that the provision of domestic water to all inhabitants for household purposes is of greater importance than is the providing of water for lawn, garden, and shrubbery irrigation.

(b) The city manager in consultation with the public works director is hereby authorized and directed to formulate in writing rules and regulations for the conservation of domestic water within the city of Lewiston, including, but not limited to, the limitation of use of water for lawn, garden, and other irrigation purposes. Such rules and regulations, when approved by the city council, shall have the full force and effect of law. Copies of such rules and regulations shall be kept at the office of the public works director and the city clerk and shall be available for inspection by the public during normal business hours. In addition, such rules and regulations, when promulgated and approved by the city council, shall be published not less than once in the local paper. Such rules and regulations may, from time to time, be amended by the city council, and any such amendment shall likewise be available for public inspection and published in the local paper.

(c) The water division shall provide such inspection and enforcement services and procedures as the city manager may direct.

(d) Two (2) or more willful violations of any rules or regulations so promulgated shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises of the person or persons so violating such rules and regulations, in which event the service shall not be reconnected until ordered by the city manager. No service shall be disconnected except upon order of the city manager after written notice to the owner of the premises concerned.

(e) A willful violation of any rule or regulation shall be an infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate violation. (Ord. No. 3373, §§ 1 – 5, 7-11-77; Ord. No. 3788, § 32, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 29, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Editor’s note – Section 36-58 is derived from Ord. No. 3373, §§ 1 – 5, which ordinance was nonamendatory of this code.

Sec. 36-59. Violation a misdemeanor.
Unless otherwise specified, any violation of the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment up to six (6) months, or both. (Ord. No. 3788, § 33, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. METERS

Sec. 36-61. Copies of article to be available.
A copy of this article may be obtained by all owners of property and consumers of water and shall be construed to be an integral part of the contract made between the city and every such water consumer. (Code 1960, § 36-76; Ord. No. 3788, § 34, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-62. Required.
All water furnished to consumers shall be furnished through meters, except as provided in section 36-33 of this code. (Code 1960, § 36-77; Ord. No. 3788, § 35, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-63. Installation; accounts to be kept.
(a) For every service location the water division shall install a suitable meter and make readings thereof.

(b) The meter readings shall be entered in the books of the city and the amounts due thereon computed. In the event of snow cover or extreme low temperature, the public works director may find that reading of a meter may result in damage to the meters and impose a minimum consumption. Charges for that consumption will be taken from the schedule of rates. If the minimum consumption imposed is greater than the actual consumption, a credit will be given to the account on the next billing. If the minimum consumption is less than the actual consumption, the account shall be adjusted accordingly.

(c) The administrative services director shall keep accounts of all consumers of water, a separate account for each separate service or premises, with all charges and penalties accrued. (Code 1960, § 36-78; Ord. No. 3788, § 36, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 30, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-64. Location; meters property of city.
(a) All meters shall be the property of the city. Meters shall not be removed from service except for test or repair, replacement or on abandonment or disconnection of the service.

(b) All meters shall be so located and maintained as to be readily accessible at all reasonable hours for reading, inspection and repair. (Code 1960, § 36-79; Ord. No. 3788, § 37, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-65. Owner to pay for repair to meters.
In cases where a meter has been lost, injured or broken by or through the carelessness or negligence of the owners or occupants of the premises served, such meter shall be properly repaired and restored under the direction of the water division and the cost of replacement or restoration shall be charged against the owner or occupant of the premises. (Code 1960, § 36-80; Ord. No. 3788, § 38, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-66. Turning water on after shutoff.
(a) When water has been shut off at any premises, either upon the application of the owner or for nonpayment of water charges or for any other cause, no person shall again connect such premises to the city water supply system except when specifically authorized to do so by the public works director.

(b) The public works director may authorize the water to be shut off at the main, or may remove a portion of the service connection in the right-of-way.

(c) If the city determines that a property is illegally connected to the city system which had previously been properly connected to the city system, then all penalties provided for in this code including a disconnection and reconnection fee shall be assessed. All penalties, charges and fees shall be paid before water service will be turned on. (Code 1960, § 36-59; Ord. No. 3542, § 4, 9-15-80; Ord. No. 3788, § 39, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4006, § 31, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4335, § 14, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Secs. 36-67 – 36-100. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. WASTEWATERS2
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY

Sec. 36-101. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

Applicant: The owner or authorized agent of the property to be served. The applicant shall be the person responsible for payment of bills for sanitary wastewater and domestic water service.

Building wastewater line: The extension from the public wastewater line to the building drainage system.

Director: The public works director of the city or a duly authorized agent, deputy or representative.

Domestic water or domestic water system: The water and the water system in which it is carried, which is for human consumption and normal household and business or industrial uses provided from the city’s supply.

Private wastewater line: A wastewater line and disposal system constructed, installed or maintained where connection with the public wastewater system is not required by this article.

Public wastewater line: A wastewater line in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.

Wastewater: Water-carried human wastes or a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, storm or other waters as may be present. (Code 1960, § 36-4; Ord. No. 2237, art. I, § 2; Ord. No. 3788, § 3, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4080, § 13, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-102. Treatment of wastewater, etc., before discharge.
No person shall discharge industrial waste or other polluted waters into any natural outlet within the city or any area under its jurisdiction any sanitary wastewater, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Code 1960, § 36-5; Ord. No. 2237, art. III, § 2; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-103. Septic tanks, cesspools, etc., prohibited; exception.
(a) No person shall construct or maintain any privy, privy vault or cesspool within the city. Private septic systems or other facilities intended or used for the disposal of wastewater shall only be permitted on lots, as defined in section 37-3 of this code, created after August 7, 1995, where a public wastewater line is more than two hundred (200) feet from the newly created lot and where the newly created lot is one (1) acre in size or greater. On lots created before August 7, 1995, private septic systems or other facilities intended or used for the disposal of wastewater shall only be permitted on lots where a public wastewater line is more than two hundred (200) feet from the lot line and where the lot is ten thousand (10,000) square feet or greater in size.

(b) Should the legal description of any property which encompasses more than the minimum lot size provided above, including public right-of-way, but less than the minimum lot size when the right-of-way is excluded, the owner of real property may request a variance from the above requirement by submitting an application to the city manager. The application shall be reviewed by a committee comprised of the city’s public works department, the wastewater district wherein the real property is located, the North Central District Health Department and the State of Idaho Department of Environmental Quality. The committee shall make a recommendation to the city manager, who shall grant or deny the application. (Code 1960, § 36-6; Ord. No. 2237, art. III, § 3; Ord. No. 4133, § 1, 8-7-95; Ord. No. 4215, § 1, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-104. Unauthorized openings, connections, use, etc.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public wastewater line without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director. No unauthorized person shall open, alter or disturb the streets or alleys of the city for the purpose of making connection with the public wastewater system without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the public works director. (Code 1960, § 36-7; Ord. No. 2237, art. III, § 4; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-105. Separate building wastewater line required for each building; exception.
(a) A separate and independent building wastewater line shall be provided for each building for connection with the public wastewater system; provided, that where feasible, this requirement may be waived upon submission of alternate plans approved by and thereafter constructed under the supervision of the public works director.

(b) Wastewater users within a condominium or townhouse development shall not be required to be separately and independently connected by a separate wastewater service line to a public wastewater line or main, if the wastewater service line from each building to the public wastewater line or main shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in diameter for developments; provided further, that each townhouse or condominium development shall include within its covenant or homeowners’ agreement suitable arrangements for maintenance of wastewater lines serving the development.

(c) A residential accessory use building as allowed in the zoning code shall not be required to have a separate wastewater service connection to the public wastewater main on those lots where the accessory use building cannot be split off and sold separately from the principal building. (Code 1960, § 36-8; Ord. No. 2237, art. III, § 9; Ord. No. 4080, § 14, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4207, § 3, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-106. Connections with public wastewater line – Required; exception.
(a) Whenever there is a public wastewater line that is within two hundred (200) feet of a property line of a parcel or lot that is not connected to the public wastewater system, and on which there is any building or structure used for human occupation which use creates wastewater, that parcel or lot shall be connected to the public wastewater system by the owner of said parcel or lot at his/her expense. The owner will be given thirty (30) days public notice in the official newspaper of the city to do so. Installation and connection shall be commenced within thirty (30) days following such notice.

(b) Where a public wastewater line is not available under the provisions of this section, a private wastewater line and wastewater disposal system shall be constructed, connected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Code 1960, § 36-9; Ord. No. 2237, art. IV, §§ 1, 3; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-107. City to make connection when owner fails to do so.
In the event the building wastewater line and connection required by the preceding section are not made within the time provided for following the notice, the public works director shall authorize the connection to be made and file a statement of the cost thereof with the city clerk.

A warrant shall be issued under the direction of the city manager against the wastewater fund for the payment of such cost. Such amount, together with penalty and interest as established by city council, shall be assessed against the property upon which such building wastewater line and connection has not been placed as required and shall become a lien on that property as provided by this article. Such total amount, when collected, shall be paid into the wastewater fund. (Code 1960, § 36-10; Ord. No. 2237, art. IV, § 2; Ord. No. 4080, § 15, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-108. Septic tanks, cesspools, etc., to be abandoned and filled.
Whenever a public wastewater line becomes available to a lot or parcel served by a private wastewater disposal system and a direct connection is made to the public wastewater line, any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. (Code 1960, § 36-11; Ord. No. 2237, art. III, § 8; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-109. Permit for private wastewater line or building wastewater line – Required.
No person shall construct or commence the construction of a private wastewater line or private wastewater disposal system without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director or his/her designee. No person shall construct, extend, relay, repair or connect a building wastewater line without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director or his/her designee. In addition, a right-of-way permit shall be obtained from the public works department for the construction, extension, relay, repair or connection to comply with all conditions of said permit. (Code 1960, § 36-12; Ord. No. 2237, art. III, § 5; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-110. Application; fee; when effective.
(a) An application for any permit for a private wastewater line or private wastewater disposal system or building wastewater line shall be made on a form furnished by the city. The application shall be supplemented with such plans, specifications, and other information as may be deemed necessary by the public works director.

(b) All wastewater connection and equity buy-in charges will be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. No. 3219, § 1, 7-1-74; Ord. No. 3975, § 4, 9-4-90; Ord. No. 4006, § 33, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 4080, § 16, 8-30-93; Ord. No. 4096, § 1, 3-28-94; Ord. No. 4109, § 4, 8-29-94; Ord. No. 4143, § 2, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 4168, § 3, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 4207, § 4, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 4223, § 2, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 4246, § 3, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 4267, § 4, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 4295, § 3, 8-27-01; Ord. No. 4317, § 3, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 4335, § 6, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 4358, § 1, 9-13-04; Ord. No. 4407, § 1, 8-22-05; Ord. No. 4447, § 1, 8-28-06; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-111. Private wastewater systems to comply with regulations of state and city.
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater system shall comply with all recommendations and regulations of the city of Lewiston and Department of Public Health of the state. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge into any public wastewater line, natural outlet or to ground surface. The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. (Code 1960, § 36-14; Ord. No. 2237, art. III, § 7; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-112. Specification for connections and building wastewater lines.
All connections and building wastewater lines connecting with the public wastewater system shall be constructed, installed and connected in such a manner as to ensure a permanent and sanitary wastewater line watertight throughout. The pipe used in the installation thereof shall be equal in quality to the pipe used in the general wastewater system and not less than four (4) inches in diameter for all new connections.

Whenever located less than one (1) foot above the nearest adjacent wastewater manhole cover, floor drains subject to backflow or back pressure, or in the case of basement drains, shall be equipped with an approved backwater valve installed in the drains at the property owner’s expense. This section shall, from and after the effective date hereof, be applicable to all buildings within the corporate limits of the city; and the city shall not be liable for any damages which occur by the failure of any property owner to comply with the provisions of this section. (Code 1960, § 36-15; Ord. No. 2237, art. III, § 10; Ord. No. 4207, § 5, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 4246, § 4, 8-23-99; Ord. No. 4422, § 1, 11-28-05; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-113. Excavation for building wastewater lines.
(a) All excavations for building wastewater line installations shall be properly safeguarded with lights and barricades so that they are not a menace to public safety.

(b) All streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city and in accordance with city standards. (Code 1960, § 36-16; Ord. No. 2237, art. III, § 11; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-114. Liability to city for violations of this article.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. (Code 1960, § 36-20; Ord. No. 2237, art. VIII, § 1; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-115. Violation a misdemeanor.
Any violation of the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment of up to six (6) months, or both. (Ord. No. 3788, § 4, 6-24-85; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-116. No-fault wastewater back-up property protection.
As part of the contract for the provision of wastewater services to the customers of the city, and in consideration of payment of wastewater bills, the city agrees to reimburse its sanitary wastewater customers for up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of clean-up costs and property damages caused by a sanitary wastewater back-up, regardless of whether the city is thought to be negligent or otherwise legally liable for those damages, subject to the following conditions:

(1) The back-up must have resulted from a condition in the city’s sanitary wastewater system or lines and not from a condition in a private line.

(2) The back-up must not have been caused by catastrophic weather or other event for which Federal Emergency Management Assistance is available.

(3) The back-up must not have been caused by an interruption in electric power to the city’s wastewater system or to any other city lift station, which continues for more than seventy-two (72) hours.

(4) The back-up must not have been caused by rainfall or precipitation that would constitute a one hundred (100) year storm event as determined by the National Weather Service.

(5) The city will not reimburse any costs which have been or are eligible to be covered under the property owner’s own homeowner’s or other property insurance, or which would be eligible to be reimbursed under a National Flood Insurance Protection (NFIP) policy, whether or not the property owner actually has NFIP coverage.

(6) The maximum amount that the city will reimburse is ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per building per year. In this regard, a structure or group of structures served by a single connection to the city’s wastewater system is considered a single building.

(7) Coverage under said program shall only be extended to those customers of the city of Lewiston wastewater utility. Properties in the city of Lewiston served by a private sanitary district shall not be eligible.

(8) The city manager, or his/her designee, may establish regulations sufficient to provide for the handling of such claims and disbursement of those funds which are set aside for payment of claims under this section.

(9) All applications for reimbursement under this section must be submitted to the city clerk within ninety (90) days after the incident occurs.

(10) Applications for reimbursement received by the city clerk shall be referred to the department of public works for investigation and recommendation. The department’s report shall be forwarded to the city manager for determination of whether the incident meets the criteria of this section.

(11) The determination as to whether to make payment for loss under this section shall be based on the following criteria:

a. Whether an eligible applicant suffered an otherwise uninsured property loss, caused by breach or backup of a city-owned sanitary wastewater line, under circumstances where the applicant acted responsibly to avoid the loss; and

b. If so, whether the extent of the loss has been adequately substantiated;

c. The following shall result in the denial of an application:

1. Application not timely submitted;

2. Loss fully covered by private insurance;

3. Applicant ineligible under the terms of this chapter;

4. Loss caused by an irresponsible act of the applicant, applicant’s agent, or member of applicant’s business or household;

5. Loss of eligibility unsubstantiated;

d. The following shall result in reduction of payment:

1. Loss partially covered by private insurance;

2. Loss exceeds funding limits of this section;

3. Verification of loss inadequate or incomplete;

4. Applicant did not cause the problem but failed to act responsibly to minimize the loss.

(12) Payment does not imply liability.

a. Payment made under this section shall not be construed as an admission of nor does it imply any negligence or responsibility on the part of the city for any damage.

b. This section shall not in any way supersede, change or abrogate any provision of the Idaho Tort Claim Act and its application to the city, or establish in any person a right to sue the city under this section.

c. Any payment made under this section which is accepted shall constitute a full and complete release of any and all claims against the city, its officers, employees and agents arising from the incident. No payments shall be made unless the claimant signs a release of all claims against the city.

(13) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no application shall be accepted from the United States or any of its departments or agencies, the state of Idaho or any of its political subdivisions. (Ord. No. 4513, § 1, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Secs. 36-117 – 36-130. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. CONNECTIONS FROM PROPERTY OUTSIDE DISTRICT

Sec. 36-131. Permit – Required.
Whenever the owner of property not within an established wastewater district desires such property to be connected with the wastewater line in an established wastewater district, upon a showing that such connection will not work injury to such wastewater line in place and will not be likely to be an injury to or damage to the property in such wastewater district, shall comply with section 36-2 of this code. (Code 1960, § 36-26; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-132. Permit – Revocation.
(a) The permit required by this division shall be revocable by action of the council.

(b) Such permit may be revoked at any time when it appears to the council that the wastewater connection under such permit is working an injury to the established wastewater line, to any property within such established wastewater district or to the owner of any property therein.

(c) Should any such permit be revoked, the deposit made for the issuing of such permit shall be returned to the depositor, upon a showing that the wastewater connection has been abandoned and removed in compliance to an order of the council.

With the advice and recommendation of the public works director or person in charge of a wastewater district the city council shall be exclusive judge of whether or not any permit granted under this section causes an injury to the wastewater line in the wastewater district or to any property or to the owner of any property in a wastewater district. (Code 1960, § 36-27; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-133. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4603, § 3, adopted Sept. 23, 2013, repealed § 36-63, pertaining to disposition of deposits, derived from Code 1960 § 36-28 and Ord. No. 4485, § 1, and renumbered said section as § 36-133.

Sec. 36-134. Applicant to bear costs.
All costs incurred in making a wastewater line connection from property lying outside of a wastewater district shall be borne by the applicant. (Code 1960, § 36-29; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-135. Credit for deposit when new district formed.
If the property served by a connecting wastewater line outside the wastewater district is subsequently placed in a new wastewater district, the amount of the deposit shall be applied to any assessment that is made against the property in the new wastewater district or the deposit may be returned to the person making the deposit, upon a showing being made that the connection has been abandoned and removed. (Code 1960, § 36-30; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-136. Assessments when new districts created.
Should a parcel or tract of land for which a permit for wastewater connection has been issued under this section be subsequently included in a new wastewater district, such tract or parcel of land shall be assessed for the full amount of its assessment in the new wastewater district. (Code 1960, § 36-31; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Secs. 36-137 – 36-150. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS FOR EXISTING AND NEW SOURCES OF POLLUTION3

Subdivision A. General Provisions

Sec. 36-151. Purpose and policy.
(a) This division sets forth uniform requirements for dischargers into the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) wastewater collection and treatment systems and enables “a designated authority” to protect public health in conformity with the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR Part 403) and all applicable state and federal laws relating thereto.

(b) Except as otherwise provided herein, the utility systems manager (USM) shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this division. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the USM may be delegated by the USM to other city personnel.

(c) The objectives of this division are:

(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system, that will interfere with the normal operation of the system or contaminate the resulting biosolids;

(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system, which do not receive adequate treatment in the POTW, and which will pass through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;

(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and biosolids from the system; and

(4) To protect the health of the city employees working in the city wastewater collection system and at the wastewater treatment plant.

(d) This division provides for the regulation of discharges into the city wastewater system through the enforcement of administrative regulations. This division does not provide for the recovery of operations, maintenance or replacement costs of the POTW or the costs associated with the construction of collection and treatment systems used by industrial dischargers, in proportion to their use of the POTW, which are the subjects of separate enactments.

(e) The public works director is authorized to recommend to the city council additional regulations related to industrial pretreatment. Such regulations shall become effective and enforceable upon adoption by the city council. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(1.01), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 1, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 1, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4686, § 1, 5-22-17; Ord. No. 4746, § 1, 5-13-19)

Subdivision B. Definitions

Sec. 36-152. Words, terms and phrases defined.
Act: The Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), as amended.

Applicable pretreatment standards: For any specified pollutant, the city prohibitive discharge standards, the city’s specific limitations on discharge, the state of Idaho Pretreatment Standards or the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards (when effective), whichever standard is most stringent.

Approval authority: The Idaho Department of Environmental Quality administrator.

ASPP: Accidental spill prevention plan.

Authority: The city of Lewiston, through the Lewiston city council.

Authorized representative of the discharger:

(1) If the discharger is a corporation:

a. The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation; or

A manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements if:

1. The manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility;

2. The manager has the duty of making major capital investment recommendations;

3. The manager can initiate and direct comprehensive measures to ensure long-term compliance with environmental laws and regulations; and

4. The manager has been delegated the authority to sign documents on behalf of the corporations;

(2) If the discharger is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively;

(3) If the discharger is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: the ranking elected official, or a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee.

(4) The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or the person who has overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city.

Best management practices (BMPs): The term “best management practices” or “BMPs” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the provisions in this chapter. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.

Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).

Bypass of treatment facilities: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a discharger’s treatment facility.

Categorical discharger: A discharger covered by one (1) of USEPA’s categorical pretreatment standards.

Categorical pretreatment standards: National pretreatment standards specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged or introduced into a POTW by specific industrial dischargers. Categorical pretreatment standards appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.

City: The city of Lewiston, Idaho.

Color: The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred (100) percent transmittance is equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.

Composite sample: The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time.

Cooling water/noncontact cooling water: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. Cooling water may be generated from any use, such as air-conditioning, heat exchangers, cooling or refrigeration, to which the only pollutant added is heat.

Discharger/industrial discharger: Any nonresidential user who discharges an effluent into a POTW by means of pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water-intercepting ditches and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto; a source of indirect discharge.

Grab sample: A sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the wastestream and collected over a period of time not exceeding fifteen (15) minutes.

IDEQ: Idaho Department of Environmental Quality.

Indirect discharge: The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from a source, regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act, into a POTW.

Industrial waste: Solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources.

Interference: A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its biosolids use or disposal, or is a cause of a violation of the city’s NPDES/IPDES permit or of the prevention of biosolids use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state biosolids management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.

IPDES: Idaho Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program of IDEQ.

Medical waste: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.

New discharger: A “new discharger” is not a “new source” and is defined as any person who applies to the city for a new building permit or any person who occupies an existing building and plans to discharge wastewater to the city’s collection system. After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this division, any person who buys an existing facility that is discharging nondomestic wastewater will be considered an “existing discharger” if no significant changes are made in the manufacturing operation.

New source: Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of the proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such sources if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; and if:

(1) The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or

(2) The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or

(3) The production of wastewater-generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as an existing source should be considered.

Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsections (1)(b) and (c) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment.

Construction of a new source, as defined herein, has commenced if the owner or operator has:

(1) Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program:

a. Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or

b. Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities, which is necessary for placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or

c. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation.

NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA).

O and M: Operation and maintenance.

Other wastes: Decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar, chemicals and all other substances, except wastewater and industrial wastes.

Pass through: The occurrence of an indirect discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES/IPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).

Permittee: The holder of a valid facility specific wastewater discharge permit issued by the city.

pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units.

Pollutant: Any substance discharged into a POTW or its collection system, which is prohibited or limited by sections 36-153 and 36-154 of this division.

POTW (publicly owned treatment works): Any wastewater treatment works and the wastewater lines and conveyance appurtenances discharging thereto, owned and operated by the city.

Pretreatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW.

Pretreatment requirement: Any substantive or procedural requirement including BMPs, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial discharger.

Pretreatment standard or standards: Prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and/or BMPs.

Process wastewater: Liquid waste resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources.

Prohibited discharge standards or Prohibited  discharges: Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 36-153 of this code.

Residential user: Any person who contributes, causes, or allows the contribution of wastewater into the POTW that is of a similar volume and/or chemical make-up as that of a residential dwelling unit. Discharges from a residential dwelling unit typically include up to one hundred (100) gallons per capita per day, 0.2 pounds of BOD per capita, and 0.17 pounds of TSS per capita.

Significant industrial discharger:

(1) Except as provided below in subsections (1)(b) and (c) of this definition, the term “significant industrial discharger” shall mean:

a. All industrial dischargers subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and

b. Any industrial discharger that discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); or

c. Any industrial discharger who contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW plant; or

d. Any industrial discharger who is designated as such by the city on the basis that the industrial discharger has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.

(2) Upon a finding that an industrial discharger meeting the criteria in subsection (1)(b), (c) or (d) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial discharger and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial discharger is not a significant industrial discharger.

(3) Upon a finding that a significant industrial discharger meets the criteria and all conditions in 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2), the city may designate the discharger a nonsignificant categorical industrial discharger.

Significant noncompliance (SNC): Violations which meet one (1) or more of the following criteria:

(1) Violations of wastewater discharge limits.

a. Chronic violations: Sixty-six (66) percent or more of the wastewater measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l).

b. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations: Thirty-three (33) percent or more of the wastewater measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) multiplied by the TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).

c. Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily, maximum, longer term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the city determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public.

d. Any discharge of pollutants that have caused imminent endangerment to human health/welfare or to the environment and have resulted in the city’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.

(2) Violations of compliance schedule milestones contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction, and attaining final compliance by ninety (90) days or more after the schedule date.

(3) Failure to provide any required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules within forty-five (45) days from the due date.

(4) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.

(5) Any other violation or group of violations, including a violation of BMPs, which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the city’s pretreatment program.

Slug load: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause interference or a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 36-153 of this division or any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.

Stormwater: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.

Total suspended solids: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.

Toxic pollutants: Pollutants listed as toxic under 40 CFR 401.15 pursuant to Section 307(a)(1) of the Act.

Upset: An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the standards set forth in sections 36-153 and 36-154 of this division due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the discharger, and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation.

USEPA: United States Environmental Protection Agency.

Utility systems manager (USM): The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain responsibilities by this division or his/her authorized representative.

Wastewater: Water-carried human wastes or a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, storm or other waters as may be present.

Wastewater discharge permit: An authorization or equivalent control document issued by the city to dischargers to the POTW. The permit may contain appropriate pretreatment standards and requirements as set forth in this division.

Wastewater line: Any pipe, conduit, ditch or other device used to collect and transport wastewater from the generating source. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(Ch. 2), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 2, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 2, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4746, § 2, 5-13-19)

Subdivision C. Regulations

Sec. 36-153. Prohibited discharge standards.
(a) General prohibitions. No discharger shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all dischargers to the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.

(b) Specific prohibitions. No discharger shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:

(1) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. In addition, wastestreams with a close cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty (60) degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

(2) Any solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a wastewater line or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.

(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than five (5) or greater than ten (10), or wastewater having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the city.

(4) pH effluent limitations under continuous monitoring.

a. Where a permittee continuously measures the pH of wastewater pursuant to a requirement of a wastewater discharge permit issued by the city, the permittee shall maintain the pH of such wastewater within the range set forth in the permit, except excursions above ten (10) pH are permitted subject to the following limitations:

1. The total time during which the pH values are above ten (10) pH shall not exceed seven (7) hours and twenty-six (26) minutes in any calendar month; and

2. No individual excursion above ten (10) pH shall exceed sixty (60) minutes.

b. The city may adjust the requirements set forth above, with respect to the length of individual excursions from the permitted range, if a different period of time is appropriate based upon treatment systems, plant configurations or other technical factors.

c. For purposes of this section, an “excursion” is an unintentional and temporary incident in which the pH value of discharge wastewater exceeds the range set forth in a wastewater discharge permit.

(5) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.

(6) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the wastewater system in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.

(7) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes.

(8) Medical waste, except as specifically authorized by the city in a wastewater discharge permit.

(9) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test.

(10) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.

(11) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to exceed the limitation set forth in the categorical pretreatment standards.

(12) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly or by interaction, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the city wastewater lines for the purpose of maintenance and repair.

(13) Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or treatment residues, biosolids or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with biosolids use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting biosolids use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state standards applicable to the biosolids management method being used.

(14) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES/IPDES and/or other disposal system permits.

(15) Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.

(16) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference but, in no case, wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds forty (40) degrees Celsius (one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit), unless the POTW treatment plant is designed to accommodate such temperature. If, in the opinion of the city, lower temperatures of such wastes could harm either the wastewater lines, wastewater treatment processes or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving streams or otherwise endanger life, health or property; or constitute a nuisance, the city may prohibit such discharges.

(17) Any slug load, which shall mean any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (e.g., BOD) released in a single, extraordinary discharge episode of such volume or strength as to cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load contain concentrations or qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation.

(18) Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the city.

(19) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that it exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.

(20) Any wastewater which, in the opinion of the city, can cause harm either to the wastewater lines, wastewater treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance, unless permitted under special agreement by the city. No special waiver shall be given from categorical pretreatment standards.

(21) Wastewater containing substances not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge to the receiving waters.

(22) Any wastewater from septic tanks except as provided in sections 36-186 through 36-192 of this code.

(23) Any trucked or hauled pollutants or wastes, except at discharge points designated by the city.

(c) Bypass of treatment facilities.

(1) Definitions.

a. “Bypass” means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a discharger’s treatment facility.

b. “Severe property damage” means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.

(2) Bypass not violating applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. The discharger may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause applicable pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation.

(3) Notice.

a. If the discharger knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice in writing to the city, if possible, at least ten (10) calendar days before the date of the bypass.

b. The discharger shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the city within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the discharger becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) calendar days of the time the discharger becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The city may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours.

(4) Prohibition of bypass.

a. Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take enforcement action against the permittee for a bypass, unless:

1. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;

2. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and

3. The discharger submitted notices as required under subsections (c)(3)(a) and (b) of this section.

b. The city may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the city determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection (c)(4)(a) of this section. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(3.01), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3838, § 1, 10-14-86; Ord. No. 3938, § 3, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 3, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4746, § 3, 5-13-19)

Sec. 36-154. Limitations on wastewater strength.
(a) National categorical pretreatment standards. National categorical pretreatment standards and other applicable regulations now existing or as hereafter promulgated by the USEPA, pursuant to the Act and as adopted, shall be enforceable by this division and shall be met by all dischargers of the regulated industrial categories. An application for modification of the national categorical pretreatment standards may be considered for submittal to IDEQ by the city when the city’s wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of the pollutants, as defined by 40 CFR 403.7.

(b) State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by all dischargers which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this division or any other applicable ordinance.

(c) Right of revision. The city reserves the right to amend this division or individual wastewater discharge permits to provide for more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in section 36-151 of this code.

(d) Dilution. No discharger shall increase the use of potable or process water in any way for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the applicable standards set forth in this division. The city may impose mass limitations on dischargers which are using dilutions to meet the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements of this chapter, or in other cases deemed appropriate by the city.

(e) Local limits. In addition to the categorical pretreatment standards referenced in subsection (1) of this section, no discharger shall discharge wastewater containing concentrations of substances exceeding the following local limits:

Parameter

Maximum Daily Concentration (mg/l)

Arsenic

0.10

Cadmium

0.09

Chromium (total)

4.31

Copper

1.43

Cyanide

0.50

Lead

0.54

Mercury

0.01

Nickel

0.74

Silver

0.09

Zinc

2.78

All concentrations for metallic substances are for “total” metal unless indicated otherwise. The utility systems manager may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above.

Local limits shall apply to process wastewater after pretreatment, and/or prior to mixing with sanitary wastewater or other dilution flows.

Wherever a discharger is subject to both a categorical pretreatment standard and a local limit for a given pollutant, the more stringent shall apply.

BMPs established by the city are considered pretreatment standards and are fully enforceable as such under this division.

(f) Pretreatment. Dischargers shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by appropriate statutes, regulation and ordinance. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, properly operated and maintained at the discharger’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities shall be submitted to the city for review and must be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans shall in no way relieve the discharger from the responsibility of modifying its facility or operations as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. Within a reasonable time after the completion of the wastewater pretreatment facility, the discharger shall furnish its operations and maintenance procedures for the city to review. Any subsequent significant changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be accepted by the city prior to the discharger’s initiation of the changes.

(g) Special agreement. The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with dischargers setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard or federal pretreatment requirement. However, the discharger may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from the approval authority in accordance with 40 CFR 403.13. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(3.02), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 3, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 4, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4754, § 1, 7-8-19; Ord. No. 4746, § 4, 5-13-19; Ord. No. 4754, § 1, 6-9-19)

Sec. 36-155. Accidental discharges.
(a) As appropriate, dischargers shall provide protection from the accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated materials or substances established by this division. Where deemed necessary by the city, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the discharger’s cost and expense. An accidental spill prevention plan (ASPP), showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection, shall be submitted to the city for review and approval before implementation. The city shall determine which discharger is required to develop an ASPP and require said discharger to submit the ASPP within sixty (60) calendar days after notification by the city. Each discharger shall implement its ASPP as submitted after such ASPP has been reviewed and approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the city shall not relieve the discharger from the responsibility to modify its facility and operating procedures as necessary to meet the requirements of this division.

(b) Dischargers shall notify the city immediately upon the occurrence of a “slug” or accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this division. The notification shall include the location of the discharge, date and time thereof, the type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions. Any discharger who discharges slugs of prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the city pursuant to state and/or federal law.

(c) Within five (5) calendar days following an accidental discharge, the discharger shall submit to the city a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the discharger to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the discharger of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the discharger of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability pursuant to this division or other applicable law.

(d) Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the discharger’s premises, advising which employees to call in the event of a slug or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who to contact in the case of an emergency or accidental discharge.

(e) Any discharger required to develop and implement an accidental spill prevention plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following:

(1) Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;

(2) Description of stored chemicals;

(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the standards in sections 36-153 and 36-154 of this division; and

(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures must include, but not be limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(3.03), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 3, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 5, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Subdivision D. Fees

Sec. 36-156. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this subdivision to provide for the payment of fees from dischargers to the city’s wastewater disposal system to compensate the city for the cost of the administration of the pretreatment program established herein. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(4.01), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 4, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 5, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-157. Charges and fees.
If costs are incurred due to noncomplying dischargers, the city will charge the noncomplying discharger for monitoring, laboratory analyses, inspections and surveillance as required by federal pretreatment requirements and this division. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(4.02), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 4, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 5, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Subdivision E. Administration

Sec. 36-158. Wastewater dischargers to comply with terms of division.
It shall be unlawful to discharge wastewater, industrial wastes or other wastes to any wastewater line outlet within the jurisdiction of the city and/or to the POTW without having first complied with the terms of this division or without having first obtained the city’s approval of a compliance schedule submitted by the discharger/industrial discharger. All dischargers/industrial dischargers proposing to connect to or to discharge wastewater, industrial wastes or other wastes to the POTW shall apply to the community development department for a wastewater discharge permit prior to or concurrent with applying for building or plumbing permits, submitting building plans for review or applying for a business license and shall comply with all terms of this division within thirty (30) calendar days after the effective date of this division. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(5.01), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 5, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 6, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4427, § 1, 4-10-06; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-159. Wastewater discharge permit requirements.
No significant industrial discharger shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the city. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered to be a violation of this division and subjects the permittee to the sanctions set out in this chapter.

(a) Disclosure forms. Significant industrial dischargers shall complete and file with the city a data disclosure declaration in the form prescribed by the city and accompanied by the appropriate fee. Existing significant industrial dischargers (SIDS) shall file a disclosure form within sixty (60) calendar days after notification by the city. (The city’s notification to SIDS covered by categorical pretreatment standards will be in ample time to ensure that the SID complies with the 180-day deadline date established in 40 CFR 403.12(b).) Subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable pretreatment standard, and at least ninety (90) days prior to the anticipated start up, new sources that become industrial dischargers considered by the city to fit the definition of SID shall apply for a permit. That permit will contain at least the information listed in subsections (a)(1) through (5) of this section. A new source (new discharger) cannot discharge without first receiving a permit from the city. New sources and new dischargers shall also be required to include in this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources and new dischargers shall give estimates of the information requested in subsections (a)(4) and (5) of this section. This data disclosure form satisfies the requirements of the baseline monitoring report as described in 40 CFR 403.12(b). The disclosure to be made by the discharger shall be made on written forms provided by the city and shall cover:

(1) Identifying information. The discharger shall submit the name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners.

(2) Permits. The discharger shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.

(3) Description of operations. The discharger shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and Standard Industrial Classification of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial discharger. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated or manufacturing processes; disclosure of the time and duration of discharges; disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all wastewater lines, wastewater connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation; and description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or may be discharged to the wastewater lines of the POTW.

(4) Flow measurement.

a. Categorical discharger. The discharger shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following:

1. Regulated or manufacturing process streams; and

2. Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e).

b. Noncategorical discharger. The discharger shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following: total process flow, wastewater treatment plant flow, total plant flow or individual manufacturing process flow as required by the city. The city may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where considerations are justified by cost or feasibility.

(5) Measurements of pollutants.

a. Categorical discharger.

1. The POTW shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for each regulated or manufacturing process.

2. The discharger shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass) where required by the city of regulated pollutants (including standards contained in sections 36-153 and 36-154 of this code, as appropriate) in the discharge from each regulated or manufacturing process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical procedures outlined in section 36-160(h) of this code.

3. The discharger shall take a minimum of one (1) representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.

4. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) for a categorical discharger covered by a categorical pretreatment standard, this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted as part of the data disclosure form.

b. Noncategorical discharger.

1. The POTW shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for its wastewater discharge.

2. The discharger shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass where required by the city) of regulated pollutants contained in sections 36-153 and 36-154 of this code, as appropriate, in the discharge. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical procedures outlined in section 36-160(h) of this code.

3. The discharger shall take a minimum of one (1) representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.

4. Where the city has determined that dilution exists and has developed an adjusted limit, the discharger shall calculate the adjusted limit from its sample results and flow measurements. The adjusted value along with supporting data shall be submitted as part of the data disclosure form.

(6) Certification. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial discharger and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial discharger to meet the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.

(7) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will be required to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, the industrial discharger will use the shortest schedule to accomplish this task. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard. For noncategorical industries, a final compliance date will be established by the city or for any categorical discharger when the local limits for said discharger are more restrictive than the USEPA’s categorical pretreatment standards.

a. Where the industrial discharger’s categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) at the time the discharger submits the report required by this subsection, the information required by subsections (a)(6) and (7) of this section shall pertain to the modified limits.

b. If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) after the discharger submits the report required by subsections (a)(6) and (7) of this section, the report shall be resubmitted by the discharger within sixty (60) calendar days after the modified limit is approved.

(8) Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to comply with this division, the discharger shall provide a compliance schedule consisting of a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the discharger will provide such additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities. Any discharger provided with a compliance schedule by the city shall follow the requirements of this subsection.

a. The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the discharger to comply with the requirements of this division, including, but not limited to, dates relating to hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing a contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction and all other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this division.

b. Under no circumstance will the city permit a time increment for any single step directed toward compliance which exceeds nine (9) months.

c. Not later than fourteen (14) calendar days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the discharger shall submit a progress report to the city. That report shall contain, at minimum, a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay and the steps being taken by the discharger to return the construction to the approved schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the city.

(9) Disclosure of each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and the rate of production.

(10) Disclosure of the type and amount of raw materials utilized, including chemicals used in the process which may be discharged to the sanitary wastewater system (average and maximum per day).

(11) All disclosure forms shall be signed by an authorized representative of the discharger and, when required by the city, a qualified engineer.

(12) Any pertinent special agreements between the discharger and the city concerning treatment of discharges, special user charges or rates, or any other information deemed necessary by the city. The city will evaluate the complete disclosure form and data furnished by the discharger and may require additional information. The city may require inspection and sampling manholes and/or flow measuring or recording and sampling equipment to assure compliance with this division. After full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may notify the discharger of the city’s acceptance thereof through issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Upon a determination to issue, the permit shall be issued within thirty (30) days of full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished. The city may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law.

(b) Standards modification. The city reserves the right to amend this division and the terms and conditions hereof in order to assure compliance by the city with applicable laws and regulations. All national categorical pretreatment standards adopted by the USEPA after the promulgation of this division shall be enforceable by the city through this division. Where a discharger, subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted a data disclosure form as required by subsection (a) of this section, the discharger shall file a disclosure form with the city within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the promulgation of the applicable categorical pretreatment standard by the USEPA. In addition, any discharger operating on the basis of a previous filing of a data disclosure form shall submit to the city within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard the additional information required by subsections (a)(7) and (8) of this section. If deemed necessary by the city, where categorical pretreatment standards are more stringent, the wastewater discharge permit will be modified. The discharger shall be informed of any proposed changes in the division at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the division shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.

(c) Wastewater discharge permit. The city shall issue each significant discharger a wastewater discharge permit. The city may issue wastewater discharge permits to dischargers/industrial dischargers other than those defined within this division as “significant” as necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. Wastewater discharge permits will be based on information in the data disclosure form.

(1) Wastewater discharge permits shall include the following:

a. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater characteristics and pollutant concentrations, loadings or characteristics.

b. When appropriate, implementation of BMPs, self-monitoring requirements, including flow monitoring frequency and method, sampling frequencies, numbers, types and standards for tests.

c. Authorized points of discharge and regulated processes.

d. Requirement for immediate notification to the city where self-monitoring results indicate noncompliance.

e. Requirement to report a bypass or upset of a pretreatment facility.

f. Requirement for the significant industrial discharger who reports noncompliance to repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the analysis to the city within thirty (30) calendar days after becoming aware of the violation.

g. A statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements.

(2) Wastewater discharge permits may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

a. Any fees and charges to be paid upon initial issuance.

b. Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization.

c. Requirements for the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities.

d. Special conditions as the city may reasonably require under particular circumstances of a given discharge.

e. Compliance schedules.

f. Requirements for the submission of special technical reports or discharge reports where the same differs from those prescribed by this division.

g. Any special agreements the city chooses to continue or develop between the city and a discharger.

(d) Wastewater discharge permits duration. All wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a five-year period, subject to amendment or revocation as provided in this division.

(e) Wastewater discharge permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least twenty (20) calendar days’ advance notice to the city and the city approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the city must include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator which states that:

(1) The new owner and/or operator have no immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;

(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and

(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit.

Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable as of the date of facility transfer.

(f) Wastewater discharge permits reissuance. A discharger, required to have a wastewater discharge permit, shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete disclosure form, in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, a minimum of ninety (90) calendar days prior to the expiration of the discharger’s existing wastewater discharge permit. If the discharger submits its data disclosure form within the time period provided in this subsection and the city does not issue a new permit prior to the expiration date in the existing permit, the existing permit shall remain in effect until the new permit is reissued. If the discharger fails to submit its data disclosure form within the time period specified in this subsection and a new permit is not issued by the city prior to the expiration date of the existing permit, the discharger is deemed to be discharging without a valid permit.

(g) Wastewater discharge permits modification. The city may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:

(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements;

(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the discharger’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the wastewater discharge permit issuance;

(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;

(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters;

(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;

(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;

(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;

(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or

(9) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator.

(h) Final compliance deadlines.

(1) Deadline for compliance with categorical standards shall be in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(b).

(2) The city shall establish a final compliance deadline date for any existing significant industrial discharger not covered by categorical pretreatment standards or for any categorical discharger when the local limits for said discharger are more restrictive than the USEPA’s categorical pretreatment standards. The city shall establish the shortest feasible time for the discharger to achieve compliance and shall incorporate a final compliance date within the discharger’s wastewater discharge permit.

(3) New sources and new dischargers that fit the definition of significant discharger shall install and have in operating condition, and shall start-up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed ninety (90) calendar days), new sources and new dischargers must meet all applicable pretreatment standards.

(4) Any wastewater discharge permit issued to a categorical discharger shall contain a compliance date that is not later than any deadline date established in the USEPA’s categorical pretreatment standards. Any other existing discharger or a categorical discharger that must comply with a more stringent local limit which is in noncompliance with any local limits shall be provided with a compliance schedule placed in the wastewater discharge permit to ensure compliance within the shortest time feasible.

(i) Wastewater discharge permits revocation. Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for, but not limited to, the following reasons:

(1) Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;

(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed condition pursuant to section 36-160(j) of this code;

(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;

(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;

(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;

(6) Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records;

(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations;

(8) Failure to pay penalties;

(9) Failure to pay wastewater charges;

(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules;

(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;

(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility; or

(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this division. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(5.02), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 5, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 7, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4427, § 2, 4-10-06; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4746, § 5, 5-13-19)

Sec. 36-160. Reporting requirements for discharger.
(a) Final compliance report. Within ninety (90) calendar days following the date for final compliance by the significant industrial discharger with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements set forth in this division, or an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or within thirty (30) calendar days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW system by a new source significant industrial discharger (or new dischargers considered by the city to fit the definition of SID), the discharger shall submit to the city a report indicating the information outlined in section 36-159(a)(4) through (5) of this code.

For industrial dischargers subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the city in accordance with procedures established in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the discharger’s long-term production rate. For all other dischargers subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the discharger’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period.

(b) Periodic compliance reports.

(1) During the months of June and December, unless required more frequently by the city in the discharger’s wastewater discharge permit, any discharger subject to a pretreatment standard set forth in this division, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source discharger, after commencement of the discharge to the POTW, shall submit to the city a report indicating the nature and concentration of prohibited or regulated substances in the effluent which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed within the wastewater discharge permit. At a minimum, dischargers shall sample their discharge at least twice per year.

(2) The report shall include a record of the concentrations (and mass if specified in the permit) of the limited pollutants that were measured and a record of all flow measurements (average and maximum) taken at the designated sampling locations, and shall also include any additional information required by this section or the permit. Production data shall be reported if required by the permit. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. If a discharger sampled more frequently than what was required by the city or by this division, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge during the reporting period.

(3) Any discharger subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the city or by unit production limits specified in the applicable categorical standards shall report production data as outlined in subsection (b)(2) of this section.

(4) If the city calculated limits to factor out dilution flows or nonregulated flows, the discharger will be responsible for providing flows from the regulated process flows, dilution flows and nonregulated flows.

(5) Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement; however, the city may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques if the city determines that an actual measurement is not feasible.

(6) Sampling shall be representative of the discharger’s daily operations and shall be taken in accordance with the requirements specified in subsection (h) of this section.

a. The city may authorize a significant industrial discharger subject to a categorical pretreatment standard permission to forgo sampling of a pollutant regulated by such standard if the discharger has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from the intake water and without an increase in the pollutant due to activities by the discharger. The authorization is subject to the conditions as outlined in 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)(i) through (vii).

b. The city may authorize a significant industrial discharger subject to a categorical pretreatment standard permission to reduce its reporting requirement to no less frequently than once a year, unless required more frequently in a pretreatment standard or by the approval authority, where the discharger meets all of the conditions outlined in 40 CFR 403.12(e)(3).

(7) The city may consider such factors as local high and low flow rates, holidays, budget or other extenuating factors for good cause and may authorize the submission of said reports on months other than those specified above.

(8) The city may require reporting by dischargers that are not required to have an industrial discharge permit if information or data is needed to establish a wastewater charge, determine the treatability of the effluent or determine any other factor which is related to the operation and maintenance of the wastewater system.

(c) Notification of significant production changes. Any discharger operating under an industrial wastewater discharge permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits shall notify the city within two (2) business days after the discharger has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any discharger not providing a notice of such anticipated change will be required to comply with the existing limits contained in its permit.

(d) Authorized representative and certification. All applications, reports, and reporting information shall be certified in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(b)(6) and signed by an authorized representative as outlined in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(l).

All wastewater discharge permit applications and discharge reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the discharger and contain the following certification statement:

I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.

(e) Hazardous waste notification. Existing dischargers that are discharging more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes as defined in 40 CFR 261 (listed or characteristic wastes) in a calendar month or any facility discharging any amount of acutely hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) are required to provide a one-time notification in writing to the city, USEPA Region 10 Office of Waste and Chemicals Management Director, and the State of Idaho Department of Environmental Quality. Any existing discharger exempt from this notification shall comply with the requirements contained herein within thirty (30) calendar days of becoming aware of a discharge of fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes in a calendar month or the discharge of acutely hazardous wastes to the city wastewater system.

Such notification shall include:

(1) The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261;

(2) The USEPA hazardous waste number; and

(3) The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other);

(4) If an industrial discharger discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the wastewater system, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent it is known or readily available to the industrial discharger: (a) an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, (b) an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestreams discharged during that calendar month, and (c) an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestreams expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.

These notification requirements do not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements.

Whenever the USEPA publishes final rules identifying additional hazardous wastes or new characteristics of hazardous waste, an industrial discharger shall notify the city of the discharge of such a substance within ninety (90) calendar days of the effective date of such regulations.

In the case of any notification made under this subsection, an industrial discharger shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.

(f) Notice of potential problems, including accidental spills and slug loadings. Any industrial discharger shall notify the city immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loads, as defined in section 36-152 of this code. The notification shall include the concentration and volume and corrective action. Steps being taken to reduce any adverse impact should also be noted during the notification. Any discharger who discharges a “slug” (or slugs) of prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the city under state or federal law.

(g) Noncompliance reporting. If analysis of sampling performed by an industrial discharger indicates a violation of discharge permit limits, the discharger shall notify the city immediately after becoming aware of the violation. The discharger shall then repeat the sampling and submit the analysis to the city within thirty (30) calendar days of the violation. Where the city conducts sampling in lieu of a discharger, the city must conduct the repeat sampling unless it requires the discharger to conduct the resampling. The discharger is not required to resample if:

(1) The city performs sampling at the industrial discharger’s facility at a frequency of at least once per month; or

(2) The city performs sampling at the discharger’s facility between the time when the discharger performs its initial sampling and the time when the discharger receives the results of this sampling.

(h) Sampling and analysis by dischargers. Any discharger required by the city or by this division to conduct wastewater sampling shall follow the following procedures:

(1) A minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The city may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any industrial discharger that demonstrates that flow-proportional is infeasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the discharger demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged;

(2) Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated or manufacturing process if no pretreatment exists or in a location contained in the discharger’s permit and designated by the city in order to evaluate compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards for categorical dischargers. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the discharger should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e);

(3) All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the USEPA;

(4) All sample results shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges from the industrial discharger. If a discharger sampled more frequently than what was required in its permit, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge as part of its self-monitoring report.

(i) Changes in wastewater characteristics/changes in hazardous wastes/notification of new hazardous wastes. Dischargers shall notify the city, in person or by phone, ninety (90) calendar days prior to the introduction of new wastewater pollutants, changes in manufacturing operations or any substantial change in the volume or characteristics of the wastewater being introduced into the city’s wastewater treatment system from the affected discharger’s industrial processes, including substantial changes in the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the discharger has submitted the initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12. Formal written notification shall be made at least ten (10) days prior to such introduction and the discharger shall obtain approval from the city to do so.

Whenever the USEPA publishes new RCRA rules identifying additional hazardous wastes or new characteristics of hazardous wastes, any affected discharger must notify the city, the USEPA Region 10 Office of Waste and Chemicals Management Director, and the State of Idaho Department of Environmental Quality if any of these wastes are discharged to the city’s treatment system. The notification must occur within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the publication.

(j) Notification of changed discharge. All dischargers shall promptly notify the city in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including significant manufacturing process changes, pretreatment modifications, and the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the discharger has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p).

(k) Record keeping. Dischargers subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this division and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the discharger independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the discharger or POTW, or where the discharger has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(5.03), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 5, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 8, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4746, § 6, 5-13-19)

Sec. 36-161. Monitoring facilities.
(a) Each discharger shall provide and operate at the discharger’s own expense a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of each wastewater discharge to the city. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the discharger’s premises, except where such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the discharger. The city may permit the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area, if the facility is located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.

(b) There shall be ample room in or near such sampling facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the discharger.

(c) All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days of receipt of the wastewater discharge permit by the discharger or as requested by the city. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(5.04), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 5, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 9, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-162. Inspection and sampling.
(a) The city may inspect the monitoring facilities of any discharger to determine compliance with the requirements of this division. The discharger shall allow the city or its representatives to enter upon the premises of the discharger at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection, sampling or records examination. The city shall have the right to set up on the discharger’s property such equipment as may be necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. The city will follow similar sampling and analytical procedures as outlined in section 36-160(h) of this code.

(b) Search warrants. If the city has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program designed to verify compliance with this division or any permit or order issued, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search and/or seizure warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(5.05), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 5, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 10, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-163. Confidential information.
(a) Information and data furnished to the city with respect to the nature and frequency of discharge shall be available to the public and any governmental agency without restriction, unless the discharger specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production, entitled to protection, trade secrets or proprietary information of the discharger.

(b) Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city until and unless a 30-day notification is given to the discharger. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(5.06), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 5, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 10, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Subdivision F. Enforcement

Sec. 36-164. Emergency suspension of service and wastewater discharge permit.
(a) After informal notice to the discharger (in writing, in person or by telephone), the city may order the suspension of wastewater treatment service and revoke the discharger’s wastewater discharge permit when it appears to the city that an actual or threatened discharge:

(1) Presents or threatens an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons, or substantial danger to the environment; or

(2) Threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or to violate any pretreatment limits imposed by this division.

(b) Any discharger notified of the suspension order shall immediately cease all discharges. In the event of failure of the discharger to comply with the suspension order, the city may immediately take all necessary steps to halt or prevent any further discharge by such discharger into the POTW. The city shall have authority to physically cap, block or seal the discharger’s wastewater line (whether on public or private property) in order to terminate service under this section. The city shall have the right to enter upon the discharger’s property to accomplish the capping, blocking or sealing of the discharger’s wastewater line. The city may also immediately commence judicial proceedings to compel the discharger’s specific compliance with such order and/or to recover civil penalties. The city shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or wastewater treatment service upon clear and convincing evidence by the discharger of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or conditions creating the threat as set forth above.

(c) A discharger that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the city prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing provided for in this division.

(d) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(6.01), 3-2-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 6, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 11, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-165. Termination of discharge.
(a) In addition to the provisions for revocation of a permit, any discharger that violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:

(1) Failure to factually report accurately the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;

(2) Failure to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or characteristics;

(3) Refusal of reasonable access to the discharger’s premises by representatives of the city for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;

(4) Violates the provisions of the wastewater discharge permit or the provisions of this division, or any order of the city with respect thereto; or

(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in sections 36-153 and 36-154 of this division.

(b) The city may seek any and all of the remedies or penalties provided in this division including termination of wastewater services and/or revocation of the wastewater discharge permit against any discharger who violates any of the foregoing prohibitions.

(c) Such discharger will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 36-167 of this code why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the discharger. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(6.02), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 6, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 12, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-166. Notification of violation; administrative adjustment.
The city may serve upon the discharger a written notice of violation when the city finds that a discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provision in section 36-165 of this code, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement. The notice shall contain the nature of the violation or violations, and may contain what action if any is required of the discharger to correct the violation. The notice may also contain what penalty or other remedy the city may seek against the discharger for the violation or violations. Within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the discharger to the city. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the city’s authority to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(6.03), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 6, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 13, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-167. Show cause hearing.
Where a violation of this division by a discharger is not corrected by timely compliance through the procedures set forth in section 36-166 of this code, the city may order such discharger to show cause before the duly authorized representative(s) of the city why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the discharger no less than ten (10) calendar days before a hearing is held. The notice shall be served by personal service, certified or registered mail, and shall specify the time and place of the hearing to be held, the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, and the proposed enforcement action. Service of the notice may be made on any agent, officer or authorized representative of the discharger. The information and evidence presented at the hearing shall be considered by the representative(s) of the city, which shall then prepare and present to the discharger a document containing the appropriate findings of fact, conclusion of law and final order(s). Within twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of the final order, the discharger may appeal to the city council, which may grant a hearing to take additional evidence or render its decision based upon the record of the show cause hearing proceedings. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(6.04), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 6, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 14, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-168. Judicial enforcement remedies.
(a) Injunctive relief. When the city finds that a discharger has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may petition a court of competent jurisdiction for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this division on activities of the discharger. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the discharger to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a discharger.

(b) Criminal prosecution.

(1) A discharger that has violated any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day, or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(2) A discharger that has introduced any substance into the POTW that causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day, or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. This penalty may be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law.

(3) A discharger that knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this division, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, and/or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day, or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(c) Fines.

(1) A discharger who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, may be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties may accrue for each day during the period of the violation.

(2) The city may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.

(3) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court may take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the discharger’s violation, corrective actions by the discharger, the compliance history of the discharger, and any other relevant factors.

(4) Filing a suit for civil fines shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a discharger. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(6.05), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 6, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 15, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4746, § 7, 5-13-19)

Sec. 36-169. Enforcement actions.
(a) Annual publication. The name of any discharger in significant noncompliance or who was the subject of enforcement proceedings pursuant to Subdivision F of this division during the twelve (12) previous months shall be published annually by the city in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality in which the POTW is located, summarizing the enforcement actions taken against the dischargers during the same twelve (12) months.

(b) Consent orders. The city may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any discharger responsible for noncompliance. Such documents may include specific action to be taken by the discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant elsewhere in this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable.

(c) Compliance orders. When the city finds that a discharger has violated or continues to violate any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may issue an order to the discharger responsible for the discharge directing that the discharger come into compliance within a specified length of time. If the discharger does not come into compliance within the time specified, wastewater service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the wastewater line. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the discharger of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the discharger.

(d) Cease and desist orders. When the city finds that a discharger has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the discharger’s past violations are likely to recur, the city may issue an order to the discharger directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the discharger to:

(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and

(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.

Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the discharger. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(6.06), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 6, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 16, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-170. Request for interpretation.
Any discharger or any interested party shall have the right to request in writing an interpretation by the city on any matter covered by this division and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. The receipt of a discharger’s request shall not stay pending enforcement proceedings if the inquiry deals with matters of performance or compliance with this division and related enforcement activities. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(6.07), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 6, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 16, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4686, § 2, 5-22-17)

Sec. 36-171. Operating upsets.
(a) Experiencing an upset. Any discharger who experiences a disruption of operations which places the discharger in a temporary state of noncompliance with this division shall inform the city within twenty-four (24) hours of the first awareness of the commencement of the disruption. Where such information is given orally, a written follow-up report thereof shall be filed by the discharger with the city within five (5) calendar days. The report shall specify:

(1) Description of the disruption, the cause thereof and the disruption’s impact on the discharger’s compliance status.

(2) Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance; and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur.

(3) All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance.

(4) That the facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures.

(b) Affirmative defense. A disruption shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with applicable standards, if the discharger can establish through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that the requirements of subsection (a) of this section have been met.

(c) Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding, the discharger seeking to establish the occurrence of an disruption shall have the burden of proof.

(d) Discharger responsibility in case of disruption. The discharger shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with applicable pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(6.08), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 6, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 17, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Subdivision G. Penalties

Sec. 36-172. Administrative civil penalties.
(a) When the utility systems manager finds that a discharger has violated or continues to violate any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the utility systems manager may assess a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such civil penalty may be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, penalties may be assessed for each day during the period of violation.

(b) After thirty (30) calendar days, dischargers who have unpaid charges, fines and penalties may be assessed an additional penalty of twelve (12) percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of twelve (12) percent per month. A lien against the discharger’s property may be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.

(c) Within thirty (30) calendar days of being notified of the penalty, dischargers desiring to dispute such civil penalties must file a written request for reconsideration with the utility systems manager. Upon receipt of a timely written request for reconsideration, the utility systems manager shall convene a hearing on the matter within twenty (20) calendar days. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply during the hearing. The utility systems manager shall issue a written decision within seven (7) calendar days after the hearing, and such decision shall be final. The utility systems manager may add to the penalty the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders.

(d) Issuance of an administrative civil penalty shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the discharger. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(7.01), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 7, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 18, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4686, § 3, 5-22-17; Ord. No. 4746, § 8, 5-13-19)

Sec. 36-173. Recovery of cost incurred by the city.
Any discharger violating any of the provisions of this division who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction or causes damage to or impairs the POTW shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The city shall bill the discharger for the cost incurred by the city for any cleaning, repair or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge and for costs incurred by the city in investigating the violation and in enforcing the division against the discharger, including reasonable administrative costs, fees for testing, attorney fees, court costs and all expenses of litigation. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this division, enforceable under the provisions of Subdivisions F and G of this division. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(7.02), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 7, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 18, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-174. Remedies nonexclusive.
Sections 36-164 through 36-173 of this code are not exclusive remedies. The city reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant discharger. Further, the city is empowered to take more than one (1) enforcement action against any noncompliant discharger. These actions may be taken concurrently. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(7.03), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 7, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 19, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-175. General criminal penalties.
(a) Any discharger who knowingly violates any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day, or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(b) Vandalism. No person shall willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in Idaho Code, Section 18-7001. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(7.04), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 3938, § 7, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 4048, § 20, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4746, § 9, 5-13-19)

Subdivision H. Reserved

Sec. 36-176. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Section 8 of Ord. No. 3938, adopted Feb. 13, 1989, repealed former § 36-96, which pertained to authorized special agreement and originated from Ord. No. 3611, § 2(Ch. 8), adopted March 8, 1982. Ord. No. 4603, adopted Sept. 23, 2013, renumbered § 36-96 as § 36-176.

Subdivision I. Records Retention

Sec. 36-177. Required.
All dischargers subject to this division shall retain and preserve for no less than three (3) years all records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence, and any and all summaries thereof relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of a discharger in connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the city pursuant to this article shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(Ch. 9), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 4048, § 20, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Subdivision J. Miscellaneous Provisions

Sec. 36-178. Removal credits.
Where applicable, the city may elect to initiate a program of removal credits as part of this division to reflect the POTW’s ability to remove pollutants in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(10.01), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 4048, § 20, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-179. Net/gross calculations.
The city may elect to adjust categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in the discharger’s intake water, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(10.02), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 4048, § 20, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Subdivision K. Severability

Sec. 36-180. Provisions declared severable.
If any provision, paragraph, word, section or chapter of this division is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections and chapters shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(Ch. 11), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 4048, § 20, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Subdivision L. Conflict

Sec. 36-181. Conflicting provisions repealed.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this division are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. (Ord. No. 3611, § 2(Ch. 12), 3-8-82; Ord. No. 4048, § 20, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Editor’s note – Section 9 of Ord. No. 3938, adopted Feb. 13, 1989, repealed former appendices A – D, which pertained to priority pollutants, general limitations on other pollutants, national categorical pretreatment standards and national prohibited discharge standards, respectively, and originated from Ord. No. 3611, § 2, adopted March 8, 1982.

Secs. 36-182 – 36-185. Reserved.
Subdivision M. Septage Haulers

Sec. 36-186. Discharge from septage haulers.
Septage haulers shall be prohibited from discharging waste with any of the characteristics identified in section 36-153 of this code at the city Wastewater Treatment Plant. Additionally, septage haulers are prohibited from discharging any nondomestic wastes which include, but are not limited to, waste from industrial or commercial holding tanks, gravel traps or grease traps. The city may perform random sampling without prior notice to haulers to determine the contents of the septage discharge. The city may also develop and implement sampling criteria and procedures as necessary to meet trucked or hauled waste monitoring requirements. (Ord. No. 3838, § 2, 10-14-86; Ord. No. 4048, § 21, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-187. Septage hauling permit required; application.
There is hereby created a permit for septage haulers. All septage haulers who intend to discharge septage to the wastewater treatment plant shall be required to complete a septage haulers’ permit application on a form provided by the city. (Ord. No. 3838, § 3, 10-14-86; Ord. No. 4048, § 22, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-188. Conditions of permit.
The septage hauler shall provide documentation concerning the type and origin of the waste being discharged. The hauler will provide the name and address of the customer, the volume to be discharged into the plant and any other information that might be required by the septage hauler permit or the city. (Ord. No. 3838, § 4, 10-14-86; Ord. No. 4048, § 23, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-189. Manifest required.
Prior to discharge at the wastewater treatment plant, the septage hauler shall complete a manifest on a form supplied by the city. The manifest may include provisions requiring documentation of the final destination or disposal site of any trucked wastes which are rejected for disposal at the city’s wastewater treatment plant. Loads may be rejected for, but not limited to, failure to meet established sampling or discharge requirements, limitations or conditions. (Ord. No. 3838, § 5, 10-14-86; Ord. No. 4048, § 24, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-190. Times and location of discharge.
Septage haulers shall discharge waste at the septage receiving facility located at the Wastewater Treatment Plant. Septage waste shall not be discharged to the city’s wastewater treatment or collection system at any other location without express written permission from the city. Hours for receiving waste shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday and between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. (Ord. No. 3838, § 6, 10-14-86; Ord. No. 4048, § 25, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4335, § 7, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-191. Fees.
Fees will be assessed as established by resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. No. 3838, § 7, 10-14-86; Ord. No. 4048, § 26, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4063, § 1, 3-8-93; Ord. No. 4207, § 6, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 4295, § 4, 8-27-01; Ord. No. 4317, § 4, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 4335, § 8, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 4368, § 2, 8-23-04; Ord. No. 4410, § 2, 8-22-05; Ord. No. 4437, § 1, 3-13-06; Ord. No. 4457, § 2, 11-27-06; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-192. Penalties.
(a) Failure to comply with the permit conditions will result in the immediate suspension of the septage hauler permit as well as any other penalties provided for in this chapter.

(b) A septage hauler whose permit is suspended shall not have the permit reinstated until the utility systems manager is satisfied that the hauler can comply with the provisions of this chapter. The action of the utility systems manager may be appealed to the public works director. (Ord. No. 3838, § 8, 10-14-86; Ord. No. 4048, § 27, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4746, § 10, 5-13-19)

Secs. 36-193 – 36-197. Reserved.
Subdivision N. Waste Pumpers/Haulers

Sec. 36-198. Waste pumper/hauler permit required; application.
All fats, oil and grease (FOG) waste pumpers/haulers that currently provide or intend to provide FOG pumping, hauling, disposal and/or pretreatment device maintenance services to commercial businesses located within the city’s pretreatment program jurisdiction must obtain a FOG waste pumper/hauler permit. Waste pumpers will be required to complete a permit application on a form provided by the city’s industrial pretreatment section. The industrial pretreatment section shall issue the permit. (Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-199. Conditions of permit.
The waste pumper shall provide documentation and information to the industrial pretreatment section including the name and address of the customer, the type and size of the wastewater treatment assembly being serviced, the date of service, waste disposal destination and any other information required by the waste pumper/hauler permit or the industrial pretreatment section. The pumper/hauler must certify that the pretreatment assembly was serviced in accordance with specific performance requirements as contained in the waste pumper/hauler permit. (Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-200. Penalties.
(a) Failure to comply with the requirements of the waste pumper/hauler permit may result in an action by the utility systems manager to suspend or revoke the permit.

(b) A waste pumper/hauler whose permit is suspended shall not have the permit reinstated until the utility systems manager is satisfied that the pumper can and will comply with the provisions of the waste pumper/hauler permit and applicable provisions of the code. The action of the utility systems manager may be appealed to the authority. (Ord. No. 4485, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4746, § 11, 5-13-19)

Secs. 36-201 – 36-250. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. STORMWATER UTILITY ORDINANCE
Sec. 36-251. Purpose.
The city council finds and declares the need for adequate and effective maintenance, operation, regulation and control of the existing stormwater drainage system in all areas within the city to improve the health, safety and general welfare of the city. The city council finds that those citizens receiving the benefits of the city’s management of the stormwater drainage system should pay for those benefits through a stormwater fee. The city council finds that the establishment of a stormwater utility is the preferred funding and management method for the city’s stormwater system. (Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-252. Definitions.
ERU or equivalent residential unit: For the purposes of this chapter, all references to “ERU” shall mean an impervious surface of four thousand (4,000) square feet.

Impervious surface: Impervious surfaces are mainly constructed surfaces – rooftops, sidewalks, roads, driveways, parking lots – covered by impenetrable materials such as asphalt, concrete, and roofing materials. These materials seal surfaces, repel water and prevent precipitation and melt water from infiltrating soils. Soils compacted by urban development are also highly impervious.

Persons responsible: The owner, agent, occupant, lessee, tenant, contract purchaser, or other person having possession or control of property or the supervision of an improvement on the property.

Utility: For the purposes of this article, all references to “utility” refer to the stormwater utility. (Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-253. Stormwater utility created.
There is hereby created and established a stormwater utility and service charge rate structure. The utility will have regulatory authority for planning, design, construction, maintenance, administration and operation of all city stormwater conveyances and facilities. (Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-254. Utility administration.
The stormwater utility will be administered by the city in a manner consistent with other city utilities. The organization structure of the utility will be approved by resolution of the city council. (Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-255. Applicability.
All persons responsible for properties within the corporate limits of the city of Lewiston are subject to the regulatory authority of the stormwater utility and shall pay a service charge determined by the rate structure created by this chapter. (Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-256. Rate structure.
The stormwater utility rate structure shall be based on property parcels as identified in the Nez Perce County property records. All property parcels within the city will be classed into one (1) of two (2) classes, residential or nonresidential, based on such classes in the Nez Perce County property records and as designated in Idaho Administrative Rules, IDAPA 35.01.03.130, except that manufactured homes on single lots will be considered residential and manufactured homes in manufactured home courts or parks will be considered commercial for the purposes of this section.

All residential class property parcels shall be assigned a value of one (1) ERU.

All nonresidential class property parcels shall be assigned a value of one (1) or more ERUs. The ERU value for each nonresidential property shall be determined as follows:

(1) The city shall determine the area of impervious surface for each parcel.

(2) The city shall divide each parcel’s impervious surface area by the surface area of one (1) ERU, four thousand (4,000) square feet.

(3) The city shall assign an ERU value of one (1) or the result of the division in step 2, rounded to the next highest value above one-half (0.5) value. (Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-257. Fee established.
Each person responsible for properties within the city shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and shall pay a stormwater utility fee for each ERU assigned to property parcels for which they are responsible. The fee per ERU shall be reviewed annually and set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-258. Exemptions and credits.
The city council may establish credits and exemptions to the rate structure established in section 36-256 of this code. Credits and exemptions may be established for classes of parcels identifiable in the Nez Perce County tax parcel base map. All credits and exemptions shall be reviewed annually by the city council as part of setting the fee for each ERU. (Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-259. Appeal and recalculation of fee.
(a) If a person responsible for properties within the city and subject to the fee established by this chapter believes that a particular assigned fee is unwarranted or based on an incorrect calculation of impervious surface or other aspect of the rate structure, such person responsible may appeal the fee.

(b) The appellant must first request that the utility recalculate or explain the fee by requesting in writing such recalculation or explanation. The request must identify the basis for disagreement with the assessed fee and be accompanied by relevant supporting documentation. The utility shall review the request and notify the appellant of its decision, in writing, no later than thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of the completed written request for explanation or recalculation.

(c) If the appellant still believes that the fee is unwarranted, a written appeal may be submitted to the city of Lewiston public works director, with supporting documentation. The public works director shall notify the appellant, within sixty (60) calendar days following receipt of the completed written appeal, with a decision on the appeal. (Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36-260. Stormwater enterprise fund.
All fees and charges received and collected under authority of this chapter shall be deposited and credited to a special fund to be designated as the stormwater enterprise fund. The accounts of the fund shall show all receipts and expenditures for the maintenance, operation, upkeep and repair and capital outlay of the stormwater system, including the payment of bonds issued to finance such capital outlay. When budgeted and appropriated, the funds and credits to the account of the stormwater enterprise fund shall be available for the payment of the requirements for the maintenance, operation, repairs and upkeep and improvements of the stormwater system of the city, including the payment of bonds issued therefor. (Ord. No. 4512, § 1, 8-11-08; Ord. No. 4603, § 3, 9-23-13)

Secs. 36-261 – 36-265. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4603, § 3, adopted Sept. 23, 2013, repealed former §§ 36-160 and 36-161, which pertained to billing and unpaid fees and charges and derived from Ord. No. 4512, § 1.

1
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3788, §§ 2 – 40, adopted June 24, 1985, provided for extensive renumbering and recodifying of Ch. 36 to read as herein set out. For a complete analysis of the changes enacted by said Ord. No. 3788, refer to the Code Comparative Table at page 399.

Cross references – Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 10; electricity, Ch. 14; gas, Ch. 18; manufactured homes, manufactured home parks and tourist facilities, Ch. 23; plumbing, Ch. 27; public right-of-way, Ch. 31; subdivisions, Ch. 32; swimming pools, Ch. 33; zoning, Ch. 37.


2
State law reference – Power to construct sewerage systems, Idaho Code, § 50-1020.


3
Cross reference – Industrial development, Ch. 19.75.


Chapter 36.5
CITY SERVICES BILLING AND COLLECTION OF UTILITY CHARGES
Art. I.    In General, §§ 36.5-1 – 36.5-15

Art. II.    Billings, Adjustments, Delinquent Notices, Etc., §§ 36.5-16 – 36.5-40

ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 36.5-1. Policy.
It is the policy of the city to operate the water, wastewater, and solid waste utilities as business enterprises that benefit the community by providing clean water and sanitary wastewater service, and by providing solid waste management. User charges for service are set to cover the full costs of operation and maintenance and capital improvements of the utilities, as such, accuracy and timeliness in billing and collecting user charges is important. The city bills for all three (3) utilities on a single monthly bill, for other services requested by the customer, and other fees required by resolution. Rates for each service area are separately calculated but are combined and printed on a single bill to facilitate billing and payment processing. The city maintains separate funds to account for specific revenues and expenditures. Monies paid for water service are accounted for in the water fund; monies for wastewater service are accounted for in the wastewater fund; monies paid for solid waste are accounted for in the solid waste fund; monies paid for other fees required by resolution are accounted for as described in the applicable provisions of the Lewiston City Code. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36.5-2. Water, wastewater, solid waste and other utilities.
Service rates and other fees for all water, wastewater, solid waste and other utilities, as may be established in the future, shall be established by resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36.5-3. Free or reduced rate utility services to be recorded and charges collected from city.
(a) If a utility service is provided to a customer for free or at a reduced rate, then the amount by which such utility service charge is reduced shall be billed to the city.

(b) The city shall pay such bill to the enterprise fund for the utility from which services were rendered. The city shall not increase the rates of other ratepayers to account for free or reduced rate utility services. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4731, § 1, 9-10-18)

Sec. 36.5-4. Definitions.
(a) Applicant: A person applying for any one (1) or more of the utility services provided by the city.

(b) Base rate: The monthly charge for access to the water, wastewater or solid waste services whether or not there is consumption and/or use. The base rate covers the costs associated with having water available, providing adequate water flow for fire protection, and capacity for wastewater removal.

(c) BOD: Biochemical oxygen demand.

(d) City services: The services supported by fees on the monthly city services bill for utility services.

(e) Commercial service: Provision of water to premises which include mercantile establishments, stores, offices, public buildings, governmental agencies, public and private hospitals, schools, churches, other commercial enterprises, and mercantile establishments combined with residences. All services except for residential as defined in this chapter.

(f) Consumption rate: A charge placed on every hundred cubic feet (HCF) of water as measured by the meter.

(g) Customer owner: A person who is responsible for the water, wastewater, and/or solid waste account. The owner is deemed to be responsible for all services billed on the city services bill.

(h) Day(s): Calendar day(s).

(i) Disconnected: Physical removal of the water meter and/or disconnection from the water main.

(j) Delinquent: Utility charges not paid by the due date specified on the bill for such charges.

(k) Delinquent fee(s): May also be referred to as “late charges” and shall be set by resolution of the city council.

(l) Domestic service: Provision of water for household residential purposes, including water for lawns, gardens and shrubbery; watering livestock, washing vehicles, and other similar and customary purposes.

(m) Domestic waste: Water carried waste from the noncommercial preparation, cooking, and handling of food or containing human excrement and similar matter from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions.

(n) Fire protection service: Provision of water to premises for automatic fire protection.

(o) Hundred cubic feet (HCF or hcf): The units used to measure water consumption. One hundred (100) cubic feet equals one (1) unit of water measured by the water meter and also equals seven hundred forty-eight (748) gallons of water.

(p) Irrigation service: Provision of water to a customer only for outside watering of landscaping, plants, or lawns and water which does not enter the wastewater system.

(q) Monthly: A term referring to frequency of billing indicating a period of twenty-six (26) to thirty-four (34) days.

(r) Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, agency, company, institution, unincorporated association, public or private corporation, government or government instrumentality.

(s) Premises: The integral property or area, including improvements thereon, to which a utility is or will be provided.

(t) Rate schedules: The entire body of effective rates, rentals, charges, and regulations as adopted by the city council.

(u) Reactivation: Restart of any utility.

(v) Residential: Single-family dwelling.

(w) Suspend(ed): A utility service which has been made temporarily inoperative because of failure to pay balance in full by due date.

(x) User charge: The fee levied on users of the water, wastewater, solid waste systems for their proportionate share of the costs of operation, maintenance, replacement, and capital facilities of the respective systems.

(y) Utility: A division of the public works department of the city of Lewiston.

(z) Utility charges: Any combination of water, wastewater, solid waste service charges or other fees and charges which are imposed on users of utility services authorized by the city council.

(aa) Utility service: Water, wastewater, solid waste services provided by the city of Lewiston. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4731, § 4, 9-10-18)

Sec. 36.5-5. Water used by city departments.
(a) Subject to the exceptions set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, water used by city departments shall be paid to the water division out of each department’s appropriation at the rate established by resolution of the city council.

(b) The water division shall not charge a fee for water used by city departments for the following public purposes:

(1) Irrigation of municipal parks and cemeteries;

(2) Firefighting, including firefighter training; and

(3) Maintenance of municipal streets, sidewalks, storm drains, sewer mains, and parking lots.

(c) The water division shall enter into an agreement with a municipal golf course, whether such municipal golf course is operated by the city or leased by the city to another entity to operate, setting forth the amount such municipal golf course shall pay the water division for water used for irrigation purposes.

(d) In its discretion, the city council may annually appropriate funds from the general fund to be paid to the water fund in order to offset, in full or in part, the costs associated with providing water for the public purposes set forth in subsections (b) and/or (c) of this section. (Ord. No. 4756, § 1, 9-9-19)

Sec. 36.5-6. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4731, §§ 2 – 4, enacted Sept. 10, 2018, repealed §§ 36.5-4 and 36.5-5, derived from Ord. No. 4603, §  4, and renumbered § 36.5-6 to § 36.5-4.

Secs. 36.5-7 – 36.5-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BILLINGS, ADJUSTMENTS, DELINQUENT NOTICES, ETC.
Sec. 36.5-16. Billing and payments.
(a) Bills.

(1) Bills for city services will be delivered monthly. Customers may be billed for any combination of the services authorized on each month’s bill depending on which services are used.

a. Water service is considered to be used if the customer’s property is connected to the water system. Consumption of water is based on the meter reading on the meter provided to the customer by the city.

b. Wastewater service is considered to be used if the customer’s property is connected to the water system. Consumption for wastewater service is generally based on a flat fee or on the water used as measured on the water

meter.

c. Other city services are considered to be used if a utility services account is active.

(2) Meter readings.

a. Meters will be read at regular intervals for the preparation of bills and as required for the preparation of opening, closing, and special bills.

b. It may not always be possible to read meters on the same day of each period. Should a monthly billing period contain less than twenty-six (26) days or more than thirty-four (34) days, a pro rata correction may be made.

c. Estimations. In rare circumstances the city, if unable to read a water meter due to inaccessibility of the meter, will estimate the read in order to calculate a bill. Estimated calculations will be based on the amount of water used in the same month in the prior year. If there was no usage date for the customer for the prior year, then the prior month’s data will be used. Bills that are produced based on an estimated read will indicate that information.

(b) Bill payment.

(1) All bills are generated for services already rendered. Balances are due upon receipt and must be paid on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the month, or the payment will be considered delinquent. On the twenty-first (21st) day of the month, a late fee, as established by the city council, shall be applied to the account. Payment may be made at the city’s utility billing office.

(2) Final bills will be processed at the time of discontinuance of service, with a minimum of seventy-two (72) hour advance notice.

(3) When bills are delinquent, the utility will follow the procedures as outlined in section 36.5-19 of this code.

(c) Administrative services charges, which include, but are not limited to, activation fees, reactivation fees, suspension fees, late fees, fees for tampering with or bypassing water meters, locking devices, or otherwise interfering with any city equipment, or any other applicable fees and charges may be charged to the customer’s account and included in the monthly billing.

(d) All payments for services rendered may be remitted on a single check or separate checks. The utility shall deposit monies equal to the billings for each service into the respective fund for the service rendered. Payment shall be applied first to administrative fees, then to solid waste charges, then to wastewater charges, and finally to the water charges. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36.5-17. Meter test.
(a) Meter test.

(1) If a meter is not new, it will be tested and certified by the water division prior to installation. No meter found to register more than one and one-half (1.5) percent fast or slow under conditions of normal operation will be placed in service.

(2) Customers may request a meter test by giving not less than five (5) working days’ notice to the city. The following conditions shall apply:

a. For each additional test after the first performed in a calendar year, the utility shall charge the customer an amount necessary to cover the reasonable cost of the test.

b. The charge shall be refunded if the meter is found to register more than one and one-half (1.5) percent fast or slow. The customer will be notified not less than five (5) working days in advance of the time and place of the test.

c. A customer or representative shall have the right to be present when the test is made.

d. A written report giving the results of the test shall be made to the public works director and made available to the customer within ten (10) calendar days after completion of the test.

e. Both parties shall accept the findings so made.

(b) Leak test. The city will assist customers who have higher than expected usage to test for leaks. If an underground leak is discovered, the city may adjust the customer’s bill as identified in section 36.5-18 of this code. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36.5-18. Adjustments.
(a) Adjustment of bills for meter error.

(1) Fast meters. When a test is made and a meter is found to register more than three (3) percent fast, under conditions of normal operation, the utility will refund to the customer the full amount of the overcharge based on corrected meter readings for a period not exceeding three (3) months that the meter was in use.

(2) Slow meters. When a test is made and a meter is found to register more than three (3) percent slow under conditions of normal operation, the utility may bill the customer for the amount of the undercharge, based upon corrected meter readings for a period not exceeding three (3) months that the meter was in use.

(3) Nonregistering meters. The utility may bill the customer for water consumed while the meter was not registering. The bill will be at the minimum monthly meter rate, or will be computed by estimating the consumption based upon either the customer’s prior use during the same season of the year or by reasonable comparison with the use of other customers receiving the same class of service during the same period and under similar circumstances and conditions. The bill shall be for the period of time that the meter was not registering.

(b) Adjustments due to underground leaks. When an undetectable and/or underground leak exists between the meter and the building and the same is repaired within a reasonable time after the owner, agent or occupant of the premises has been notified of such leakage, the utility may allow an adjustment of fifty (50) percent of the estimated excess water consumption for a period not exceeding two (2) months that the meter was in use. The wastewater charges may be adjusted for fifty (50) percent of the estimated excess wastewater consumption for a period not exceeding two (2) months that the meter was in use, assuming the wastewater charges are based on water consumption and not a flat rate. The adjustment will be computed upon an estimate of consumption based either upon the customer’s use during the same period of the year prior or upon a reasonable comparison with the use of other customers receiving the same class of service during the same period and under similar circumstances and conditions.

(c) Adjustments for other causes. In the event an over or under billing error is discovered by the utility or the customer, corrections will be calculated for a period of no more than one (1) year.

(1) Amounts owed by the utility to the customer: the customer shall receive the amount as a credit.

(2) Amounts owed by the customer to the utility: if the amount owed is less than the customer’s average monthly bill, the amount shall be due and payable no later than the next regular payment due date. If the amount owed is more than the average monthly bill, the customer may arrange a time-payment agreement to repay the amounts owed. The customer must maintain all current bills and pay the amounts owed on the time-payment agreement each month. The city shall not charge a penalty or interest on the past-due amount as long as the payment terms are met. In no case may the customer take more than one (1) year to repay the amounts owed. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36.5-19. Delinquent accounts.
(a) Policy. To keep costs of operations as low as possible, the city’s policy will pursue collection of all accounts. No account shall be written off or reduced, except as provided for in sections 36.5-18 and 36.5-29 of this code, or as approved by the public works director. The finance department shall provide the city council and the public works director with a yearly accounting of all utility bills written off or reduced in the previous year.

(b) Procedure.

(1) A city services account shall be deemed a delinquent account if it is not paid on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the month following the account’s billing date. For the purposes of this section, “paid” means received in the city finance department. Payments placed in the drop boxes provided by the city shall be deemed as received as of the next business day.

a. The subsequent month’s bill shall serve as the first notice of delinquency and the second notice of when payment must be received in order to avoid turn-off for nonpayment.

b. The city shall serve notice of delinquency to both the occupant and the owner when the person responsible for paying the bill is not the resident of the service address.

c. The city shall transfer any delinquent amount owed on a final account by a customer at a previous location to that customer’s new address when payment is not received within twenty-six (26) days of the final bill. Payments of the delinquent amount shall apply as set forth in subsections (1)(a) and (b) of this section.

d. Subject to the appeal procedure provided in section 36.5-20 of this code, the public works director or his/her designee is authorized to turn off water service at any location for which there exists a delinquent city service account no earlier than the forty-third (43rd) day after the date of billing on that account. Discontinuance of water service shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provide herein or any other city code or by any other applicable law.

(2) Service suspended due to delinquency turn-off. Prior to reactivation, the person responsible for a service that has been suspended for nonpayment will be required to bring the account to a zero (0) balance including service fees.

(3) Recovery of unpaid charges. Any charge due which has not been paid when due may be recovered by any means permitted by law.

The public works director is hereby empowered and directed to enforce this provision as to all delinquent accounts, using the procedures provided in this section. At all reasonable times, employees of the city shall have access to any premises served by the city for inspection, repair or the enforcement of the provisions herein. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13; Ord. No. 4731, § 5, 9-10-18)

Sec. 36.5-20. Appeals.
Upon written request by the customer, a hearing concerning computation of the amount owed and/or whether the service should be terminated shall be held before the city manager. Service shall not be discontinued before the hearing has been conducted, unless service was disconnected before the hearing was requested. If the city manager finds that the computation was in error, the city manager shall adjust the amount of the service charge. If the city manager finds that the computation was correct, the city manager shall determine the service charges to be correct and shall set a date for payment. If the city manager determines that the amount owed on the account has not been paid by the time set after the hearing, then the city manager shall set a date for termination of service. The decision of the city manager is final. If the person requesting the hearing does not appear at the scheduled hearing, the city manager shall enter an order declaring the service charges to be correct and when due and/or when the service shall be terminated if unpaid.

In cases where the customer is unable to pay the bill because of short-term problems or an emergency, the city manager or his/her representative shall have the discretion to renew or continue service to a delinquent account upon receipt of an acceptable plan for payment of past due amount. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36.5-21. Rates for sale of water to tenants and users of water at Lewiston-Nez Perce County Airport; administrative practices.
(a) The rate charged by the city for water purchased by the city from the Lewiston Orchards Irrigation District (LOID) for resale to tenants and other water users located on, or served from the water lines located upon, the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Airport at Lewiston, Idaho, shall be one and one-half (1.5) times the actual charge to the city by the LOID for such water, both irrigation and domestic.

(b) Collection of water charges, billing practices, enforcement of charges, and other administrative practices for the charging and collection of water accounts shall be set forth herein for the city-operated water system.

(c) This section shall be null and void in the event that the city extends its water system to include the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Airport, so that the purchase of water from the LOID is no longer necessary to supply water to said airport. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36.5-22. Utility charges to continue as long as water is connected.
(a) When water has been turned on at any premises, in conformity with the city code, the utility charges shall continue to be charged against the premises for which the service was installed until the public works director or his/her designee is ordered by the owner or his authorized agent, in writing, to disconnect the service.

(b) All accounts for water, wastewater, solid waste, and/or any other utility shall be kept in the name of the owner of the premises for whom the service was installed until a subsequent owner shall take possession, and the city has been notified either by a title company or by Nez Perce County of the change in ownership.

(c) Utility charges may be billed to the occupant when the owner requests the administrative services director/CFO or his/her designee to do so by completion of a non-owner-occupied real property utility billing agreement. However, as provided in said billing agreement, the property owner is not relieved of liability for any utility charges against the property. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36.5-23. Lien on property.
All delinquent charges for water and wastewater connections and service, solid waste charges and all service charges provided by this chapter, together with penalties and interest thereon, shall be a utility tax assessment upon the property to which such connections are made or to which such wastewater service or domestic water service or solid waste service is rendered, superior to all other liens and encumbrances whatsoever, except for general taxes and local special assessments. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36.5-24. Charges recorded against premises where service installed.
(a) All charges shall be recorded against the premises for which the service was installed.

(b) Should the same become delinquent and unpaid, such charges shall be a tax assessment against the property so served and the finance director may make and file a tax assessment for the amount due.

(c) Such assessment shall bind the premises in the manner provided by Idaho Code, Section 50-1008.

(d) In like manner, a charge may be collected for any labor or materials furnished. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36.5-25. Discontinuance of service.
(a) Nonpayment of bills. A customer’s water service may be suspended if the water bill is not paid in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.

(b) Unsafe apparatus.

(1) The utility may refuse to furnish water and may disconnect service to any premises where apparatus, appliances, or equipment using water are dangerous, unsafe, or being used in violation of laws, ordinances, or legal regulations.

(2) The utility does not assume liability for inspecting apparatus on the customer’s property. If there is reason to believe that an unsafe or illegal apparatus is in use, the utility reserves the right to inspect the apparatus.

(c) Service detrimental to others. The utility may refuse to furnish water and may reduce service to any premises where excessive demands by one (1) customer will result in inadequate service to others.

(d) Fraud and abuse. The utility shall have the right to refuse or to disconnect water service to any premises to protect itself against fraud or abuse.

(e) Noncompliance. Unless otherwise provided, the utility may disconnect water service to a customer for noncompliance with any of the regulations of this chapter any time after giving written notice to the customer of the utility’s intention to disconnect service. If such noncompliance affects matters of health or safety or other conditions that warrant such action, the utility may disconnect water service immediately.

(f) Restoration – Reconnection charge. The utility shall charge for restoring water service which has been disconnected because of noncompliance with these rules. Water service which has been disconnected because of nonpayment or noncompliance with these rules shall not be restored in the name of any relative, friend, family member, nor in the same customer name when the head of the household has not changed or when the customer of record at that service location would continue to receive water service.

(g) Penalty for turning on water service without authority. Should the water be turned on by any water customer or other person without authority from the utility, the water may then be shut off at the main or the meter may be removed. A charge for removing and/or reinstalling the meter shall be established by the city council. Any water usage during this unauthorized connection shall be charged to the person(s) receiving the water, and water shall not again be furnished to the customer until said charges are paid.

(h) Tampering. Water services locked off for nonpayment or noncompliance will be subject to tampering should any consumer or person without authority from the utility remove or destroy any locking device in order to self-restore water service. Tampering charges and/or costs shall be billed to the customer. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36.5-26. Notices.
(a) Notices required to be given by the utility to the customer will normally be given in writing, and may be delivered to the customer personally or by mail to the address for which service is rendered.

(b) Notice from the customer to the utility shall be given by the customer or authorized representatives orally or in writing at the city’s utility’s office. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36.5-27. Additional and special charges.
(a) Delinquent payments are subject to the following charges:

(1) Whenever water service to a user has been terminated because of nonpayment of delinquent charges, the customer or user must, in addition to paying the delinquent charges in full, pay a late fee.

(2) Further, a reconnect charge shall be paid in full before water service will be restored.

(b) Special reading charge. Any special readings requested by a user or customer shall be charged to the customer.

(c) Special reading charge – Selling of property. All property closures shall have a final reading. The owners or title company shall provide three (3) days’ notice; however, if a shorter notice is given, then an additional fee shall be paid. The charge for the “final reading” and the short notice fee shall be established by city council resolution. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36.5-28. Temporary suspension of service.
(a) Whenever a user or customer wishes to temporarily suspend water service, he/she shall provide a written request, on a form supplied by the utility, to the utility. The utility shall not accept any other type of request. The request, as a minimum, shall include the following:

(1) Address of service where suspension is requested.

(2) Dates of requested suspension.

(3) Account number.

(4) Printed name of user or customer.

(5) Signature of user or customer.

(b) The user or customer shall remain responsible for all base charges with respect to water, wastewater, and solid waste or any other utility. In addition, he/she shall also be responsible for any water and wastewater services and/or charges used during the suspension. (Ord. No. 4603, § 4, 9-23-13)

Sec. 36.5-29. Utility circuit breaker program.
(a) Policy. The purpose of the circuit breaker program is to provide essential utility services to qualified property owners at reduced rates.

(b) Qualifications. To qualify for the utility circuit breaker program, a customer must: (1) qualify and be approved for the state of Idaho property tax reduction program, as set forth in Idaho Code, §§ 63-701 et seq., the same year in which the customer applies for the utility circuit breaker program; (2) receive the utility services for which the customer is applying from the city, as opposed to another water or sewer district; and (3) be the property owner of a single-family residence, duplex, or triplex, including mobile homes on individual lots where the property owner applicant receives the city utility bill in his or her name.

(c) Application. A qualified customer may apply for the utility circuit breaker program June 1 through September 1 each year; provided, however, for the first year of the utility circuit breaker program (fiscal year 2019), a qualified customer may apply for the utility circuit breaker program from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section through May 31, 2019. If September 1 falls on a weekend or holiday, then applications shall be accepted through the next business day. Late applications shall not be accepted. To continue receiving discounted utility rates through the utility circuit breaker program, a qualified customer must reapply for such program each year.

To apply for the utility circuit breaker program, a qualified customer must submit to the city’s utility billing division: (1) a completed utility circuit breaker program application form, which form is provided by the city; and (2) a copy of the customer’s completed application for the state of Idaho property tax reduction program for the same year in which the customer is applying for the utility circuit breaker program.

(d) Approval. The city’s utility billing division shall approve an application for the utility circuit breaker program if the customer qualifies for such program and timely submits a completed application, as required in this section. If the city’s utility billing division denies an application, then such division shall provide the applicant written notice of denial, stating the reason(s) for the denial.

Once an application for the utility circuit breaker program is approved, a qualified customer shall receive the applicable discounted utility rates from October 1 through September 30 of the following year. A qualified customer who owns a duplex or triplex shall only receive utility circuit breaker rates for utility services rendered to that portion of the property owned by the qualified customer. utility circuit breaker rates shall be set by resolution of the city council.

(e) Disqualification. The city’s utility billing division may disqualify a customer from the utility circuit breaker program at any time if the customer: (1) provides false information when applying for the utility circuit breaker program; (2) fails to fully pay the utility bill within ninety (90) days from the date of billing; or (3) has utility services suspended for nonpayment of the utility bill. If the city’s utility billing division disqualifies a customer from the utility circuit breaker program, then such division shall provide the customer with written notice of disqualification, stating the reason(s) for disqualification. A customer who has been disqualified from the utility circuit breaker program shall not be eligible to reapply for such program for the following fiscal year of the city.

(f) Appeal. A decision by the city’s utility billing division regarding approval for or disqualification from the utility circuit breaker program may be appealed to the city manager within two (2) weeks after the date of notice of denial or disqualification. A customer must file a written notice of appeal with the city clerk setting forth the specific bases of appeal. The city manager may hold a hearing on the appeal or issue a decision without holding a hearing based on the application materials, the written decision of the city’s utility billing division, evidence of whether the applicant is or is not qualified for the utility circuit breaker program, and the written notice of appeal. The city manager shall issue a decision within seven (7) business days from the date the notice of appeal is filed with the city clerk. The city manager’s decision shall be final and binding.

(g) Difference Billed to City. The difference between regular utility rates and the reduced rates charged to qualified customers through the utility circuit breaker program shall be billed to and paid by the city on an annual basis, in accordance with section 36.5-3 of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4731, § 6, 9-10-18)

Secs. 36.5-30 – 36.5-40. Reserved.
Chapter 37
ZONING1
Art. I.    In General, §§ 37-1 – 37-3

Art. II.    Basic Provisions, §§ 37-4 – 37-10.5

Art. III.    Use Zones, §§ 37-11 – 37-122

Art. IV.    Supplementary Regulations, §§ 37-123 – 37-132

Art. V.    Floodplain Management, §§ 37-133 – 37-138

Art. VI.    Home Occupations, §§ 37-140 – 37-144

Art. VII.    Off-Street Parking and Loading, §§ 37-145 – 37-155

Art. VIII.    Exceptions, §§ 37-156 – 37-159.1

Art. IX.    Conditional Uses, §§ 37-160 – 37-165

Art. X.    Nonconformities, §§ 37-166 – 37-172

Art. XI.    Variances, §§ 37-173 – 37-177

Art. XII.    Amendments, §§ 37-178 – 37-180.1

Art. XIII.    Administrative Procedure, §§ 37-181 – 37-192

Art. XIV.    Remedies, §§ 37-193 – 37-194

Art. XV.    Animal Rights, Livestock and Pasture Standards, §§ 37-195 – 37-200

Art. XVI.    Inoperable Vehicle Storage, §§ 37-205 – 37-208

Art. XVII.    Wireless Communication Facilities Regulations, §§ 37-215 – 37-236

ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 37-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lewiston. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the orderly development of the city according to a comprehensive plan; to conserve and stabilize the value of property; and otherwise to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

Accessory building means a building that is used for a purpose that is related, incidental, ancillary, or subordinate to, and on the same lot as, the primary building and use.

Adult bookstore means a structure, building or place or portion thereof wherein there is sold, conveyed, transferred, distributed, or stored any of the following:

(1) Any books, magazines, newspapers, drawings, or other printed or written matter or materials which depict or describe representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals or genital area.

(2) Any pictures, drawings, photographs, films, motion pictures, videotapes, or other pictorial representations which depict or describe patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated or which depict or describe masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals or genital area.

Provided, however, that no item which contains matter which, when considered as a whole and in the context in which it is used, possesses serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value shall be included within the items described in subsection (1) or subsection (2) hereinabove.

Adult entertainment facility means any structure, building, or place, or any portion thereof, wherein there is any live performance, exhibition, showing or display which depicts or describes ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or which depicts or describes masturbation or excretory functions or in which the genitals or the genital area is exposed; provided, however, that no exhibition, showing or display which, when considered as a whole and in the context in which it is used, possesses serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value shall be included within the definition contained in this paragraph.

Adult theater means a structure, building or place, or any portion thereof, wherein there is shown, exhibited or displayed any motion pictures, videotapes, films, pictures, photographs, or other pictorial representations which depict or describe patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or which depict or describe masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals or genital area; provided, however, that no item which contains matter which, when considered as a whole and in the context in which it is used, possesses serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value shall be included as an item listed hereinabove in this definition.

Affected person means one having an interest in real property which may be adversely affected by the issuance or denial of a permit authorizing development.

Alley means a street which affords only a secondary means of access to the property and is not intended for general traffic circulation.

Bed and breakfast means an owner-occupied residence, including an existing detached guest house that is located on the same lot and that provides restroom facilities, where lodging and breakfast are provided for remuneration to overnight, paying guests.

Buildable area means the space remaining on a lot after the minimum open space requirements (coverage, yards, setbacks) have been met.

Building means any structure having a roof supported by walls, posts, or columns and built for the shelter of persons, animals, or property of any kind.

Cemetery means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead and dedicated to cemetery purposes, including columbaria, crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in connection with or within the boundaries of a cemetery.

Change in use means any use that substantially differs from the previous use of a building or land, as determined by the community development director.

Church means a building used for assemblage as a place of worship service for a group of people of a religious faith.

City means the city of Lewiston, Idaho.

Commercial entertainment facility means any use conducted for gain under private ownership whose primary purpose is to provide one of various types of entertainment, recreational activity, or athletic involvement. Typical uses would include theaters, bowling alleys, handball-racquetball club-courts, go-cart tracks, radio controlled car race centers, etc.

Commission means the planning and zoning commission of the city of Lewiston.

Conditional use means a use permitted in a particular zone district upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with all the conditions and standards as specified in this chapter, including any additional conditions of approval, and when approved by the planning and zoning commission.

Construction and contracted trades means occupations engaged in the construction of buildings and other structures, heavy construction, additions, alterations, installations, maintenance and repairs of buildings, demolition, earth moving, excavating, and other land preparation. Construction trades are generally administered or managed from a fixed place of business, but the actual construction work is performed at different project sites.

Contractor’s storage yard means an outside area dedicated to the storage of heavy equipment, business vehicles, construction equipment, construction forms, and machinery related to construction practices.

Council means the city council of the city of Lewiston.

Craft or handicrafts means occupations engaged in finished, personal, or household items that are either made to order or which involve considerable handwork to produce. Examples include textiles, pottery, woodworking, or other products made on an individualized, single-item basis. The use of mechanized assembly line production is excluded from this definition.

Day care center means as defined in section 21-131.

Destruction of structure means the removal of damage equal to or greater than eighty (80) percent of the assessed value of the structure prior to damage, as determined by the Nez Perce County assessor.

Detached building means a building surrounded on all sides by a minimum of three (3) feet of open space between it and another building. Such three-foot open space shall include separation between any eave or lean-to.

Dormitory means a building accessory to a public or private institution used as a group living quarter exclusively for members of the institution. Dormitories may also include convenience services for the residents such as food service, laundry, computer laboratory, recreational facilities, or retail sales clearly subordinate and accessory to the use of the building as a dormitory.

Driveway means a private roadway providing access to a street and serving no more than three (3) lots.

Dwelling, accessory apartment means a size-limited attached or detached apartment meeting the standards of section 37-131.2 of this code.

Dwelling, multifamily means a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units, or more than one (1) detached single-family dwelling on one (1) lot, or more than one (1) two-family dwelling on one (1) lot, or any combination thereof, excluding one (1) single-family dwelling with an accessory apartment.

Dwelling, single-family means a detached building containing one (1) dwelling unit or one (1) dwelling unit with an accessory apartment and shall include a Class A manufactured home as defined herein and any group residence in which eight (8) or fewer unrelated mentally and/or physically handicapped or elderly persons reside and who are supervised at the group residence in connection with their handicap or age-related infirmity, pursuant to Idaho Code, Section 67-6531.

Dwelling, two-family means a detached building on a single lot containing two (2) dwelling units.

Dwelling unit means one (1) or more rooms designated for occupancy by one (1) family.

Family means one (1) or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit and living as a single household unit.

Family day care means as defined in section 21-131.

Farming means the raising and harvesting of crops; feeding, breeding and management of livestock; growing and harvesting of timber; dairying; or any other agricultural or horticultural use or any combination thereof. It includes the construction and use of dwellings and other structures customarily provided in conjunction with farming and further includes the disposal, by marketing or otherwise, of products produced on the premises. Standards for the keeping of livestock in a zone in which farming is permitted shall be the same as the standards for the keeping of livestock under a conditional use permit.

Feedlot means a property which does not have sufficient livestock area or animal rights for the number of livestock and poultry on site, whereon livestock is confined for any period of time, for the primary purpose of feeding prior to sale. Feedlot does not include the raising, feeding and keeping of livestock by children residing on the property for the purpose of participation in educational programs such as 4-H.

Floodplain overlay district means the area lying one hundred fifty (150) feet on either side of Lindsay Creek as measured from the center of the stream and extending in a southeasterly direction from the Camas-Prairie Railroad grounds to the Lewiston corporate limits.

Floor area, gross means the cumulative floor area of each floor level, including any basement within the exterior walls of a building, as measured from the outside surface of the exterior walls.

Garage, private means a portion of a residential building in which storage such as motor vehicles used by the tenants of the building is kept.

Grade means, at ground level, the average of the landscaped ground level at the center of all walls of the building. If a wall is parallel to and within five (5) feet of a sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.

Group day care means as defined in section 21-131.

Height of building, building height means the vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.

Home occupation means an activity, profession, or craft carried on entirely within a residence by the occupants; which activity is clearly incidental to the use of said residence as a dwelling and does not change the residential character thereof, is conducted in such a manner as to not give any outward appearance of a business in the ordinary meaning of the term; so located and conducted that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its existence other than for a nameplate, as permitted; and which does not infringe upon the rights of neighboring residents to enjoy a peaceful occupancy of their homes.

Homeless person means an individual who lacks stable living arrangements or housing (without regard to whether the individual is a member of a family). Such individuals may include, but are not limited to: those whose primary residence during the night is a supervised public or private facility that provides temporary living accommodations; those residing in transitional housing; those living on the streets; and those residing in a homeless shelter, mission, single-room occupancy facility, abandoned building, vehicle, any place not meant for human habitation, or in any other unstable or nonpermanent situation.

Homeless shelter means a privately or publicly operated facility, the primary purpose of which is to provide overnight accommodation free of monetary charge to homeless persons at a fixed location. Such facility may be overnight use only for a twenty-four (24) hour operation. Such facility may also provide support services, such as food, hygiene, laundry, counseling, job training, and referrals to other social service agencies. Homeless shelter shall not include medical facilities licensed by the state of Idaho as a hospital (Idaho Code, Section 39-1301(a)), nursing facility (Idaho Code, Section 39-1301(b)), intermediate care facility (Idaho Code, Section 39-1301(c)), behavioral health service (Idaho Code, Section 39-3122(1)), behavioral health community crisis center (Idaho Code, Section 39-9103(2)), Idaho certified family homes (Idaho Code, Section 39-3502(8)), health facilities (Idaho Code, Section 39-1402(d)), or approved private or public treatment facilities (Idaho Code, Section 39-302(3), (4)). Homeless shelter shall also not include safe houses for domestic violence victims.

Household pets means small animals permitted in the house or yard and kept for company or pleasure, such as dogs, cats, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, or other small, fur-bearing animals; canaries, parrots, parakeets, goldfish, etc.

Industrial park means a development at least five (5) acres in area with a coordinated design for a variety of industrial and related uses.

Intermediate care facility means a facility that provides, on a regular basis, personal care, including dressing, eating and health-related care and services, to individuals who require such assistance but who do not require the degree of care and treatment that a hospital or skilled nursing facility provides.

Junk means any manufactured good, machinery, vehicle stored in public view in violation of Article XVI, personal property or any other thing or part thereof, whether of value or valueless, that is demolished, discarded, dismantled, partially dismantled, dilapidated, worn or deteriorated. This shall

include by way of illustration only and without limitation wood, rubber, scrap metal, concrete, rubble, boxes, crates, or machinery parts.

Junkyard/auto-wrecking yard means an open area where one (1) or more inoperable motor vehicles, junk motor vehicles, vehicle parts or automobile hulks are stored or kept and not in compliance with Article XVI regardless of whether for profit or not, or where waste and scrap material are stored whether for profit or not or where waste and scrap material is bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled. Any property where such vehicles or materials are present for thirty (30) days shall be deemed a junkyard. A junkyard includes an auto-wrecking yard but does not include uses established entirely within closed buildings.

Kennels, commercial means any lot or premises or portion thereof, other than a veterinary hospital, on which four (4) or more dogs are maintained, harbored, possessed, boarded, bred or cared for in return for compensation or kept for sale.

Kennels, noncommercial means any lot, premises or portion thereof, other than a veterinary hospital, on which six (6) or more dogs are maintained, harbored, possessed, boarded, bred or cared for and are not for sale or compensation.

Long-term care facility means an institution or a distinct part of an institution that is licensed or approved to provide health care under medical supervision for twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours to two (2) or more patients who are not related to the governing authority or its members by marriage, blood, or adoption.

Lot means a tract or adjoining tracts of land, no matter how legally described, whether by metes and bounds and/or by lot and block of a recorded plat, which meets the minimum requirements of this chapter for lot access, lot area, lot width, and lot depth and is represented by its owner on a site plan with a permit application as the tract of land to be developed, used, or built upon for purposes of and subject to the requirements of the permit requested.

Lot area means the total area of a lot measured in a horizontal plane within the lot boundary lines, exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way.

Lot, corner means a lot abutting on two (2) or more streets, other than an alley, at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. The front of a corner lot shall be determined at the time of building permit application.

Lot coverage means that portion of the lot that is covered by building and structures.

Lot depth means the average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line.

Lot, flag means a lot that is, generally, in the shape of a flag extended at the end of a pole, wherein the pole portion of the lot serves to provide the required street frontage and the flag portion of the lot serves to provide the buildable area of the lot.

Lot line means the property line bounding a lot.

Lot line, front means the property line separating the lot from the street, other than an alley.

Lot line, rear means a property line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular, triangular, or other shaped lot, means a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line.

Lot line, side means any property line not a front or rear lot line.

Lot, nonconforming means a lot that does not meet the current minimum requirements of this chapter for lot area, lot width, or lot depth, but which was platted or otherwise created and accepted by the governing local land use jurisdiction as a recognizable building lot prior to the current lot size requirements of this chapter and that does meet the current minimum requirements of this chapter for lot access.

Lot, through means a lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. Setbacks for the zone in which such lot is located must be met on both street frontages and all accessory buildings shall comply with all front and rear yard setback requirements of the primary use.

Lot width means the length of a line at right angles to the axis of the lot at a distance equal to the front setback required for the zone in which the lot is located. The axis of a lot shall be a line joining the midpoints of the front and rear property lines.

Manufactured home means a structure, constructed after June 15, 1976, in accordance with the HUD manufactured home construction and safety standards, and is transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or is forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein, except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under 42 U.S.C. Sections 5401 et seq.

Class A manufactured home: A manufactured home meeting the following standards:

(1) Constructed after June 15, 1976, and certified as meeting the manufactured home construction and safety standards of the Department of Housing and Urban Development;

(2) Shall be multisectional and enclose a space of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet;

(3) Roof pitch shall be not less than a three-foot rise for each twelve (12) feet of horizontal run (3:12) and roof shall have minimum six-inch eave or eave and gutter;

(4) Has roofing materials which are generally acceptable for site-built housing. Any roofing material may be used provided it has the appearance of a nonmetallic shingle, shake or tile roof;

(5) Has siding material which has the appearance of wood, masonry or horizontal metal siding. Reflection from horizontal metal siding shall be no greater than that from siding coated with white gloss enamel;

(6) The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and backfilled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the home is located not more than twelve (12) inches above grade;

(7) Hitch or tongue of manufactured home shall be removed.

Class B manufactured home: A manufactured home meeting the manufactured home construction and safety standards of the Department of Housing and Urban Development but not meeting all the criteria (2) through (5) for Class A manufactured homes. Also included certified rehabilitated mobile homes as provided in Title 44, Chapter 25 of Idaho Code.

Class C manufactured home: A manufactured home which does not meet the manufactured home construction and safety standards of the Department of Housing and Urban Development but which is at least eight (8) feet wide and forty (40) feet in length.

Manufactured home park means a tract of land under unified ownership developed for the purpose of providing individual rental spaces for the placement of manufactured homes within its boundaries.

Manufacturing means occupations engaged in the mechanical, physical, or chemical transformation of materials, substances, or components into new products. The assembling of component parts of manufactured products is considered manufacturing, except in cases where the activity is appropriately classified as construction, crafts, or art.

Mini-storage complex means one (1) or more structures on the same site containing several individually accessible storage spaces, or outdoor storage not associated with a contractor’s storage yard, for rent or lease to persons or businesses.

Nonconforming structure or use means a structure or use which was lawful March 13, 1972, the date of adoption of Ordinance No. 3071, or the date any amendment thereto became effective but which fails by reasons of adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.

Occupancy permit means a required permit allowing occupancy of a development or use after it has been determined that the development or use meets all the requirements of the applicable codes.

Office park means a development on a tract of land that contains a number of separate office buildings, accessory and supporting uses, and space designed, planned, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis.

Outdoor storage means the keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, materials, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours.

Owner includes an authorized agent of the owner.

Park means a tract of land, designated and used by the public for active and passive recreation.

Parking means off-street parking with access from streets or secondary means or as approved by a subdivision plat.

Parking lot means a parcel of land devoted to parking spaces for motor vehicles.

Parking lot, commercial means any lot upon which the members of the general public operating a motor vehicle upon said lot and parking thereon may be required to pay a charge or fee for said usage to the owner of the lot or his agent.

Parking lot, reconstruction means the removal and replacement of existing asphalt, concrete, or similar paving material where reconstruction exposes the parking lot subgrade of an area exceeding two thousand (2,000) square feet.

Parking space means a permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, meeting the requirements of the city of Lewiston standard drawings or the city engineer.

Person means every natural person, firm, partnership, association, social or fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, branch of government, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

Personal service use means any use conducted for gain which primarily offers service to the general public such as barbershops, beauty parlors, watch repair, shoe repair, self-service laundry, and dry cleaners and similar activities.

Planned unit development means an area of land in which a variety of residential, commercial, industrial, and/or other land uses are provided.

Prevailing architectural character means the basic aesthetic idea of a building, or group of buildings or structures, including the site and landscape development, that produces its distinctive character.

Professional offices means the use of offices and related spaces for such service as are provided by medical practitioners, lawyers, architects, engineers and similar professions.

Public use means a structure or use intended or used for a public purpose by a city, a school district, the county, the state, or by any other public agency, or by a public utility. Public uses may be considered to be uses permitted outright when the use or structure proposed if the same use or structure were to be undertaken by a private individual would be allowed as a use permitted outright in a specific zone.

Quarrying means an excavation or open pit from which building materials, such as rock, gravel and sand, are extracted by earth moving operations. The term does not include mineral extraction by mining.

Ravine/Drainageway means an open drainage channel identified within the city of Lewiston storm water master plan or as identified during annexation proceedings. Two (2) types of ravines/drainageways exist:

Category A:

(1) Open drainage channels that transport less than one hundred (100) cubic feet per second (cfs) during a storm event for a distance of five hundred (500) linear feet, as identified in the city of Lewiston storm water master plan or as identified during annexation proceedings. The width of a category A drainage channel shall be measured ten (10) feet horizontally on each side of the channel at the average annual high water point. The width shall not exceed ten (10) feet measured horizontally from the edge of the channel at the average annual high water point, and the height shall not exceed ten (10) feet.

Category B:

(1) Open drainage channels that transport more than one hundred (100) cubic feet per second (cfs) during a storm event for a distance of five hundred (500) linear feet, as identified in the city of Lewiston storm water master plan or as identified during annexation proceedings. The width of a category A drainage channel shall be measured twenty-five (25) feet horizontally on each side of the average annual high water channel. The width shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet from the edge of the channel at the average annual high water channel, and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height; or

(2) Open drainage channels that contain significant habitat as determined by designation of wetlands status by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

Recreational vehicle means a vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The basic entities are: travel trailer, camping trailer, fifth-wheel camper and motor home.

Recyclable material means materials that can be collected, sold or reused at a net cost equal to or less than the cost of collection and disposal of the same material.

Recycling center (intermediate processing center) means a place, building or facility where post consumer recyclable materials, including paper products, plastics, tin, aluminum, metals and glass, are accepted to be sorted, processed, packaged, baled, stored, sold or prepared for transport. Specifically excluding auto bodies, parts and related items.

Replacement of a nonconforming use means the replacement, after destruction, of a building or structure with its functional equivalent. The equivalent need not be an exact replica of the original.

Riding academy means an establishment where horses are boarded and cared for and where instructions in riding, jumping and showing is offered and the general public may, for a fee, hire horses for riding.

Riding arena means an enclosed indoor or outdoor area that is used for the purposes of riding horses or other similar animals.

Roadway means that portion of a highway or street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of any sidewalk, berm or shoulder.

Semi-public use means a structure or use intended or used by a fraternal, cultural or similar organization, excluding any church or homeless shelter.

Service station means any building or premises used primarily for the retail sale of gasoline and lubricants, but which may also provide for the incidental servicing of motor vehicles including grease racks, tire repairs, battery charging, hand washing of automobiles, sale of merchandise and supplies related to the servicing of motor vehicles and minor replacements, but excluding body and fender work, engine overhauling, painting, welding, storage of autos not in operating condition or other work involving noise, fumes, glare or smoke.

Sign means a device designed to inform or to attract the attention of persons not on the premises. The area of a sign is the total of the exposed exterior display surfaces, including flags, pennants, banners.

Small animal hospital, clinic or kennel means a building used for the care, grooming, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured small animals or pets, not including livestock, which are in need of medical or surgical attention, and may include enclosed overnight accommodations on the premises for the treatment, observation or recuperation of small animals or pets. Such premises shall be under the direct supervision and control of a licensed veterinarian, as defined by Chapter 21 , Title 54, Idaho Code, as the chapter now exists or may hereafter be amended. Board of small animals or pets may be included as an incidental use.

Structural alteration means any change to the supporting members of a building including foundations, bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, girders, or any structural change in the roof or in the exterior walls.

Structure means something constructed or built and having a fixed base on, or fixed connections to, the ground or another structure.

Swimming pool means manufactured or field constructed equipment designed to contain water for swimming, wading, immersion, or therapeutic purposes for a person or persons.

Travel trailer means a trailer house not more than eight (8) feet in width or more than twenty-nine (29) feet in interior length, designed for travel and recreation uses.

Travelway means that portion of the parking lot or vehicle storage lot normally used by motor vehicles or equipment to drive from a public street or alley to a parking or storage space.

Truck terminal means an area and building where cargo is stored and where trucks load and unload cargo on a regular basis. Truck service and maintenance associated with the trucking lines serving the trucking terminal and clearly secondary in nature to the truck terminal is an accessory use.

Use means the purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.

Variance means a modification of the requirements of the zoning ordinance as to lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, yards, setbacks, parking space, height of building or other ordinance provisions affecting the size of lots or the size, shape or placement of structures upon lots but not involving the actual use and shall not be of the applicant’s making.

Vehicle means any vehicle or device intended to be used for carrying or conveying persons and/or objects under its power including but not limited to: automobile, motorcycle, truck, motorized boat, motorized recreational vehicle, personal watercraft, three/four wheeler, snowmobile, motor home, etc.

Vehicle, inoperable means any motorized vehicle which is damaged, is missing any part essential for movement, or on which essential parts are broken or defective, including flat tires such that it cannot be considered to be operable; or does not meet the definition of operable vehicle.

Vehicle, junk means any motor vehicle from which all salvageable parts have been removed and the only remaining value is scrap.

Vehicle, operable means:

(1) Any motor vehicle intended for and that can be legally operated on any public roadway. Generally it requires title, and may or may not have current registration, certificate of insurance and properly displayed license plates.

(2) Any motorized vehicle not intended for legal operation on a public roadway including but not limited to race vehicles, watercraft, seasonal vehicles and pre-event demolition derby vehicles.

Vehicle parts means one or more new or used motor vehicle components.

Vehicle storage lot means a parcel of land devoted to the storage or display for sale of motor vehicles or equipment.

Veterinary clinic or kennel means a building used for the care, grooming, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured animals, including household pets and livestock, and those animals which are in need of medical

or surgical attention, including overnight accommodations on the premises for treatment, observation or recuperation. Such premises shall be under the direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian, as defined by Chapter 21 , Title 54, Idaho Code, as that chapter now exists or may hereafter be amended. Boarding of pets and livestock may be included as an incidental use.

Wholesale distribution means an establishment engaged in the receipt, storage and distribution of goods, products, cargo and materials including transshipment by boat, rail, air or motor vehicles.

Wood processing plant means an area or facility for the processing, handling or distribution of wood-based products including but not limited to sawmills, retail or wholesale firewood lots, or similar facilities that transform raw wood products to a more finished form.

Working day means any day except a Saturday, Sunday or a day which is a legal holiday under the laws of Idaho.

Wrecking yard, see Junkyard.

Yard means an open space on a lot which is unobstructed from the ground upward.

Yard, front means a yard between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line from the front lot line to a building.

Yard, rear means a yard between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line from the rear lot line to a building.

Yard, side means a yard between the front and rear yard measured horizontally and at right angles from the side lot line to a building.

Zoning certificate means a notation attached to a building permit, occupancy permit or business license, or issued separately by the community development director or authorized representative, to certify that a building, structure, use or occupancy specified thereon is in conformity with all the provisions of this chapter.

Zoning official means the director of the community development department of the city. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4161, § 1, 7-1-96; Ord. No. 4249, § 1, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4270, § 1, 10-30-00; Ord. No. 4283, § 1, 4-9-01; Ord. No. 4322, § 1, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4328, § 1, 3-24-03; Ord. No. 4329, § 1, 6-16-03; Ord. No. 4344, § 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 4351, § 1, 3-15-04; Ord. No. 4354, § 1, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 4386, § 1, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4393, § 1, 3-14-05; Ord. No. 4423, § 2, 11-21-05; Ord. No. 4426, §§ 1, 2, 11-28-05; Ord. No. 4398, § 5, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4440, § 1, 8-14-06; Ord. No. 4486, § 1, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 4499, § 1, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 4520, § 1, 11-24-08; Ord. No. 4523, § 2, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 4525, § 1, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 4531, § 1, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4581, § 1, 8-13-12; Ord. No. 4587, § 1, 8-27-12; Ord. No. 4676, § 1, 11-28-16; Ord. No. 4672, § 1, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 4689, § 1, 4-24-17; Ord. No. 4742, § 2A, 8-19-19; Ord. No. 4755, § 1, 9-9-19)

ARTICLE II. BASIC PROVISIONS
Sec. 37-4. Compliance with chapter provisions.
A lot may be used and a structure or part of a structure constructed, reconstructed, altered, occupied or used only as this chapter permits and subject to provisions of Articles III to X. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-5. Maintenance of minimum requirements.
No lot dimensions, yards or off-street parking areas existing on or before March 13, 1972, shall be reduced below the minimum requirements of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-6. Interpretation.
Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this chapter or any other applicable regulation, the provision which is more restrictive shall govern. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-7. Reserved.
Sec. 37-8. Classification of zones.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following zones are hereby established:

Zone

Abbreviated Designation

Agricultural Transitional Zone

F-2

Suburban Residential Zone

R-1

Low Density Residential Zone

R-2

Low Density Residential Zone

R-2A

Normal Hill North Zone

NHN

Normal Hill South Zone

NHS

Medium Density Residential Zone

R-3

Higher Density Residential Zone

R-4

North Lewiston Mixed Use Development Zone

MXD-NL

Local Commercial Zone

C-1

Normal Hill Special Planning Area Mixed Use Zone

NHMU

Tourist Commercial Zone

C-2

Community Commercial Zone

C-3

General Commercial Zone

C-4

Central Commercial Zone

C-5

Regional Commercial Zone

C-6

Light Industrial Zone

M-1

Bryden Avenue Special Planning Area

BASPA

Heavy Industrial Zone

M-2

Planned Unit Development Zone

PD

Airport Zone

A

Port Zone

P

Billboard Overlay Zone

BB

Form and Impact Based Zone

FIB

(Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4161, § 2, 7-1-96; Ord. No. 4283, § 2, 4-9-01; Ord. No. 4689, § 2, 4-24-17; Ord. No. 4725, § 1, 11-26-18)

Sec. 37-9. Zoning map.
The boundaries of the zones established by this chapter are indicated on a map entitled Zoning Map of the City of Lewiston, which is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this chapter as though fully set forth herein. The boundaries may be modified in accordance with zoning map amendments which shall be adopted by reference. A certified print of the adopted map or subsequently amended map shall be maintained as long as this chapter remains in effect. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-10. Zone boundaries.
Unless otherwise specified, zone boundaries are section lines, subdivision lines, lot lines, centerlines of streets, alleys or railroad rights-of-way, or such lines extended. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-10.5. Public nuisance prohibited.
No use or activity described in this chapter, whether permitted outright or by conditional use permit, may be conducted in such a way as to cause a public nuisance, such as littering, loitering, indecent exposure, criminal activity, disturbing the peace, drunk or disorderly person, noise, dust, or fumes. (Ord. 4689, § 3, 4-24-17)

ARTICLE III. USE ZONES
AGRICULTURAL TRANSITIONAL ZONE F-2

Sec. 37-11. F-2 Agricultural Transitional Zone.
(a) Purpose: To provide a transition zone from agricultural land uses to residential land use within the city limits where centralized water and sewer are not available. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 2, 10-25-99)

Sec. 37-12. Uses permitted outright.
In an F-2 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of Article IV:

(1) Class A manufactured home;

(2) General farming, except feedlots;

(3) Single-family dwelling;

(4) Bed and breakfast facilities, subject to special conditions of section 37-13.1(1) of this code;

(5) Family day care, subject to special conditions of section 37-13.1(2) of this code. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 3, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 4, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4742, § 2B, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-13. Conditional uses permitted.
In an F-2 Zone, the following uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the standards and requirements in Article IX:

(1) Class B manufactured home;

(2) Commercial kennels;

(3) Public use;

(4) Quarrying when the outer boundary is not located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a dwelling unit other than that of the operator;

(5) Recreational vehicle park, subject to the provisions of Chapter 23, Article II of this code;

(6) Semi-public use;

(7) Group day care, subject to special conditions of section 37-13.1(3) of this code. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 4, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 5, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4698, § 15, 10-30-17; Ord. No. 4742, § 2C, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-13.1. Special conditions.
(1) Bed and breakfast facilities.

(a) The use shall not change the residential character of the dwelling, shall be conducted in such a manner as to not give any outward appearance of a business in the ordinary meaning of the term, shall be conducted so that the average neighbor under normal circumstances would not be aware of its existence, and shall not infringe upon the rights of neighboring residents to enjoy the peaceful occupancy of their homes.

(b) No more than one (1) person, other than members of the family residing on the premises, shall be engaged in the occupation.

(c) Only resident guests of bed and breakfast facilities shall be served meals.

(d) Bed and breakfast facilities shall be limited to five (5) or fewer guestrooms.

(e) One (1) off-street parking space is required for each guestroom of a bed and breakfast facility.

(f) A bed and breakfast facility shall be allowed one (1) sign, no more than four (4) square feet and non-illuminated.

(g) The size of the site is shown to be reasonable for the intended use.

(h) Access to the site meets all applicable ordinances.

(i) The surrounding properties will not otherwise be adversely affected.

(2) Family day care, one (1) to six (6) children.

(a) Registration with the family day care registry is required in accordance with section 21-138 of this code.

(b) The size of the site is shown to be reasonable for the intended use.

(c) Access to the site meets all applicable ordinances.

(d) The surrounding properties will not otherwise be adversely affected.

(3) Group day care, seven (7) to twelve (12) children.

(a) A business license is required in accordance with section 21-133 of this code.

(b) The size of the site is shown to be reasonable for the intended use.

(c) Access to the site meets all applicable ordinances.

(d) The surrounding property will not otherwise be adversely affected. (Ord. No. 4249, § 5, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 2, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4351, § 2, 3-15-04; Ord. No. 4742, § 2D, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-14. Lot size.
The lot size shall be as follows:

(1) For a single-family dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be five (5) acres;

(2) Minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-15. Yards.
Except as provided in Article VIII, yards shall be as follows:

(1) A front yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet;

(2) A side yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet, except that on a corner lot, the side yard shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the property line or thirty (30) feet from the centerline of the street, whichever is greater;

(3) A rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-16. Height of buildings.
Buildings shall not exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-17. Lot coverage.
Buildings shall not cover more than forty (40) percent of the lot. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-1

Sec. 37-18. R-1 Suburban Residential Zone.
(a) Purpose: To provide for agricultural or transitional area for suburban residential uses. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 6, 10-25-99)

Sec. 37-19. Uses permitted outright.
In an R-1 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright, subject to the provisions of Article IV:

(1) Bed and breakfast facilities, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1(1) of this code;

(2) Church, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(2) of this code;

(3) Class A manufactured home;

(4) Commercial uses legally established as of December 31, 2004, and which have maintained a valid business and occupation permit;

(5) Family day care, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1(2) of this code;

(6) General farming, except feedlots;

(7) Mortuary, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(1) of this code;

(8) Park, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(4) of this code;

(9) School, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(3) of this code;

(10) Single-family dwelling;

(11) Two-family dwelling. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 7, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4385, § 1, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4398, § 6, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4531, § 2, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4675, § 1, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-20. Conditional uses permitted.
In an R-1 Zone the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the standards and requirements in Articles IV and IX:

(1) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(2) Class B manufactured home;

(3) Day care center, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(5) of this code;

(4) Group day care, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1(3) of this code;

(5) Intensification, or expansion of commercial uses of ten (10) percent of the building area or more which were legally established and licensed for business and occupation;

(6) Manufactured home park, subject to the requirements of Chapter 23 of this code, with a minimum area of two (2) acres and a maximum density of five and eight-tenths (5.8) units per acre;

(7) Noncommercial kennel, subject to commercial kennel standards of section 37-163(15) of this code;

(8) Preschool, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(6) of this code;

(9) Public use;

(10) Re-establishment of a commercial use which was legally established but where the business and occupation license has lapsed for a period not to exceed one (1) year;

(11) Replacement of a nonconforming commercial use located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to standards of section 37-163(17) of this code;

(12) Replacement of a nonconforming residential use not located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to setback and yard requirements of the R-2 Zone;

(13) Semi-public use. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 8, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 5, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4328, § 2, 3-24-03; Ord. No. 4385, § 2, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4398, § 7, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4531, § 2, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4675, § 2, 11-28-16; Ord. No. 4742, § 2E, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-20.1. Special conditions.
(1) Mortuary.

(a) The size of the site is shown to be reasonable for the intended use.

(b) Access to the site meets all applicable ordinances.

(c) The abutting/adjacent properties will not otherwise be adversely affected.

(d) A site development plan is submitted for review and approval; subsequent development shall be in substantial conformance with the approved development plan.

(e) The developer of the proposed project shall contact all property owners and tenants within three hundred (300) feet of the property on which the project is planned. The notification shall provide details of the proposed development and inform those receiving notification of their opportunity to contact the community development department, in writing, within fifteen (15) days of notification with complaints or concerns about the proposed project. The developer shall provide to the community development department written verification of the notification to all property owners and tenants. If no written objections are received from those persons entitled to receive notice within fifteen (15) days of such notice, zoning approval may be granted. If any written objection to the proposed development is received within fifteen (15) days of such notice from any person entitled to notice, a conditional use permit shall be required. The developer shall apply for a conditional use permit as provided in Article IX of this chapter.

(2) Church.

(a) The size of the site is shown to be reasonable for the intended use.

(b) Access to the site meets all the applicable ordinances.

(c) The abutting/adjacent properties will not otherwise be adversely affected.

(d) A church may exceed the height limitations of the zone in which it is located to a maximum of fifty (50) feet, if the total floor area of the building does not exceed one and one-half (1-1/2) times the area of the site and if the yard dimensions in each case are equal to at least two-thirds (2/3) of the height of the principal structure.

(e) Site development plan is submitted for review and approval; subsequent development shall be in substantial conformance with the approved development plan.

(f) The developer of the proposed project shall contact all property owners and tenants within three hundred (300) feet of the property on which the project is planned. The notification shall provide details of the proposed development and inform those receiving notification of their opportunity to contact the community development department, in writing, within fifteen (15) days of notification with complaints or concerns about the proposed project. The developer shall provide to the community development department written verification of the notification to all property owners and tenants. If no written objections are received from those persons entitled to receive notice within fifteen (15) days of such notice, zoning approval may be granted. If any written objection to the proposed development is received within fifteen (15) days of such notice from any person entitled to notice, a conditional use permit shall be required. The developer shall apply for a conditional use permit as provided in Article IX of this chapter.

(3) School.

(a) The size of the site is shown to be reasonable for the intended use.

(b) Access to the site meets all applicable ordinances.

(c) The surrounding property will not otherwise be adversely affected.

(d) Site development plan is submitted for review and approval; subsequent development shall be in substantial conformance with the approved development plan.

(e) The developer of the proposed project shall contact all property owners and tenants within three hundred (300) feet of the property on which the project is planned. The notification shall provide details of the proposed development and inform those receiving notification of their opportunity to contact the community development department, in writing, within fifteen (15) days of notification with complaints or concerns about the proposed project. The developer shall provide to the community development department written verification of the notification to all property owners and tenants. If no written objections are received from those persons entitled to receive notice within fifteen (15) days of such notice, zoning approval may be granted. If any written objection to the proposed development is received within fifteen (15) days of such notice from any person entitled to notice, a conditional use permit shall be required. The developer shall apply for a conditional use permit as provided in Article IX of this chapter.

(4) Park.

(a) Site development plan is submitted for review and approval to the Lewiston parks and recreation manager; subsequent development shall be in substantial conformance with the approved development plan.

(b) The site development plan shall be shown to be in substantial compliance with the park and open space master plan.

(5) Day care center, thirteen (13) children or over.

(a) A business license is required in accordance with Chapter 21 of this code.

(b) The size of the site is shown to be reasonable for the intended use.

(c) Access to the site meets all applicable ordinances.

(d) The surrounding property will not otherwise be adversely affected.

(e) Off-street parking and pick-up/drop-off area shall be provided.

(6) Preschool.

(a) Approval of a conditional use permit from the planning and zoning commission is required. This requires a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission.

(b) A business license is required, including a criminal history check for all employees, volunteers and people over twelve (12) years of age living on the premises.

(c) Compliance with state regulations, Uniform Building Codes and city standards is required.

(d) The size of the site is shown to be reasonable for the intended use.

(e) Parking and access to the site meet all applicable ordinances.

(f) The surrounding property will not otherwise be adversely affected. (Ord. No. 4249, § 9, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4351, § 3, 3-15-04; Ord. No. 4692, § 11, 10-30-17)

Sec. 37-21. Lot size.
In an R-1 Zone, the lot size shall be as follows:

(1) For a single-family dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet, subject to sections 32-45(f)(1) and 36-103 of this code.

(2) For a two-family dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, subject to sections 32-45(f)(1) and 36-103 of this code.

(3) Lot width shall be a minimum of seventy (70) feet.

(4) Lot depth shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4381, § 1, 1-24-05; Ord. No. 4531, § 2, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4676, § 2, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-22. Yards.
Except as provided in Article VIII, in an R-1 Zone yards shall be as follows:

(1) A front yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet or thirty-five (35) feet from the centerline of the street, whichever is greater.

(2) A side yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet, except that on a corner lot the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the property line or thirty (30) feet from the centerline of the street, whichever is greater.

(3) A rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.

(4) Duplex dwelling units constructed as a use permitted outright in this zone and constructed so as to share a common or adjoining side wall shall be allowed to legally split into two (2) minimum seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square foot lots provided the front and rear setbacks are in compliance with this chapter and the side yard opposite the zero lot line shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. In no case shall the minimum width of the zero lot line lot be less than sixty (60) feet nor the depth less than one hundred (100) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-23. Lot coverage.
Buildings shall not cover more than forty (40) percent of the lot. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-24. Height of buildings.
In an R-1 Zone, the buildings shall not exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-25. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4216, § 1, adopted Aug. 10, 1998, repealed § 37-25, relative to signs permitted in the R-1 Zone, which derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2, adopted Aug. 15, 1994.

LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-2

Sec. 37-26. R-2 Low Density Residential Zone.
(a) Purpose: To provide land for lower density residential development in a neighborhood setting. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 10, 10-25-99)

Sec. 37-27. Uses permitted outright.
In an R-2 Zone the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of Article IV:

(1) Bed and breakfast facilities, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1(1) of this code;

(2) Church, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(2) of this code;

(3) Class A manufactured home;

(4) Commercial uses legally established as of December 31, 2004, and which have maintained a valid business and occupation permit;

(5) Family day care, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1(2) of this code;

(6) Mortuary, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(1) of this code;

(7) Park, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(4) of this code;

(8) School, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(3) of this code;

(9) Single-family dwelling;

(10) Two-family dwelling. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4161, § 3, 7-1-96; Ord. No. 4249, § 11, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4385, § 3, 2-14-05)

Sec. 37-28. Conditional uses permitted.
In an R-2 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the standards and requirements in Articles IV and IX:

(1) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(2) Day care center, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(5) of this code;

(3) Group day care, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1(3) of this code;

(4) Intermediate care facility;

(5) Long-term care facility;

(6) Intensification, or expansion of commercial uses of ten (10) percent of the building area or more which were legally established and licensed for business and occupation;

(7) Multifamily dwelling, meeting the standards of section 37-124.1 of this code;

(8) Noncommercial kennel, subject to commercial kennel standards of section 37-163(15) of this code;

(9) Preschool, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(6) of this code;

(10) Public use;

(11) Re-establishment of a commercial use which was legally established but where the business and occupation license has lapsed for a period not to exceed one (1) year;

(12) Replacement of a nonconforming commercial use located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to standards of section 37-163(17) of this code;

(13) Replacement of a nonconforming residential use not located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to setback and yard requirements of the R-2 Zone;

(14) Semi-public use;

(15) Small lot development subject to the requirements of section 37-33 of this code, standards for small lot development. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 12, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 5, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4328, § 2, 3-24-03; Ord. No. 4385, § 4, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4433, § 1, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4499, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 4531, § 3, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4656, § 1, 3-28-16; Ord. No. 4676, § 3, 11-28-16; Ord. No. 4742, § 2F, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-29. Lot size.
In an R-2 Zone, the minimum lot size shall be as follows:

(1) For a single-family dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet, subject to sections 32-45(f)(1) and 36-103 of this code.

(2) For a two-family dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet, and connection to a municipal sanitary sewer system must be provided.

(3) For a multifamily dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet plus three thousand (3,000) square feet for each dwelling unit over two (2), and connection to a municipal sanitary sewer system must be provided.

(4) Lot width shall be a minimum of sixty (60) feet.

(5) Lot depth shall be a minimum of eighty (80) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4499, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 4676, § 4, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-30. Yards.
Except as provided in Article VIII, in an R-2 Zone the minimum yard requirements shall be as follows:

(1) A front yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet or thirty-five (35) feet from the centerline of the street, whichever is greater.

(2) A side yard shall be a minimum of five (5) feet and the total of both side yards shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet, except on corner lots the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the property line or thirty-five (35) feet from the centerline of the street, whichever is greater.

(3) A rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.

(4) Duplex dwelling units constructed as a use permitted outright in this zone and constructed so as to share a common or adjoining side wall shall be allowed to legally split into two (2) minimum five thousand (5,000) square foot lots provided the front and rear setbacks are in compliance with this chapter and the side yard opposite the zero lot line shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. In no case shall the minimum width of the zero lot line lot be less than fifty (50) feet nor the depth less than eighty (80) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-31. Lot coverage.
In an R-2 Zone buildings shall not cover more than forty (40) percent of the lot. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-32. Height of buildings.
In an R-2 Zone, no building shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-33. Small lot development; development consisting of zero lot line town homes or duplexes.
(a) Lot size.

(1) For a single-family dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet;

(2) For a two-family dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet;

(3) Lot width shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet for interior and forty-five (45) feet for corner lots;

(4) Lot depth shall be a minimum of eighty (80) feet.

(b) Yards. Except as provided in section 37-156 of this code, the minimum yard requirements shall be as follows:

(1) A front yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet or twenty-five (25) feet from the centerline of the adjacent street, whichever is greater.

(2) A side yard shall be:

a. Zero (0) feet when adjacent to a primary building constructed on the property line; or

b. Five (5) feet or more, except on corner lots the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet or twenty-five (25) feet from the centerline of the adjacent street, whichever is greater.

(3) A rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet except when one (1) side yard is at least twenty (20) feet, the rear yard may be reduced to ten (10) feet.

(c) In small lot development, buildings shall not cover more than sixty (60) percent of the lot.

(d) Standards.

(1) One (1) detached garage of four hundred forty (440) square feet is allowed when provided with vehicle access from an improved right-of-way and a garage is not attached to the primary residence. No other accessory buildings are allowed.

(2) Vehicular access shall be provided from the rear of the lot when the structure is set back less than twenty (20) feet from the front lot line. (Ord. No. 4433, § 2, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4755, § 2, 9-9-19)

LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-2A

Sec. 37-34. R-2A Low Density Residential Zone.
(a) Purpose: To provide land for lower density residential development with the keeping of livestock as a conditional use. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4161, § 4, 7-1-96; Ord. No. 4249, § 13, 10-25-99)

Sec. 37-35. Uses permitted outright.
In an R-2A Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of Article IV:

(1) Bed and breakfast facilities, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1(1) of this code;

(2) Church, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(2) of this code;

(3) Class A manufactured home;

(4) Commercial uses legally established as of December 31, 2004, and which have maintained a valid business and occupation permit;

(5) Family day care, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1(2) of this code;

(6) Manufactured home park, subject to the requirements of Chapter 23 of this code with a minimum area of two (2) acres and a maximum density of 8.7 units per acre;

(7) Mortuary, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(1) of this code;

(8) Park, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(4) of this code;

(9) School, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(3) of this code;

(10) Single-family dwelling;

(11) Two-family dwelling. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 14, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4385, § 5, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4398, § 8, 1-9-06)

Sec. 37-36. Conditional uses permitted.
In an R-2A Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the standards and requirements in Articles IV and IX:

(1) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(2) Day care center, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(5) of this code;

(3) Group day care, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1(3) of this code;

(4) Intermediate care facility;

(5) Keeping of livestock, subject to the standards of sections 37-195 through 37-199 of this code;

(6) Long-term care facility;

(7) Intensification, or expansion of commercial uses of ten (10) percent of the building area or more which were legally established and licensed for business and occupation;

(8) Multifamily dwelling, meeting the standards of section 37-124.1 of this code;

(9) Noncommercial kennel, subject to commercial kennel standards of section 37-163(15) of this code;

(10) Preschool, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(6) of this code;

(11) Public use;

(12) Re-establishment of a commercial use which was legally established but where the business and occupation license has lapsed for a period not to exceed one (1) year;

(13) Replacement of a nonconforming residential use not located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to setback and yard requirements of the R-2 Zone;

(14) Semi-public use;

(15) Manufactured home park, subject to the requirements of Chapter 23 of this code with a density greater than eight and seven-tenths (8.7) units per acre;

(16) Small lot development subject to the requirements of section 37-33, standards for small lot development. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 15, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 5, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4328, § 2, 3-24-03; Ord. No. 4354, § 2, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 4385, § 6, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4398, § 9, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4433, § 3, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4499, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 4531, § 3, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4656, § 2, 3-28-16; Ord. No. 4676, § 5, 11-28-16; Ord. No. 4742, § 2G, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-37. Lot size.
In an R-2A Zone, the minimum lot size shall be as follows:

(1) For a single-family dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet, subject to sections 32-45(f)(1) and 36-103 of this code.

(2) For a two-family dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet, and connection to a municipal sanitary sewer system must be provided.

(3) For a multifamily dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet plus four thousand (4,000) square feet for each dwelling unit over two (2), and connection to a municipal sanitary sewer system must be provided.

(4) Lot width shall be a minimum of seventy (70) feet.

(5) Lot depth shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet.

(6) Two-family dwelling units constructed as a use permitted outright in this zone and constructed so as to share a common or adjoining side wall shall be allowed to legally split into two (2) minimum five thousand (5,000) square foot lots, provided the front and rear setbacks are in compliance with this chapter and the side yard opposite the zero lot line shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. In no case shall the minimum width of the zero lot line lot be less than fifty (50) feet nor the depth less than eighty (80) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4381, § 2, 1-24-05; Ord. No. 4499, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 4676, § 6, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-38. Yards.
Except as provided in Article VIII, in an R-2A Zone the minimum yard requirements shall be as follows:

(1) A front yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet or thirty-five (35) feet from the centerline of the street, whichever is greater.

(2) A side yard shall be a minimum of five (5) feet and the total of both side yards shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet, except that on corner lots the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet or thirty-five (35) feet from the centerline of the street, whichever is greater.

(3) A rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-39. Lot coverage.
In an R-2A Zone buildings shall not cover more than forty (40) percent of the lot. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-40. Height of buildings.
In an R-2A Zone, no building shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

NORMAL HILL NORTH ZONE – NHN

Sec. 37-41. Normal Hill North Zone.
(Ord. No. 4589, § 1, 8-27-2012)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4216, § 1, adopted Aug. 10, 1998, repealed § 37-41, relative to signs permitted in the R-2A Zone, which derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2, adopted Aug. 15, 1994.

Sec. 37-41.1. Normal Hill North Zone permitted uses.
USES BY RIGHT – NORMAL HILL NORTH ZONE

NORTH

Bed and breakfast facilities, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1 of this code

x

Church, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1 of this code

x

Class A manufactured home

x

Commercial uses legally established as of December 31, 2004, and which have maintained a valid business and occupation permit

x

Family day care (six (6) or fewer children), subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1 of this code

x

Group day care (seven (7) to twelve (12) children), subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1 of this code

x

Intensification, or expansion of commercial uses of ten (10) percent of the building area or more which were legally established and licensed for business and occupation

x

Multifamily dwelling not exceeding a total of six (6) dwelling units; provided, that it is a REMODEL of an existing single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling, does not expand the footprint of the existing building by more than ten (10) percent, and does not add a floor level to the existing building, except as a basement or unless it is within the existing roof line. The addition of dormers to accommodate an attic conversion to habitable space shall be permitted.

x

Park, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1 of this code

x

School or preschool, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1 of this code

x

Semi-public use

x

Single-family dwelling

x

Two-family dwelling

x

Zero lot line residential development

x

(Ord. No. 4589, § 1, 8-27-2012; Ord. No. 4656, § 3, 3-28-16; Ord. No. 4676, § 8, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-41.2. Normal Hill North Zone conditional uses.
CONDITIONAL USES NORMAL HILL NORTH ZONE 

NORTH

Day-care center (thirteen (13) or more children), subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1 of this code

x

Dormitory, subject to the special conditions of section 37-44.1 of this code

x

Hospital

x

Intermediate-term care facility, subject to the special conditions of section 37-44.1 of this code

x

Long-term care facility, subject to the special conditions of section 37-44.1 of this code

x

Multifamily dwelling not meeting the requirements of a multifamily dwelling permitted by right in this zone and subject to the standards of section 37-124.1 of this code

x

Public use

x

Re-establishment of a commercial use which was legally established but where the business and occupation license has lapsed and no use of lesser intensity has been established for a period exceeding twelve (12) consecutive months

x

(Ord. No. 4589, § 1, 8-27-2012; Ord. No. 4656, § 4, 3-28-16; Ord. No. 4676, § 9, 11-28-16; Ord. No. 4742, § 2H, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-41.3. Maximum building height.
The maximum building height will be thirty-five (35) feet. (Ord. No. 4589, § 1, 8-27-2012)

Sec. 37-41.4. Minimum setbacks.
(a) Minimum setbacks – Main building.

(1) Front. Twenty (20) feet from the property line, or thirty (30) feet from face of street curb or, if no curb, edge of asphalt, or the average of that of the other lots on the same side of the street of the block, whichever is less, but in no case less than five (5) feet to the property line;

(2) Rear. Twenty (20) feet, or twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is less, but not less than five (5) feet, or three (3) feet if abutting an alley;

(3) Interior sides. Twelve (12) feet combined with no side less than five (5) feet, except eight (8) feet combined if abutting an alley with three (3) feet on the alley side and five (5) feet on any other interior side;

(4) Street sides. Ten (10) feet or twenty-five (25) feet from face of street curb or if no curb, edge of asphalt, or the average of that of the other lots on the same side of the street of the block, whichever is less, but in no case less than five (5) feet to the property line. (Ord. No. 4589, § 1, 8-27-2012)

Sec. 37-41.5. Minimum lot area.
(a) For a single-family dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be three thousand two hundred (3,200) square feet.

(b) For a two-family dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be six thousand four hundred (6,400) square feet.

(c) For a multifamily dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be six thousand four hundred (6,400) square feet plus an additional two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet for each dwelling unit over two (2). (Ord. No. 4589, § 1, 8-27-2012; Ord. No. 4676, § 10, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-41.6. Minimum lot width.
Forty (40) feet if abutting an alley on either the side or the rear of the lot; sixty (60) feet if not abutting an alley on either the side or the rear of the lot. (Ord. No. 4589, § 1, 8-27-2012)

 

Sec. 37-41.7. Minimum lot depth.
Sixty (60) feet if abutting an alley on either the side or the rear of the lot; eighty (80) feet if not abutting an alley on either the side or the rear of the lot. (Ord. No. 4589, § 1, 8-27-2012)

Sec. 37-41.8. Subdivisions.
Any subdivision of land requiring platting pursuant to Chapter 32 of this code and not being done simply to separate two (2) existing primary uses shall require public hearing and notice as set forth in Sections 67-6509 and 67-6512, Idaho Code. Approval or denial of any such subdivision application shall be based upon compliance with the intents, purposes and standards of this chapter, those of Chapter 32 of this code, with the city of Lewiston comprehensive plan and shall be reasoned in accordance with Section 67-6536, Idaho Code. (Ord. No. 4589, § 1, 8-27-2012)

Sec. 37-41.9. Maximum lot coverage.
Sixty (60) percent, including all structures on the lot. (Ord. No. 4589, § 1, 8-27-2012)

Sec. 37-41.10. Accessory buildings.
(a) Attached and detached buildings accessory to a single-family or two-family dwelling shall be subject to the following, notwithstanding the provisions of section 37-131 of this code:

(1) Minimum setbacks. Such building shall be subject to the same requirements as the dwelling, except that detached accessory buildings may be located five (5) feet from a rear lot line or three (3) feet where the rear lot line abuts an alley, subject to the related building height provisions set forth in subsection (a)(4) of this section, and five (5) feet from an interior side lot line or three (3) feet where the side lot line abuts an alley, subject to the related building height provisions set forth in subsection (a)(4) of this section.

(2) Detached accessory buildings shall not be in front of or project beyond the front wall of the dwelling, unless:

a. The lot is less than fifty (50) feet in width and there is no abutting alley; or fifty (50) percent of the dwelling is constructed within the rear half of the depth of the lot and there is no abutting alley.

b. The detached accessory building is on the street side of a corner lot and it meets the minimum required street side yard setback and does not project beyond the front wall of the dwelling on the front yard side.

(3) The footprint of any one (1) detached accessory building shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of the footprint of the dwelling, including any attached garage, carport, or patio cover; or sixty (60) percent of the habitable gross floor area of the dwelling; or seven hundred twenty (720) square feet, whichever is greater, but in no case greater than one thousand four hundred forty (1,440) square feet.

(4) Detached accessory buildings that encroach into the minimum rear yard setback required for the dwelling shall be limited to sixteen (16) feet in height, unless the minimum five-foot rear yard setback required in subsection (a)(1) of this section is increased at a ratio of two (2) to one (1) for building height in excess of sixteen (16) feet; and provided, that in no case shall the building height exceed eighteen (18) feet, except for a second floor accessory apartment constructed pursuant to section 37-41.11 of this code.

(b) Attached and detached buildings accessory to a use other than a single-family or two-family dwelling shall comply with the height and setback standards required for the primary use building. (Ord. No. 4589, § 1, 8-27-2012; Ord. No. 4672, § 4, 12-13-16)

Sec. 37-41.11. Accessory apartments.
Only one (1) accessory apartment, detached from a single-family dwelling, may be constructed in compliance with section 37-131.2 of this code and:

(1) An accessory apartment in the Normal Hill North Zone shall provide a minimum of one (1) off-street parking space per bedroom; and

(2) An accessory apartment in the Normal Hill North Zone shall not be located in front of or project beyond the front wall of the associated single-family dwelling, unless:

a. The lot is less than fifty (50) feet in width and there is no abutting alley; or fifty (50) percent of the dwelling is constructed within the rear half of the depth of the lot and there is no abutting alley; or

b. It is on the street side of a corner lot and it meets the minimum required street side yard setback and does not project beyond the front wall of the dwelling on the front yard side. (Ord. No. 4589, § 1, 8-27-2012; Ord. No. 4672, § 5, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 4755, § 3, 9-9-19)

Sec. 37-41.12. Minimum off-street parking.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 37-149 of this code:

(1) One-half (0.50) of any public on-street parking located directly adjacent to the subject lot may be counted toward the required off-street parking.

(2) For uses requiring more than four (4) parking spaces, twenty-five (25) percent of the parking may be for compact vehicles, if such parking stalls are dimensioned at no less than seven and one-half (7.5) feet by fifteen (15) feet with a twenty (20) feet minimum back-up space.

(3) Residential uses.

a. Zero (0) to one (1) bedroom unit: One (1) space per unit;

b. Greater than one (1) bedroom unit: Three-quarters (0.75) of a space per bedroom, rounded up to the nearest whole number;

c. Housing devoted to persons meeting the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s definition of “elderly”: one-half (0.50) space per bedroom, rounded up to the nearest whole number;

d. Any use other than residential described above: as determined by section 37-149 of this code. (Ord. No. 4589, § 1, 8-27-2012)

Sec. 37-41.13. Nonconforming structures.
(a) Nonconforming structures, if destroyed or removed, may be reconstructed in their same location to the same height, notwithstanding setback and building height requirements of this chapter and notwithstanding the provisions of section 37-168 of this code; provided, that they meet the requirements of the most recently adopted building and fire codes and the replacement has an approved building permit within twelve (12) months of the date of destruction or removal of the nonconforming structure.

(b) Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and land in combination may be re-established by conditional use permit approval of the planning and zoning commission, notwithstanding the provisions of section 37-170 of this code. (Ord. No. 4589, § 1, 8-27-2012; Ord. No. 4656, § 6, 3-28-16)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4656, § 5, adopted March 28, 2016, repealed § 37-41.13, relative to multifamily residential use in the Normal Hill North Zone, which derived from Ord. No. 4589, § 1, adopted Aug. 27, 2012.

NORMAL HILL SOUTH ZONE – NHS

Sec. 37-41A. Normal Hill South Zone.
(Ord. No. 4589, § 2, 8-27-2012)

Sec. 37-41A.1. Uses permitted by right.
USES BY RIGHT NORMAL HILL SOUTH ZONE 

SOUTH

Church, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1 of this code

x

Class A manufactured home

x

Commercial uses legally established as of December 31, 2004, and which have maintained a valid business and occupation permit

x

Family day care (six (6) or fewer children), subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1 of this code

x

Intensification, or expansion of commercial uses of ten (10) percent of the building area or more which were legally established and licensed for business and occupation

x

Park, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1 of this code

x

School or preschool, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1 of this code

x

Single-family dwelling

x

Two-family dwelling

x

(Ord. No. 4589, § 2, 8-27-2012)

Sec. 37-41A.2. Conditional uses.
CONDITIONAL USES NORMAL HILL SOUTH ZONE 

SOUTH

Bed and breakfast facilities, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1 of this code

x

Day care center (thirteen (13) or more children), subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1 of this code

x

Dormitory, subject to the special conditions of section 37-44.1 of this code

x

Group day care (seven (7) to twelve (12) children), subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1 of this code

x

Hospital

x

Intermediate-term care facility, subject to the special conditions of section 37-44.1 of this code

x

Long-term care facility, subject to the special conditions of section 37-44.1 of this code

x

Multifamily dwelling meeting the standards of section 37-124.1 of this code

x

Public use

x

Re-establishment of a commercial use which was legally established but where the business and occupation license has lapsed and no use of lesser intensity has been established for a period exceeding twelve (12) consecutive months

x

Semi-public use

x

Zero lot line residential development

x

(Ord. No. 4589, § 2, 8-27-2012; Ord. No. 4656, § 7, 3-28-16; Ord. No. 4676, § 12, 11-28-16; Ord. No. 4742, § 2H, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-41A.3. Maximum building height.
The maximum building height will be thirty-five (35) feet. (Ord. No. 4589, § 2, 8-27-2012)

Sec. 37-41A.4. Minimum setbacks.
(a) Minimum setbacks – Main building.

(1) Front. Twenty (20) feet from the property line, or thirty (30) feet from face of street curb or, if no curb, edge of asphalt, or the average of that of the other lots on the same side of the street of the block, whichever is less, but in no case less than five (5) feet to the property line;

(2) Rear. Twenty (20) feet or twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is less, but not less than five (5) feet, or three (3) feet if abutting an alley;

(3) Interior sides. Twelve (12) feet combined with no side less than five (5) feet, except eight (8) feet combined if abutting an alley with three (3) feet on the alley side and five (5) feet on any other interior side;

(4) Street sides. Ten (10) feet or twenty-five (25) feet from face of street curb or if no curb, edge of asphalt, or the average of that of the other lots on the same side of the street of the block, whichever is less, but in no case less than five (5) feet to the property line. (Ord. No. 4589, § 2, 8-27-2012)

Sec. 37-41A.5. Minimum lot area.
(a) For a single-family dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be three thousand two hundred (3,200) square feet.

(b) For a two-family dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be six thousand four hundred (6,400) square feet.

(c) For a multifamily dwelling, the minimum lot area shall six thousand four hundred (6,400) square feet plus an additional three thousand (3,000) square feet for each dwelling unit over two (2). (Ord. No. 4589, § 2, 8-27-2012; Ord. No. 4676, § 13, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-41A.6. Minimum lot width.
Forty (40) feet if abutting an alley on either the side or the rear of the lot; sixty (60) feet if not abutting an alley on either the side or the rear of the lot. (Ord. No. 4589, § 2, 8-27-2012)

Sec. 37-41A.7. Minimum lot depth.
Sixty (60) feet if abutting an alley on either the side or the rear of the lot; eighty (80) feet if not abutting an alley on either the side or the rear of the lot. (Ord. No. 4589, § 2, 8-27-2012)

Sec. 37-41A.8. Subdivisions.
Any subdivision of land requiring platting pursuant to Chapter 32 of this code and not being done simply to separate two (2) existing primary uses shall require public hearing and notice as set forth in Sections 67-6509 and 67-6512, Idaho Code. Approval or denial of any such subdivision application shall be based upon compliance with the intents, purposes and standards of this chapter, those of Chapter 32 of this code, with the city of Lewiston comprehensive plan and shall be reasoned in accordance with Section 67-6536, Idaho Code. (Ord. No. 4589, § 2, 8-27-2012)

Sec. 37-41A.9. Maximum lot coverage.
Sixty (60) percent, including all structures on the lot. (Ord. No. 4589, § 2, 8-27-2012)

Sec. 37-41A.10. Accessory buildings.
(a) Attached garages and detached buildings accessory to a single-family or two-family dwelling shall be subject to the following, notwithstanding the provisions of section 37-131 of this code:

(1) Minimum setbacks. Such building shall be subject to the same requirements as the dwelling, except that detached accessory buildings may be located five (5) feet from a rear lot line or three (3) feet where the rear lot line abuts an alley, subject to the related building height provisions set forth in subsection (a)(4) of this section, and five (5) feet from an interior side lot or three (3) feet where the side lot line abuts an alley, subject to the related building height provisions set forth in subsection (a)(4) of this section.

(2) Detached accessory buildings shall not be in front of or project beyond the front wall of the dwelling, unless:

a. The lot is less than fifty (50) feet in width and there is no abutting alley; or fifty (50) percent of the dwelling is constructed within the rear half of the depth of the lot and there is no abutting alley.

b. The detached accessory building is on the street side of a corner lot and it meets the minimum required street side yard setback and does not project beyond the front wall of the dwelling on the front yard side.

(3) The footprint of any one (1) detached accessory building shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of the footprint of the dwelling, including any attached garage, carport, or patio cover; or sixty (60) percent of the habitable gross floor area of the dwelling; or seven hundred twenty (720) square feet, whichever is greater, but in no case greater than one thousand four hundred forty (1,440) square feet.

(4) Detached accessory buildings that encroach into the minimum rear yard setback required for the dwelling shall be limited to sixteen (16) feet in height, unless the minimum five-foot rear yard setback required in subsection (a)(1) of this section is increased at a ratio of two (2) to one (1) for building height in excess of sixteen (16) feet; and provided, that in no case shall the building height exceed eighteen (18) feet, except for a second story accessory apartment constructed pursuant to section 37-41A.11 of this code.

(b) Attached and detached buildings accessory to a use other than a single-family or two-family dwelling shall comply with the height and setback standards required for the primary use building. (Ord. No. 4589, § 2, 8-27-2012; Ord. No. 4672, § 6, 12-13-16)

Sec. 37-41A.11. Accessory apartments.
Only one (1) accessory apartment, detached from a single-family dwelling, may be constructed in compliance with section 37-131.2 of this code and:

(1) An accessory apartment in the Normal Hill South Zone shall provide a minimum of one (1) off-street parking space per bedroom; and

(2) An accessory apartment in the Normal Hill South Zone shall not be located in front of or project beyond the front wall of the associated single-family dwelling, unless:

a. The lot is less than fifty (50) feet in width and there is no abutting alley; or fifty (50) percent of the dwelling is constructed within the rear half of the depth of the lot and there is no abutting alley; or

b. It is on the street side of a corner lot and it meets the minimum required street side yard setback and does not project beyond the front wall of the dwelling on the front yard side. (Ord. No. 4589, § 2, 8-27-2012; Ord. No. 4672, § 7, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 4755, § 4, 9-9-19)

Sec. 37-41A.12. Minimum off-street parking.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 37-149 of this code:

(1) One-half (0.50) of any public on-street parking located directly adjacent to the subject lot may be counted toward the required off-street parking.

(2) For uses requiring more than four (4) parking spaces, twenty-five (25) percent of the parking may be for compact vehicles, if such parking stalls are dimensioned at no less than seven and one-half (7.5) feet by fifteen (15) feet with a twenty (20) foot minimum back-up space.

(3) Residential uses.

a. Zero (0) to one (1) bedroom unit: one (1) space per unit;

b. Greater than one (1) bedroom unit: three-quarters (0.75) of a space per bedroom, rounded up to the nearest whole number;

c. Housing devoted to persons meeting the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s definition of “elderly”: one-half (0.50) space per bedroom, rounded up to the nearest whole number;

(4) Any use other than residential described above: as determined by section 37-149 of this code. (Ord. No. 4589, § 2, 8-27-2012)

Sec. 37-41A.13. Nonconforming structures.
(a) Nonconforming structures, if destroyed or removed, may be reconstructed in their same location to the same height, notwithstanding setback and building height requirements of this chapter and notwithstanding the provisions of section 37-168 of this code; provided, that they meet the requirements of the most recently adopted building and fire codes and the replacement has an approved building permit within twelve (12) months of the date of destruction or removal of the nonconforming structure.

(b) Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and land in combination may be re-established by conditional use permit approval of the planning and zoning commission, notwithstanding the provisions of section 37-170 of this code. (Ord. No. 4589, § 2, 8-27-2012; Ord. No. 4656, § 9, 3-28-16)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4656, § 8, adopted March 28, 2016, repealed § 37-41A.13, relative to multifamily residential use in the Normal Hill South Zone, which derived from Ord. No. 4589, § 2, adopted Aug. 27, 2012.

NORMAL HILL HERITAGE OVERLAY ZONE – NHHO

Sec. 37-41B. Normal Hill Heritage Overlay (NHHO) Zone.
(Ord. No. 4669, § 1, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-41B.1. Intent.
(a) Normal Hill has a very long and important history, as is recognized in the Lewiston Comprehensive Plan and in general by the community at large. The historic nature of the construction, the development pattern, and many of the sites and buildings in the NHHO Zoning District contribute to the historic significance and character of the neighborhood. This neighborhood adds to the attractiveness, desirability, and economy of the city of Lewiston.

(b) It is the intent of this section to preserve and enhance these benefits, encourage investment, improve properties, and increase property values in the neighborhood. It is not the intent of these provisions to deter property owners from maintaining, improving, or upgrading their buildings. Construction and maintenance work subject to this section shall not be denied a certificate of appropriateness (COA) when such work is for replacement of inefficient or failing materials, fixtures, or systems with modernly designed and constructed replacements that duplicate, replicate, or result in substantial conformance with the visual appearance or integrity of a historically significant aspect of the building. (Ord. No. 4669, § 1, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-41B.2. Applicability.
(a) The provisions of this section shall apply to exterior features visible from public rights-of-way, exclusive of alleys, of the following:

(1) Construction of a new building that requires a building permit.

(2) Reconstruction or improvement of a building where such work requires a building permit and is valued in excess of fifty (50) percent of the building value.

(3) Addition of more than one hundred twenty (120) square feet to an existing building, where a building permit is required.

(4) Work proposed that requires a building permit, whether construction, reconstruction, improvement, or an addition on a building:

a. Originally constructed prior to January 1, 1940; or

b. Located within one hundred (100) feet of a building that was constructed prior to January 1, 1940.

(b) No building permit for construction listed above shall be issued for a building located in the NHHO Zone unless the Lewiston Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) has issued a COA.

(c) The provisions of this section shall be applicable to property owners who are entities that may otherwise be exempt from city building permits. This section shall apply in addition to the provisions of the underlying zoning of properties in the Normal Hill Heritage Overlay Zone and in addition to other applicable provisions of the city of Lewiston zoning code. (Ord. No. 4669, § 1, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-41B.3. Factors.
In accordance with section 37-41B.4 of this code and subject to section 37-41B.5 of this code, when considering applications for COAs, the HPC shall apply the following Secretary of Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation (36 CFR Part 67, Historic Preservation Certifications):

(1) The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alterations of features and spaces that characterize a property should be avoided.

(2) Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken.

(3) Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historical significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.

(4) Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved.

(5) Deteriorated historic features should be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of the deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by physical or pictorial documentary evidence.

(6) New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property, unless such work is for replacement of inefficient or failing materials, fixtures, or systems with modernly designed and constructed replacements that duplicate, replicate, or result in substantial conformance with the visual appearance or integrity of a historically significant aspect of the building. The new work should be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment.

(7) New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. (Ord. No. 4669, § 1, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-41B.4. Administration.
Subject to section 37-41B.5 of this code:

(1) If an application is found to be consistent with factors in sections 37-41B.3(1), (4) and (6) of this code, then the HPC shall approve the application and issue a COA.

(2) If an application complies with two (2) factors of sections 37-41B.3(1), (4), and (6) of this code, then the application must also comply with at least three (3) of the remaining factors of sections 37-41B.3(2), (3), (5), and (7) of this code to be approved for a COA, unless otherwise justified by the HPC due to special circumstance(s).

(3) If an application complies with only one (1) factor of sections (1), (4), and (6), or none of them, then the HPC shall deny a COA unless and until the COA is reworked to meet the standards and requirements of this section.

(4) If an application is filed for a brand new structure that is visible from an adjacent city street, then the HPC shall approve a COA when the construction incorporates architectural features found on surrounding historic buildings, including building massing, window style, roof pitch, and siding materials. (Ord. No. 4669, § 1, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-41B.5. Conditions and exceptions.
(a) The HPC may impose conditions of approval on a COA that are necessary to bring the work into compliance with section 37-41B.1 of this code (Intent).

(b) The HPC may make an exception to one or more of the factors of section 37-41B.3 of this code, provided such exception is justified by special findings, which shall be articulated and documented by the HPC and recorded in the HPC meeting minutes.

(c) The HPC may grant a COA for improvements, regardless of compliance with factors in section 37-41B.3(1) through (5) of this code, if the applicant demonstrates the following special circumstances:

(1) The proposed improvements are necessary for the continued maintenance, safety, or enhanced ingress and egress of the structure; or

(2) Compliance with this the provisions of this section would require expenditures for materials and other items required to obtain a COA that would exceed the costs that would be incurred without complying with the provisions of this section by twenty (20) percent or more.

(d) Emergency repairs may be performed without a COA; provided, that it can be proven to the satisfaction of the building official that such repairs were necessitated by an emergency, it was not practical to obtain a COA or building permit before commencement of the repairs, and a building permit is applied for on the following business day. “Emergency repairs” refer to those situations described as such in the International Building Code, International Existing Building Code, and the International Residential Code, as adopted by the city of Lewiston. (Ord. No. 4669, § 1, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-41B.6. Procedure and decision.
(a) An applicant shall submit an application for a COA and supporting documentation to the Lewiston community development department. Documentation may include design drawings, project scope, materials, and other relevant documents to assist the HPC in reviewing the request for a COA.

(b) Community development staff shall review the applicant’s submission and include the request for a COA on the next meeting agenda of the HPC. Community development staff shall also include the applicant’s application for a COA and associated materials in the meeting packet to the HPC at least one (1) week prior to the HPC’s meeting.

(c) A quorum of the HPC shall review each application for a COA within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of the completed application by community development staff.

(d) If the HPC determines there is insufficient information to complete a full review of the application for a COA, then the HPC shall deny the application. The application for a COA may be submitted again with the additional information requested by the HPC. In such cases, community development staff shall write a file note and place it in the property file.

(e) If there is sufficient information to complete a full review of the application for a COA, then a community development staff member shall assist the applicant in presenting to the HPC such information as necessary for the HPC to make an informed decision based on the factors of section 37-41B.3 of this code.

(f) The HPC shall deny, approve, or approve with conditions an application for a COA within seven (7) calendar days of reviewing the application. Decisions of the HPC shall be recorded in the meeting minutes of the HPC and shall include specific findings of the HPC based upon sections 37-41B.1 (Intent), 37-41B.2 (Applicability), and 37-41B.3 (Factors) of this code. Failure by the HPC to render its decision within the time limits established herein shall constitute approval of the request for a COA.

(g) No building permit application subject to review under section 37-41B.2 of this code shall be issued without approval by the HPC of a COA, except as set forth in subsection (f) of this section. Community development staff shall verify compliance with any condition placed upon an approval of a COA by the HPC prior to issuance of a COA or a letter of completion, whichever is applicable.

(h) Any denial or condition of approval on a COA rendered by the HPC may be appealed by the applicant to the city council pursuant to section 19.5-21(9) of this code.

(i) Upon written request, the property owner may request a written takings analysis within twenty-eight (28) days after the city council’s decision, pursuant to the Idaho Regulatory Takings Act, Idaho Code Section 67-8001, et seq. Such request shall be submitted to the city clerk. (Ord. No. 4669, § 1, 11-28-16)

MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-3

Sec. 37-42. R-3 Medium Density Residential Zone.
(a) Purpose: To provide land for the development of multifamily dwellings and to provide an orderly transition from more intensive, high density uses to less intensive, lower density uses. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 16, 10-25-99)

Sec. 37-43. Uses permitted outright.
In an R-3 Zone the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of Article IV:

(1) Bed and breakfast facilities, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1(1) of this code;

(2) Church, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(2) of this code;

(3) Class A manufactured home;

(4) Commercial uses legally established as of December 31, 2004, and which have maintained a valid business and occupation permit;

(5) Family day care, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1(2) of this code;

(6) Intermediate term care facility, subject to the special conditions of section 37-44.1(1) of this code;

(7) Long-term care facility, subject to the special conditions of section 37-44.1(2) of this code;

(8) Mortuary, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(1) of this code;

(9) Multifamily dwelling, meeting the standards of section 37-124.1 of this code;

(10) Park, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(4) of this code;

(11) School, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(3) of this code;

(12) Single-family dwelling;

(13) Two-family dwelling;

(14) Small lot development subject to the requirements of section 37-33, standards for small lot development. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4161, § 5, 7-1-96; Ord. No. 4249, § 17, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4385, § 7, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4386, § 2, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4433, § 4, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4499, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 4531, § 4, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4656, § 10, 3-28-16; Ord. No. 4676, § 14, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-44. Conditional uses permitted.
In an R-3 Zone the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the standards and requirements in Articles IV and IX:

(1) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(2) Day care center, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(5) of this code;

(3) Dormitory, subject to the special conditions of section 37-44.1 of this code;

(4) Group day care, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1(3) of this code;

(5) Intensification, or expansion of commercial uses of ten (10) percent of the building area or more which were legally established and licensed for business and occupation;

(6) Noncommercial kennel, subject to the commercial kennel standards of section 37-163(15) of this code;

(7) Preschool, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(6) of this code;

(8) Public use;

(9) Re-establishment of a commercial use which was legally established but where the business and occupation license has lapsed for a period not to exceed one (1) year;

(10) Replacement of a nonconforming residential use not located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to setback and yard requirements of the R-2 Zone;

(11) Semi-public use. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 18, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 5, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4328, § 2, 3-24-03; Ord. No. 4385, § 8, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4386, § 3, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4531, § 4, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4742, § 2I, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-44.1. Special conditions.
(1) Intermediate care facility.

(a) The size of the site is shown to be reasonable for the intended use.

(b) Access to the site meets all applicable ordinances.

(c) The surrounding property will not otherwise be adversely affected.

(2) Long-term care facility.

(a) The size of the site is shown to be reasonable for the intended use.

(b) Parking and access to the site meets all applicable ordinances.

(c) The surrounding property will not otherwise be adversely affected.

(3) Dormitory.

(a) Dormitories with twelve (12) occupants or more shall have on-site management.

(b) Buildings shall be designed with the following security measures:

1. Interior access to each room;

2. Controlled access beyond the lobby and to individual floors;

3. Manager’s name and contact information posted in clear view in the lobby.

(c) Dumpsters shall be located inside the building or placed no closer than fifteen (15) feet from any property line adjacent to residentially zoned property. (Ord. No. 4249, § 19, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4386, § 6, 2-14-05)

Sec. 37-45. Lot size.
In an R-3 Zone, the minimum lot size shall be as follows:

(1) Lot area shall be a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet plus an additional two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet for each dwelling unit over one (1).

(2) Lot width shall be a minimum of sixty (60) feet.

(3) Lot depth shall be a minimum of eighty (80) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4499, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 4531, § 4, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4676, § 15, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-46. Yards.
Except as provided in Article VIII, in an R-3 Zone minimum yard requirements shall be as follows:

(1) A front yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet or thirty-five (35) feet from the centerline of the street, whichever is greater.

(2) A side yard shall be a minimum of five (5) feet and the total of both side yards shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet, except that on corner lots the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the property line or thirty-five (35) feet from the centerline of the street, whichever is greater.

(3) A rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.

(4) Side and rear yards shall be increased by one (1) foot for each foot by which a building exceeds a height of thirty-five (35) feet. A front yard shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet by which a building exceeds thirty-five (35) feet.

(5) Two-family dwelling units constructed as a use permitted outright in this zone and constructed so as to share a common or adjoining side wall shall be allowed to legally split into two (2) minimum five thousand (5,000) square foot lots, provided the front and rear setbacks are in compliance with this chapter and the side yard opposite the zero lot line shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. In no case shall the minimum width of the zero lot line lot be less than fifty (50) feet nor the depth less than eighty (80) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4676, § 16, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-47. Lot coverage.
In an R-3 Zone, buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the lot. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4676, § 17, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-48. Height of buildings.
In an R-3 Zone, no building shall exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-49. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4216, § 1, adopted Aug. 10, 1998, repealed § 37-49, relative to signs permitted in the R-3 Zone, which derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2, adopted Aug. 15, 1994.

HIGHER DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-4

Sec. 37-50. R-4 Higher Density Residential Zone.
(a) Purpose: To accommodate a compatible mixture of residential uses in proximity to major community facilities, employers, arterials and commercial developments. Such uses generally serve as transition or buffer zones between major arterials or more intensively developed areas and residential districts. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 20, 10-25-99)

Sec. 37-51. Uses permitted outright.
In an R-4 Zone the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of Article IV:

(1) Bed and breakfast facilities, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1(1) of this code;

(2) Church, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(2) of this code;

(3) Class A manufactured home;

(4) Commercial uses legally established as of December 31, 2004, and which have maintained a valid business and occupation permit;

(5) Family day care, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1(2) of this code;

(6) Hospital;

(7) Intermediate care facility, subject to the special conditions of section 37-44.1(1) of this code;

(8) Long-term care facility, subject to the special conditions of section 37-44.1(2) of this code;

(9) Mortuary, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(1) of this code;

(10) Multifamily dwelling, meeting the standards of section 37-124.1 of this code;

(11) School, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(3) of this code;

(12) Single-family dwelling;

(13) Two-family dwelling;

(14) Small lot development subject to the requirements of section 37-33 of this code, standards for small lot development. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4161, § 6, 7-1-96; Ord. No. 4249, § 21, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4385, § 9, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4386, § 4, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4433, § 5, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4499, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 4676, § 18, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-52. Conditional uses permitted.
In an R-4 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the standards and requirements in Articles IV and IX:

(1) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(2) Day care center, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(5) of this code;

(3) Dormitory, subject to the special conditions of section 37-44.1 of this code;

(4) Group day care, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1(3) of this code;

(5) Intensification, or expansion of commercial uses of ten (10) percent of the building area or more which were legally established and licensed for business and occupation;

(6) Noncommercial kennel, subject to the commercial kennel standards of section 37-163(15) of this code;

(7) Preschool, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(6) of this code;

(8) Public use;

(9) Re-establishment of a commercial use which was legally established but where the business and occupation license has lapsed for a period not to exceed one (1) year;

(10) Replacement of a nonconforming residential use not located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to setback and yard requirements of the R-2 Zone;

(11) Semi-public use. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 22, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 5, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4328, § 2, 3-24-03; Ord. No. 4385, § 10, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4386, § 5, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4531, § 5, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4742, § 2J, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-53. Lot size.
In an R-4 Zone, the minimum lot size shall be as follows:

(1) Lot area shall be a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet plus an additional one thousand six hundred (1, 600) square feet per dwelling unit over one (1).

(2) Lot width shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet.

(3) Lot depth shall be a minimum of eighty (80) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4499, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 4531, § 5, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4676, § 19, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-54. Yards.
Except as provided in Article VIII, in an R-4 Zone minimum yard requirements shall be as follows:

(1) A front yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet or thirty-five (35) feet from the centerline of the street, whichever is greater.

(2) A side yard shall be a minimum of five (5) feet and the total of both side yards shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet, except that on corner lots the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the property line or thirty-five (35) feet from the centerline of the street, whichever is greater.

(3) A rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.

(4) Side and rear yards shall be increased by one (1) foot for each foot by which a building exceeds a height of thirty-five (35) feet. A front yard shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet by which a building exceeds thirty-five (35) feet.

(5) Two-family dwelling units constructed as a use permitted outright in this zone and constructed so as to share a common or adjoining side wall shall be allowed to legally split into two (2) minimum five thousand (5,000) square foot lots, provided the front and rear setbacks are in compliance with this chapter and the side yard opposite the zero lot line shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. In no case shall the minimum width of the zero lot line lot be less than fifty (50) feet nor the depth less than eighty (80) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4676, § 20, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-55. Lot coverage.
In an R-4 Zone, buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the lot. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4676, § 21, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-56. Height of buildings.
In an R-4 Zone no building shall exceed a height of sixty (60) feet. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-57. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4216, § 1, adopted Aug. 10, 1998, repealed § 37-57, relative to signs permitted in the R-4 Zone, which derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2, adopted Aug. 15, 1994.

NORTH LEWISTON MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ZONE MXD-NL

Sec. 37-57.1. MXD-NL North Lewiston Mixed Use Development Zone.
(a) Purpose: To foster mixed use development of a variety of commercial, industrial and residential uses in North Lewiston, utilizing development standards to protect abutting uses. (Ord. No. 4283, § 3, 4-9-01)

Sec. 37-57.2. Uses permitted outright.
In the North Lewiston Mixed Use Development (MXD-NL) Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the provisions of Articles IV and IX:

(1) Auto, boat, truck, recreational vehicle rental, sales and service;

(2) Building supply outlet;

(3) Business or professional offices;

(4) Car wash;

(5) Class A manufactured home;

(6) Commercial or industrial laundry and dry cleaners;

(7) Concrete or concrete products manufacturing;

(8) Eating or drinking establishments;

(9) Financial institutions;

(10) Greenhouses and nurseries;

(11) Heavy equipment sales;

(12) Heavy equipment service subject to development standards;

(13) Hotels or motels;

(14) Industrial parks;

(15) Keeping of livestock on lots where the predominant use on the property is residential, subject to the standards of sections 37-195 through 37-199 of this code;

(16) Manufactured home parks subject to the standards of Chapter 23 of this code with a minimum of two (2) acres and a maximum density of 8.7 units per acre;

(17) Manufacturing, processing, assembly and distribution, except a use specifically listed as a conditional use in an M-1, M-2 or P Zone, subject to development standards;

(18) Office parks;

(19) Personal services;

(20) Public uses;

(21) Recreational vehicle park, subject to the standards of Chapter 23 of this code;

(22) Retail sales and service;

(23) Single-family, two-family, or multifamily residential, subject to the lot size requirements of the R-4 Higher Density Residential Zone;

(24) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(25) Truck terminals;

(26) Veterinary clinic or kennel;

(27) Warehousing and mini-storage, subject to development standards. (Ord. No. 4283, § 3, 4-9-01; Ord. No. 4398, § 10, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4676, § 22, 11-28-16; Ord. No. 4685, § 1, 7-10-17; Ord. No. 4742, § 2K, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-57.3. Conditional uses permitted.
In the MXD-NL Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the standards and requirements of Articles IV and IX:

(1) Semi-public use;

(2) Wholesale distribution;

(3) Wood processing plant;

(4) Manufactured home park, subject to the requirements of Chapter 23 of this code with a density greater than 8.7 units per acre. (Ord. No. 4283, § 3, 4-9-01; Ord. No. 4398, § 11, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4742, § 2K, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-57.4. Prohibited uses.
Because of the mixed use nature of this zone, certain uses are expressly prohibited due their potential negative impact on surrounding land uses. These uses include:

(1) Asphalt plant;

(2) Meatpacking;

(3) Feed lot or stockyard;

(4) All salvage and recycling operations except when incidental to a use permitted outright;

(5) Solid waste handling facilities;

(6) Rendering plants;

(7) Junk yards, salvage yards or auto wrecking yards. (Ord. No. 4283, § 3, 4-9-01)

Sec. 37-57.5. Lot size.
In the MXD-NL Zone, the minimum lot size shall be as follows:

(1) A recreational vehicle park shall comply with the minimum lot size set forth in Chapter 23 of this code.

(2) A residential use shall meet the minimum lot size for an R-4 Higher Density Residential Zone, as set forth in section 37-53 of this code. If a lot is in residential use, or the aggregate of such contiguous lots or parcels platted prior to the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in section 37-57.1 et seq. of this code are in residential use and do not meet the requirements of said R-4 Higher Density Residential Zone, then such residential use shall be limited to a single-family residential use.

(3) Other uses shall have no minimum lot size. (Ord. No. 4283, § 3, 4-9-01; Ord. No. 4685, § 2, 7-10-17)

Sec. 37-57.6. Height.
In the MXD-NL Zone, the maximum height of any structure shall not to exceed forty-five (45) feet. (Ord. No. 4283, § 3, 4-9-01)

Sec. 37-57.7. Yards.
Except as provided in Article VIII, in the MXD-NL Zone the minimum yard requirements shall be as follows:

(1) Residential uses shall comply with the setback standards established for R-4 Higher Density Residential Zone uses as set forth in section 37-54 of this code.

(2) Residential accessory buildings shall conform to the requirements of section 37-131 of this code.

(3) New or expanded nonresidential structures shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any property line abutting an established residential use.

(4) Vehicle, equipment and storage yards and customer or employee parking lots established after the effective date of the ordinance codified in section 37-57.1 et seq. of this code shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from any right-of-way line of a public street and a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any property used for residential purpose. Such uses shall be screened from view by a screen in conformance with the standards itemized in section 37-87(3) of this code. The required setback from the public right of way for said vehicle, equipment, storage and parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with standards set forth in section 37-153(b) of this code.

(5) No part of a required setback adjacent to an established residential use may be used for off-street parking or loading. (Ord. No. 4283, § 3, 4-9-01)

Sec. 37-57.8. Standards for development.
In the MXD-NL Zone, the standards for development shall be as follows:

(1) Heating, ventilating, air conditioning units, air compressors and similar mechanical equipment installed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in section 37-57.1 et seq. of this code shall be located and directed away from adjacent residential uses and those residential uses across a public right-of-way sixty (60) feet in width or less.

(2) Solid waste handling equipment including compactors and bulky waste disposal units installed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in section 37-57.1 et seq. of this code shall be placed a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the property lines abutting established residential uses and those res-

idential uses across a public right-of-way sixty (60) feet in width or less.

(3) Uses involving the service or repair of heavy equipment established after the effective date of the ordinance codified in section 37-57.1 et seq. of this code shall take place entirely within an enclosed structure; doors and access to said structure shall be oriented away from any adjacent established residential use.

(4) Use of loudspeakers and other amplified noise shall not be permitted between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(5) All parking lot development within the North Lewiston Mixed Use Zone (MXD-NL) shall be subject to the standards as set forth in section 37-151(a) of this code for all parking lot and landscape standards.

(6) Loading docks constructed or established after the effective date of the ordinance codified in section 37-57.1 et seq. of this code shall be so located as to prevent headlights from shining onto adjacent existing residential units and shall be placed at least fifteen (15) feet from property lines abutting an established residential use.

(7) Any land graded for construction of any type, and not built upon within three (3) months of the date of initial clearing, shall be seeded with grasses to minimize dust generation and weed propagation; all such property shall be kept in conformance with Chapter 17 of this code.

(8) All construction sites shall be controlled to minimize dust generation during construction.

(9) The property owner or developer shall take appropriate measures to prevent mud and debris from being tracked onto public rights-of-way. (Ord. No. 4283, § 3, 4-9-01; Ord. No. 4531, § 6, 7-13-09)

Sec. 37-57.9. Limitations on use.
In the MXD-NL Zone, uses which cause excessive noise or dust, discernible odor at the property line, vibration or electrical disturbance are declared to be nuisances and are prohibited. (Ord. No. 4283, § 3, 4-9-01)

Sec. 37-57.10. Required screening/buffer yards.
(a) Intent of screening: Screening is intended to preserve the enjoyment of residential properties and to minimize disturbances to residents.

(b) Where screening is required: Visual screening shall be required between abutting uses as follows:

 

(1) When a new commercial use is established adjacent to an existing residential use;

(2) When a new industrial use is established adjacent to an existing residential use;

(3) When an existing commercial or industrial use constructs a new facility, including, but not limited to, loading docks, parking areas, indoor or outdoor storage facilities, or a building expansion or major remodeling of structures within fifty (50) feet of an established residential use.

(c) Approved methods to provide required screening:

(1) Fencing may be used if a minimum of eight (8) feet in height and provides a solid appearance to block the view of the property from adjacent existing residential uses, subject to the provisions of subsection (d) of this section.

(2) Evergreen vegetation may be used if it is a minimum of six (6) feet in height at the time of planting and is so spaced that it will provide a visual screen within five (5) years of planting, subject to the provisions of subsection (d) of this section.

(3) Medium shrubbery with an expected maximum height between three (3) feet to six (6) feet may be used in a visual screen only if combined with deciduous shade trees of at least one-and-one-half-inch caliper at time of planting and an expected total height of at least thirty (30) feet in fifteen (15) years.

(d) Extent of screening required:

(1) Required screening shall be contained in a planting strip with a minimum depth of ten (10) feet, located entirely on the property providing the screening and shall consist of screening vegetation or solid fencing or a combination of both and shall contain one (1) one-and-one-half-inch caliper deciduous tree or one (1) minimum six-foot high evergreen tree for at least every thirty-five (35) linear feet of required screening.

(2) All required landscaping shall be provided an automatic irrigation system.

(3) Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the developer of the property shall provide an acceptable landscape maintenance plan documenting a minimum three-year maintenance schedule and replacement of required vegetation. (Ord. No. 4283, § 3, 4-9-01)

Sec. 37-57.11. Establishment of residential use.
Provisions of sections 37-57.7, 37-57.8 and 37-57.10 of this code, which require setbacks, screening or other standards between an nonresidential use and a residential use, shall apply only when the established use of property is clearly residential in nature as determined by the community development director. (Ord. No. 4283, § 3, 4-9-01)

LOCAL COMMERCIAL ZONE C-1

Sec. 37-58. Local Commercial Zone C-1.
(a) Purpose: To permit the establishment of convenience business uses while minimizing their impacts on nearby residential uses. Such zones shall be located along collector and arterial streets. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 23, 10-25-99)

Sec. 37-59. Uses permitted outright.
In a C-1 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of Article IV:

(1) Car wash, subject to the special conditions of section 37-60.1(1) of this code;

(2) Convenience food store;

(3) Day care center, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(5) of this code;

(4) Drugstore;

(5) Personal service uses;

(6) Preschool, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(6) of this code;

(7) Professional offices;

(8) Public or governmental offices or semi-public uses which uses are similar to other uses permitted outright in this zone;

(9) Residential uses legally established as of December 31, 2004;

(10) Service station, subject to the special conditions of section 37-60.1(2) of this code. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 24, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 4, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4390, § 1, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4742, § 2L, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-60. Conditional uses.
In a C-1 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with standards and requirements of Articles IV and IX:

(1) Public/semi-public use;

(2) Other neighborhood commercial services which are not permitted outright but which are consistent with the purpose of the C-1 Zone, and are not detrimental to any of the outright permitted uses or other existing conditional uses nor to nearby residential uses;

(3) Replacement of a nonconforming commercial use located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to standards of section 37-163(17) of this code;

(4) Replacement of a nonconforming residential use not located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to setback and yard requirements of the R-2 Zone;

(5) A nonconforming commercial use may expand to bring that use into compliance with the requirements of this chapter, Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading. Such nonconforming commercial use may expand onto a separate parcel containing a conforming use where that parcel is abutting the nonconforming use for purposes of parking only. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 25, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4328, § 2, 3-24-03)

Sec. 37-60.1. Special conditions.
(1) Car wash.

(a) The size of the site is shown to be reasonable for the intended use.

(b) Parking and access to the site meets all applicable ordinances.

(c) Surrounding property will not otherwise be adversely affected.

(d) Any exterior lighting shall be directed or shrouded so as at not shine onto any adjacent properties.

(e) Requirements of Chapter 24, Article II of this code, Noise Control and Regulation, shall be met.

(f) If located adjacent to residential use property, a sight-obscuring fence, a minimum of six (6) feet in height or a landscape buffer with an eighty (80) percent opacity rating, shall be installed on the outer perimeter of the lot and extending the full distance of the residential adjacency.

(2) Service station.

(a) The size of the site is shown to be reasonable for the intended use.

(b) Parking and access to the site meets all applicable ordinances.

(c) The surrounding property will not otherwise be adversely affected.

(d) Any exterior lighting shall be directed or shrouded so as to not shine onto any adjacent properties.

(e) Requirements of Chapter 24, Article II of this code, Noise Control and Regulation shall be met.

(f) If located adjacent to residential use property, a sight-obscuring fence, a minimum of six (6) feet in height or a landscape buffer with an eighty (80) percent opacity rating, shall be installed on the outer perimeter of the lot and extending the full distance of the residential adjacency. (Ord. No. 4249, § 26, 10-25-99)

Sec. 37-61. Development standards.
In a C-1 Zone, the following development standards shall apply and be in force:

(1) Maximum combined building footprint of all uses shall not exceed a total square footage of four thousand (4,000) square feet.

(2) Maximum height for buildings: Thirty-five (35) feet.

(3) Maximum lot coverage: Fifty-five (55) percent.

(4) Minimum lot size: None.

(5) Minimum front yard: Twenty (20) feet (except as provided in Article VIII).

(6) Minimum side yard: None except twenty (20) feet when a property abuts a residential zone (except as provided for in Article VIII).

(7) Minimum rear yard: None except twenty (20) feet when a property abuts a residential zone (except as provided for in Article VIII).

(8) Signs: Signs shall be subject to the sign ordinance of the city.

(9) Off-street parking: Off-street parking is subject to the requirements provided in Article VII.

(10) Sidewalks: Portland cement concrete sidewalks shall be required in all commercial zones. See section 32-45(c) of this code. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-62. Development limitations.
In a C-1 Zone, the following limitations shall apply:

(1) In considering the plans for a proposed use, the zoning official shall consider the effect of the use on the surrounding residential property and may impose conditions which in his or her judgment are necessary to protect such property from any adverse effects of the proposed use. Such conditions may include but need not be limited to:

(a) Measures to reduce glare from roofs or siding into nearby residences.

(2) All activity in connection with a use permitted outright, other than off-street parking or off-street loading, shall be wholly within an enclosed building.

(3) Minimum screening: Side or rear yards abutting residential zones shall be screened by means of a sight-obscuring fence, approved landscaping materials or a combination thereof. Such required screening shall be installed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4382, § 1, 1-24-05; Ord. No. 4531, § 7, 7-13-09)

NORMAL HILL SPECIAL PLANNING AREA MIXED USE ZONE, NHMU

Sec. 37-62.1. NHMU, Normal Hill Special Planning Area Mixed Use Zone.
Purpose: To provide for a protection and expansion area for Lewis-Clark State College and Saint Joseph Regional Medical Center as intended by the related growth and impact area discussions in the Lewiston Comprehensive Plan; to guide the future development of these institutions in a manner that preserves the historic residential character of the larger, surrounding neighborhood; to allow a mix of land uses, including commercial uses consistent and compatible with these two institutions and offering limited commercial services to neighborhood residents; to create a vibrant, campus-like atmosphere for these two institutions; to promote a pedestrian friendly environment; to establish complementary land uses within close proximity to each other; to provide transition and buffering between the differing land uses and development styles that are associated with this institutional zone and neighboring zoning; to provide housing and services for these two institutions such that they may be as compact and self-sustaining as possible within their immediate campus areas. (Ord. No. 4562, § 1, 8-15-11)

Sec. 37-62.2. Uses permitted outright.
Within the NHMU Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright, subject to any and all other applicable provisions of this chapter:

(1) Accessory buildings.

a. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 37-131 of this code, a building accessory to a college or hospital use, when on property owned by a college or hospital, shall be permitted, even if it is the only building on the lot, subject to the provisions of sections 37-62.4(1), (2), (3), and (4)(b) of this code;

b. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 37-131 of this code, buildings accessory to any use permitted in this zone, other than a college, hospital, single-family residential, or two-family residential use, shall be permitted subject to the provisions of sections 37-62.4(1), (2), (3), and (4)(b) of this code;

c. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 37-131 of this code, buildings accessory to single-family and two-family dwellings shall be permitted subject to the provisions of sections 37-41.10 and 37-41.11 of this code;

(2) Arts and cultural centers and related and similar theaters and studios, including dance;

(3) Barber shops and hair and beauty salons;

(4) Bed and breakfasts;

(5) Colleges and adult schools affiliated with Lewis-Clark State College or Saint Joseph Regional Medical Center;

(6) Commercial uses legally established and which have maintained annually a valid city business license with no lapse greater than one (1) year;

(7) Copying, printing and mailing services;

(8) Day care facilities;

(9) Dormitories, fraternities and sororities;

(10) Hospitals and clinics, except veterinary clinics and veterinary hospitals;

(11) Repealed by Ord. 4676;

(12) Parking lots and parking garages, when in conjunction with and accessory to a new construction project;

(13) Professional offices providing medical services;

(14) Single-family, two-family, and multifamily residential. (Ord. No. 4562, § 1, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 4676, § 23, 11-28-16; Ord. No. 4672, § 8, 12-13-16)

Sec. 37-62.3. Uses permitted by conditional use permit.
Within the NHMU Zone the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted, subject to approval of a conditional use permit and any and all other applicable provisions of this chapter:

(1) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(2) Commercial uses not explicitly listed as uses permitted outright and which are determined to be consistent with the purpose of this zoning district;

(3) Parking lots and parking garages not associated with and accessory to a new construction project;

(4) Public uses;

(5) Restaurants or eating and drinking establishments not exceeding two thousand (2,000) square feet and not including drive-through service windows;

(6) Retail stores not exceeding three thousand (3,000) square feet, excluding furniture, flooring and building materials stores;

(7) Semi-public uses;

(8) Professional offices not providing a medical service. (Ord. No. 4562, § 1, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 4742, § 2M, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-62.4. Development standards.
The following standards shall apply to all new construction and major remodels as defined in Chapter 31 of this code, Article I, Right-of-Way, in the NHMU Zoning District:

(1) Maximum building height: sixty-five (65) feet for college and hospital owned and operated buildings and uses; forty-five (45) feet for all other buildings; however:

a. For a lot directly abutting (does not includes lands separated by public street right-of-way) any other zone, the building height shall be limited to the maximum building height permitted in the adjacent zone; however;

b. If the proposed building setback from the property line common between the two (2) zones is increased by two (2) feet for each foot above the maximum building height permitted in the adjacent zone, the proposed building may exceed the maximum allowable height of the adjacent zone. For purposes of this provision, building height shall be measured at the required setback line. This shall be interpreted such that the building may be stepped or sloped upward away from the property line. If the use of the property in the adjacent zone is a public park, a cemetery, or similar open space, then the increased setback is not required.

(2) Maximum lot coverage: Sixty-five (65) percent.

 

(3) Minimum lot size: None, except that residential development shall be subject to the lot size requirements of the Higher Density Residential R-4 Zone.

(4) Minimum Yards.

a. Single-family and duplex residential: fifteen (15) feet from any front yard street right-of-way; fifteen (15) feet rear; five (5) feet sides, except that for a corner lot the street side yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way.

b. Any use other than single-family or duplex residential: ten (10) feet from any street right-of-way and five (5) feet from any other property line or fifteen (15) feet if that other property line directly abuts (not including across a street or alley) a single-family or duplex residential use.

(5) Open Space. Any use other than single-family or duplex residential shall provide a minimum of ten (10) percent of the lot area as improved open space, in addition to any landscape areas otherwise required by this chapter. Such improved open space may be for active or passive recreation or consist solely of landscaping that is above and beyond any minimum landscaping required by this chapter. Improvements, in addition to landscaping, may include, but not be limited to, items for public gathering, enjoyment, or resting, such as benches, tables, chairs, trellises, plazas, gardens, and sculptures.

(6) Parking. Required off-street parking shall be subject to the provisions of Article VII of this chapter; provided, that:

a. Fifty (50) percent of the on-street parking on the same side of the street(s) as the subject property and within the limits of the street frontage of the subject property shall be counted toward the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces. Any removal of or reduction in the number of subject on-street parking spaces caused by the city or by anyone other than the subject property owner after compliance with this provision has been established for a particular land use shall not be considered as causing the subject land use to be illegal or nonconforming.

b. For conversion of a single-family to a business which does not require more than four (4) parking stalls, the parking lot standards of Article VII of this chapter shall not apply, except for required parking for disabled persons.

c. For uses other than single-family and two-family residential and which require five (5) or more parking stalls, a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the required parking, not including the fifty (50) percent allowable on-street parking, may be provided between the building and the street. Where compliance with this provision cannot be met due to the subject property having multiple street frontages or where this provision is shown by the applicant to be unachievable, to impose undue hardship, or that it would provide no neighborhood benefit, this provision may be waived by mutual agreement of the community development and public works directors. However, the parking for which this provision is being waived shall be buffered from the street by double the width and number of plantings for perimeter parking lot landscaping required by section 37-153 of this code and that the interior parking lot landscaping provided be double the percentage of interior parking lot landscaping required by section 37-153 of this code.

d. A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the required off-street parking may be for compact vehicles (except for single-family dwellings), if such parking stalls are dimensioned at no less than fifteen (15) feet by seven and one-half (7.5) feet with a minimum twenty (20) foot back-up space.

e. Parking arrangements which include interior access between required parking for buildings and uses owned or leased by different parties and on separate, adjoining lots shall allow for a reduction of ten (10) percent of the required parking.

f. Joint use parking, except for single-family and two-family dwellings, established pursuant to the provisions of section 37-146(5) of this code shall allow for a reduction of thirty (30) percent of the required parking for the proposed use. Parking reduction allowed by this provision shall be ensured by a recorded agreement between the property owners and the city.

g. Bicycle parking racks shall be provided, except uses which require less than five (5) parking spaces, to accommodate the number of bicycles equivalent to a minimum of five (5) percent of the minimum required vehicular parking spaces, but shall be for not less than one (1) bicycle and not more than ten (10) bicycles. Such bicycle parking racks shall be located for the convenience of users but shall not interfere with any vehicular or pedestrian travel ways, shall not be located in the public right-of-way without an encroachment permit from the department of public works, and shall not be located within any required landscaping area or planting strip.

(7) Screening. Uses other than single-family and duplex residential which directly abut a single-family or duplex residential use shall provide either:

a. A minimum three-foot-wide landscape strip with one (1) shade tree (twenty-foot-tall minimum expected mature height with fifteen-foot-wide minimum canopy) or one (1) ornamental tree (any tree less than twenty (20) feet tall and having less than fifteen (15) feet of canopy at maturity) and four (4) shrubs every twenty-five (25) feet; or

b. A minimum six-foot-tall sight-obscuring fence or hedgerow with one (1) shade tree (twenty-foot-tall minimum expected mature height with fifteen-foot-wide minimum canopy) every thirty-five (35) feet.

c. Shrubbery shall not be required where there is sight-obscuring fencing or hedgerow.

d. These provisions may be satisfied or partially satisfied utilizing existing screening either on the site of the proposed development or on the neighboring property; provided, that such screening satisfy the intent and effect of this provision and is mutually agreed upon by the owners of the two (2) properties.

e. Plantings and fencing shall be maintained so as not to be a hazard to person or property.

f. The screening required by this section may be modified upon submission to the city of a signed and dated written agreement between the owners of the two (2) properties.

(8) Noise generating, mechanical and electrical equipment (including rooftop equipment but not including meters or panels) for all uses shall be enclosed, muffled, designed, installed, and/or located so as not to violate the provisions of Chapter 24 of this code, Article II, Noise Control and Regulation, and, except for single-family and two-family residential uses, shall be screened or located so as not to be visible from a public street or sidewalk.

(9) Street Buffers. Street buffers consisting of trees and turf or trees and decorative rock, such as river rock or lava rock (not including gravel), shall be provided along all streets between the sidewalk and the street. Tree species shall be approved by the city forester.

(10) For all uses, building facades which face a street shall include exterior wall window and door openings equal to a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the facade.

(11) Signs. Signs in the Normal Hill Mixed Use Zoning District shall be regulated in the same manner as signs in the Local Commercial (C-1) Zone, as set forth in Chapter 30 of this code. For purposes of this section, sign shall have the same meaning as defined in Chapter 30 of this code. (Ord. No. 4562, § 1, 8-15-11; Ord. No. 4676, § 24, 11-28-16; Ord. No. 4692, § 12, 10-30-17)

TOURIST COMMERCIAL ZONE C-2

Sec. 37-63. Tourist Commercial Zone C-2.
(a) Purpose: To encourage the development of facilities for the traveling public and conventions in locations readily accessible from principal and minor arterials and major through highways. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 27, 10-25-99)

Sec. 37-64. Uses permitted outright.
In a C-2 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of Article IV:

(1) Car wash, subject to the special conditions of section 37-60.1(1) of this code;

(2) Commercial marina;

(3) Commercial entertainment facility;

(4) Day care center, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(5) of this code;

(5) Eating or drinking establishment;

(6) Motel/hotel;

(7) Personal service uses;

(8) Preschool, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(6) of this code;

(9) Public or governmental offices or semi-public uses which uses are similar to other uses permitted outright in this zone;

(10) Recreational vehicle park when in conformance with Chapter 23 of this code;

(11) Residential uses legally established as of December 31, 2004;

(12) Retail sales and service;

(13) Service station, subject to the special conditions of section 37-60.1(2) of this code;

(14) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(15) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(16) Church. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 28, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 4, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4390, § 2, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4398, § 12, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4531, § 8, 7-13-09: Ord. No. 4742, § 2N, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-65. Conditional uses.
In a C-2 Zone the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with standards and requirements of Articles IV and IX:

(1) Multifamily residential;

(2) Public or semi-public use;

(3) Other tourist oriented uses which are not permitted outright but which are consistent with the purpose of the C-2 Zone, and are not detrimental to any of the outright permitted uses or other existing conditional uses;

(4) Replacement of a nonconforming commercial use located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to standards of section 37-163(17) of this code;

(5) Replacement of a nonconforming residential use not located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to setback and yard requirements of the R-2 Zone;

(6) A nonconforming commercial use may expand to bring that use into compliance with the requirements of this chapter, Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading. Such nonconforming commercial use may expand onto a separate parcel containing a conforming use where that parcel is abutting the nonconforming use for purposes of parking only. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 29, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4328, § 2, 3-24-03)

Sec. 37-66. Development standards.
In a C-2 Zone the following development standards shall apply and be in force:

(1) Maximum height for buildings: None except thirty-five (35) feet when on a lot abutting a residential zone.

(2) Maximum lot coverage: None.

(3) Minimum lot size: None.

(4) Minimum front yard: None.

(5) Minimum side yard: None except fifteen (15) feet when a property abuts a residential zone.

(6) Minimum rear yard: None except fifteen (15) feet when a property abuts a residential zone.

(7) Signs: Signs shall be subject to the restrictions enumerated in the sign ordinance of the city.

(8) Off-street parking: Off-street parking shall be subject to the requirements enumerated in Article VII.

(9) Sidewalks: Portland cement concrete sidewalks shall be required in all commercial zones. See section 32-45(c) of this code.

(10) Minimum screening: Side or rear yards abutting residential zones shall be screened by means of a sight obscuring fence, approved landscaping materials or a combination thereof. Such required screening shall be installed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL ZONE C-3

Sec. 37-67. Community Commercial Zone C-3.
(a) Purpose: To provide for development of commercial and service uses designed to serve community wide needs. Such areas shall provide for uses which because of size, operating characteristics, or need for major street accessibility, may not be suitable in the central business district or local commercial areas. Provisions of this zone shall ensure compatibility of design with any adjacent residential development. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 30, 10-25-99)

Sec. 37-68. Uses permitted outright.
In a C-3 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of Article IV:

(1) Auto, boat, manufactured home, recreational vehicle sales and service;

(2) Car wash, subject to the special conditions of section 37-60.1(1) of this code;

(3) Commercial entertainment facility, subject to the special conditions of section 37-69.1(3) of this code;

(4) Day care center, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(5) of this code;

(5) Drinking establishments;

(6) Eating establishments;

(7) Financial institutions;

(8) Mini-storage, subject to the special conditions of section 37-69.1(1) of this code;

(9) Personal services;

(10) Preschool, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(6) of this code;

(11) Professional and business offices;

(12) Public or governmental offices or semi-public uses which uses are similar to other uses permitted outright in this zone;

(13) Residential uses legally established as of December 31, 2004;

(14) Retail sales and services;

(15) Service station, subject to the special conditions of section 37-60.1(2) of this code;

(16) Small animal hospital, clinic or kennel, subject to the special conditions of section 37-69.1(2) of this code;

(17) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(18) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(19) Temporary vendors operating for sixteen (16) days or less;

(20) Church. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 31, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 4, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4346, § 2, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 4390, § 3, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4531, § 8, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4742, § 2O, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-69. Conditional uses.
In a C-3 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the standards and requirements of Articles IV and IX:

(1) Other public or semi-public use;

(2) Temporary vendors operating in excess of sixteen (16) days as defined by Chapter 21 of this code;

(3) Other limited commercial uses which are not permitted outright but which are consistent with the purpose of the C-3 Zone, and are not detrimental to any of the outright permitted uses or other existing conditional uses;

(4) Recreational vehicle park, subject to the provisions of Chapter 23, Article II of this code;

(5) Replacement of a nonconforming commercial use located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to standards of section 37-163(17) of this code;

(6) Replacement of a nonconforming residential use not located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to setback and yard requirements of the R-2 Zone;

(7) A nonconforming commercial use may expand to bring that use into compliance with the requirements of this chapter, Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading. Such nonconforming commercial use may expand onto a separate parcel containing a conforming use where that parcel is abutting the nonconforming use for purposes of parking only. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 32, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4328, § 2, 3-24-03; Ord. No. 4346, § 2, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 4698, § 16, 10-30-17)

Sec. 37-69.1. Special conditions.
(1) Mini-storage. Where a mini-storage complex abuts a residential use, the portion of the site abutting the residential use shall be fenced and/or landscaped. The underlying zoning, parking and landscaping standards shall determine the extent to which landscaping and fencing is required.

(a) Where a mini-storage complex abuts a commercial zone, outdoor storage areas must be fenced along the perimeter of the outdoor storage area with a sight-obscuring fence.

(b) Asphalt or portland cement paving shall be required on all areas designated for vehicular movement, on- or off-loading, or parking.

(c) On-site area for on- and off-loading of vehicles shall be provided so that such operations do not take place on or interfere with public right-of-way.

(d) Exterior security lighting shall be provided.

(2) Small animal hospital, clinic or kennel.

(a) The floor of an indoor kennel shall be made or covered with a durable, impervious surface sloped to a floor drain to allow the area to be cleaned and disinfected.

(b) The outdoor dog runs shall be enclosed with fences or walls of a minimum of eight (8) feet in height.

(c) All laws applicable to the public health shall be complied with for the entire period of the operation of the kennel.

(d) Outdoor kennels, play yards or pens associated with the kennel shall be located only in the side or rear yard and shall be set back one hundred (100) feet from any residentially zoned property.

(e) A minimum ten (10) foot wide landscaped buffer shall be installed along any side or rear property line adjacent to residentially zoned property. Landscaping shall consist of one (1) one-and-one-half (1-1/2) inch caliper deciduous tree or one (1) six (6) foot evergreen tree and five (5) one (1) gallon shrubs per thirty-five (35) linear feet.

(3) Commercial entertainment facility.

(a) The size of the site is shown to be reasonable for the intended use.

(b) Parking and access to the site meets all applicable ordinances.

(c) The surrounding property will not otherwise be adversely affected.

(d) Any exterior lighting shall be directed or shrouded so as to not shine onto any adjacent properties.

(e) Requirements of Chapter 24, Article II of this code, Noise Control and Regulation, shall be met.

(f) If located adjacent to residential use property, a sight-obscuring fence, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, or a landscape buffer with a minimum eighty (80) percent opacity rating shall be installed on the perimeter of the portion of the lot abutting the residential use. (Ord. No. 4249, § 33, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4399, § 1, 7-11-2005; Ord. No. 4440, § 2, 8-14-06)

Sec. 37-69.2. Development standards.2
In a C-3 Zone, the following development standards shall apply and be in force:

(1) Maximum height for buildings: Forty-five (45) feet.

(2) Maximum lot coverage: None.

(3) Minimum lot size: None.

(4) Minimum front yard: Twenty (20) feet measured from the front property line or forty-five (45) feet from the center line of the street, whichever is greater.

(5) Minimum side yard: None except fifteen (15) feet when a property abuts a residential zone.

(6) Minimum rear yard: None except fifteen (15) feet when a property abuts a residential zone.

(7) Signs: Signs shall be subject to the restrictions enumerated in the sign ordinance of the city.

(8) Off-street parking: Off-street parking shall be subject to the requirements enumerated in Article VII.

(9) Minimum screening: Side or rear yards abutting residential zones shall be screened by means of a sight obscuring fence or approved landscaping materials. Such screening shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.

(10) Sidewalks: Portland cement concrete sidewalks shall be required in all commercial zones. See section 32-45(c) of this code. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE C-4

Sec. 37-70. General Commercial Zone C-4.
(a) Purpose: To provide areas to serve the city and regional needs for commercial goods and services. Such areas shall be compatible with adjacent residential development. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 34, 10-25-99)

Sec. 37-71. Uses permitted outright.
In a C-4 Zone the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright subject to the standards of Article IV:

(1) Auto, boat, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, heavy equipment sales and service;

(2) Building supply outlet;

(3) Business or professional offices;

(4) Car wash, subject to the special conditions of section 37-60.1(1) of this code;

(5) Commercial entertainment facility, subject to the special conditions of section 37-69.1(3) of this code;

(6) Day care center, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(5) of this code;

(7) Eating or drinking establishment;

(8) Financial institutions;

(9) Greenhouses and nurseries;

(10) Laundry and dry cleaners;

(11) Mini-storage, subject to the special conditions of section 37-69.1(1) of this code;

(12) Mortuary;

(13) Motel/hotel;

(14) Multifamily residential uses not on the ground floor of a building;

(15) Personal services;

(16) Preschool, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(6) of this code;

(17) Public or governmental offices or semi-public uses which uses are similar to other uses permitted outright in this zone;

(18) Residential uses legally established as of December 31, 2004;

(19) Retail sales and service;

(20) Service station, subject to the special conditions of section 37-60.1(2) of this code;

(21) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(22) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(23) Temporary vendors operating for sixteen (16) days or less;

(24) Veterinary clinic or kennel, subject to the special conditions of section 37-69.1(2) of this code;

(25) Recreational vehicle park, subject to the provisions of Chapter 23, Article II of this code;

(26) Church. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 35, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 4, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4346, § 2, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 4390, § 4, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4398, § 13, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4531, § 8, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4698, § 17, 10-30-17; Ord. No. 4742, § 2P, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-72. Conditional uses.
In a C-4 Zone the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with Articles IV and IX:

(1) Tire recapping;

(2) Truck terminal;

(3) Multifamily residential when located on the ground floor of a structure;

(4) Wholesale warehouse;

(5) Adult bookstore;

(6) Adult theaters;

(7) Adult entertainment facility;

(8) Other semi-public uses;

(9) Other public uses;

(10) Temporary vendors operating in excess of sixteen (16) days as defined by Chapter 21 of this code;

(11) Homeless shelter, subject to the standards of section 37-125 of this code;

(12) Other general commercial uses which are not permitted outright but which are consistent with the purpose of the C-4 Zone, and are not detrimental to any of the outright permitted uses or other existing conditional uses;

(13) Replacement of a nonconforming commercial use located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to standards of section 37-163(17) of this code;

(14) Replacement of a nonconforming residential use not located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to setback and yard requirements of the R-2 zone;

(15) A nonconforming commercial use may expand to bring that use into compliance with the requirements of this chapter, Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading. Such nonconforming commercial use may expand onto a separate parcel containing a conforming use where that parcel is abutting the nonconforming use for purposes of parking only. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 36, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4328, § 2, 3-24-03; Ord. No. 4346, § 2, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 4689, § 4, 4-24-17)

Sec. 37-73. Development standards.
In a C-4 Zone, the following development standards shall apply and be in force:

(1) Maximum height for buildings: Sixty (60) feet.

(2) Maximum lot coverage: None.

(3) Minimum lot size: None.

(4) Minimum front yard: None except property abutting Thain Road shall have a twenty (20) foot minimum.

(5) Minimum side yard: None except fifteen (15) feet when a property abuts a residential zone.

(6) Minimum rear yard: None except fifteen (15) feet when a property abuts a residential zone.

(7) Signs: Signs shall be subject to the restrictions enumerated in the sign ordinance of the city.

(8) Off-street parking: Off-street parking shall be subject to the requirements enumerated in Article VII.

(9) Minimum screening: Side or rear yards abutting residential zones shall be screened by means of a sight obscuring fence or approved landscaping materials. Such screening shall be installed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.

(10) Sidewalks: Portland cement concrete sidewalks shall be required in all commercial zones. See section 32-45(c) of this code. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-7. Reserved.
Sec. 37-75. Temporary conditional use.
The purpose of the temporary conditional use in a C-4 Zone is to enable a better temporary use of certain existing structures to ease their transition from certain light industrial uses to general commercial uses in compliance with the goals and purposes of the comprehensive plan of the city of Lewiston.

In a C-4 Zone, the temporary conditional uses of fabricating and assembly operations may be permitted only if the following conditions have been met:

(1) The use shall only apply to existing structures and shall be compatible with the existing structures on the subject property. No exterior construction which substantially alters the existing structure shall be permitted by the grant of this conditional use and the building must be inspected by a building official.

(2) For the purposes of this section, an existing structure is one that was constructed prior to January 1, 1981.

(3) The use shall be compatible with all uses in existence within the surrounding area in that it will not create an adverse impact on traffic, noise levels, fire safety standards, clean air standards, water purity standards or detract from the nature and character of the surrounding uses.

(4) The temporary conditional use shall not be granted outright and shall be strictly controlled, subject to such conditions as may be directed by the commission or the council to insure that the use shall be compatible as set forth in subsection (3) herein.

(5) The temporary conditional use shall be granted only after following the same procedure for conditional uses in accordance with Articles IV and IX.

(6) The allowance of a temporary conditional use shall not grant the applicant any permanent rights in the use of the property. The temporary conditional use shall automatically terminate upon the expiration of a period of time to be set by the commission or the council which period of time shall in no event exceed five (5) years. Nothing shall prevent the holder of a temporary conditional use from applying for a new temporary conditional use for the same or similar purposes at, near or after the expiration date of a temporary conditional use granted pursuant to this section. Such an application shall be treated in all respects as a new application.

(7) In any hearing concerning the allowance of a temporary conditional use pursuant to this section, the commission or the council shall consider and make findings and conclusions concerning the following:

a. Specific findings with respect to subsections (1) through (6) of this section; and

b. The nature and extent of the temporary conditional use shall be specifically set forth by the commission and the council and no implied use shall arise therefrom; and

c. That the trend of the use of the area to general commercial use will not be impeded by the length of time for which the temporary conditional use is allowed. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE C-5

Sec. 37-76. Central Commercial Zone C-5.
(a) Purpose: To provide a mix of uses within the Central Business District for a wide variety of goods, services and compatible multifamily housing. Development shall provide access to adequate parking for uses that normally rely heavily on pedestrian circulation. Such areas should be compatible with adjacent noncommercial development. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 37, 10-25-99)

Sec. 37-77. Uses permitted outright.
In a C-5 Zone the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the provisions of Article IV:

(1) Business or professional office;

(2) Commercial entertainment – indoors and outdoors;

(3) Convention center;

(4) Day care center, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(5) of this code;

(5) Eating or drinking establishment;

(6) Financial institutions;

(7) Hotel;

(8) Multifamily residential uses not on the ground floor of a building;

(9) Personal use;

(10) Preschool, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(6) of this code;

(11) Public or governmental offices or semi-public uses which uses are similar to other uses permitted outright in this zone;

(12) Residential uses legally established as of December 31, 2004;

(13) Retail sales and service;

(14) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(15) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(16) Temporary vendors operating for sixteen (16) days or less;

(17) Theater;

(18) Winery, brewery;

(19) Church. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 38, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 4, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4346, § 2, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 4390, § 5, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4508, § 1, 7-14-08; Ord. No. 4531, § 8, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4742, § 2Q, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-78. Conditional uses.
In a C-5 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the provisions of Articles IV and IX:

(1) Automobile, recreational vehicle sales and service;

(2) Multifamily residential when located on the ground floor of a building;

(3) Other public uses;

(4) Other semi-public uses;

(5) Printing establishments;

(6) Processing, packing and storage;

(7) Recycle center;

(8) Service station, subject to the special conditions of section 37-60.1(2) of this code;

(9) Temporary vendors operating in excess of sixteen (16) days as defined by Chapter 21 of this code;

(10) Warehousing;

(11) Welding fabrication;

(12) Other central commercial uses which are not permitted outright but which are consistent with the purpose of the C-5 Zone, and are not detrimental to any of the outright permitted uses or any other existing conditional uses;

(13) Replacement of a nonconforming commercial use located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to standards of section 37-163(17) of this code;

(14) Replacement of a nonconforming residential use not located abutting a principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the Lewiston Comprehensive Transportation Plan, subject to setback and yard requirements of the R-2 Zone;

(15) A nonconforming commercial use may expand to bring that use into compliance with the requirements of this chapter, Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading. Such nonconforming commercial use may expand onto a separate parcel containing a conforming use where that parcel is abutting the nonconforming use for purposes of parking only. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 39, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4328, § 2, 3-24-03; Ord. No. 4346, § 2, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 4508, § 2, 7-14-08)

Sec. 37-79. Development standards.
In a C-5 Zone, the following development standards shall apply and be in force:

(1) Maximum height for buildings: None.

(2) Maximum lot coverage: None.

(3) Minimum lot size: None.

(4) Minimum front yard: None.

(5) Minimum side yard: None.

(6) Minimum rear yard: None.

(7) Signs: Signs shall be subject to the restrictions enumerated in the sign ordinance of the city.

(8) Off-street parking: Off-street parking shall be subject to the requirements enumerated in Article VII.

(9) Sidewalks: Portland cement concrete sidewalks shall be required in all commercial zones. See section 32-45(c) of this code. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

REGIONAL COMMERCIAL ZONE C-6

Sec. 37-80. Regional Commercial Zone C-6.
(a) Purpose: To encourage the establishment of areas for varied types of commercial uses and to meet the needs of the regional market area. Such uses shall be readily accessible from streets designated as principal or minor arterials as shown in the Lewiston comprehensive transportation plan. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 40, 10-25-99)

Sec. 37-81. Uses permitted outright.
In a C-6 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of Article IV:

(1) Auto, boat, manufactured home, recreational vehicle sales and service;

(2) Eating and drinking establishments;

(3) Financial institutions;

(4) Hotel/motel;

(5) Car wash, subject to the special conditions of section 37-60.1(1) of this code;

(6) Commercial entertainment facility, subject to the special conditions of section 37-69.1(3) of this code;

(7) Day care center, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(5) of this code;

(8) Mini-storage, subject to the special conditions of section 37-69.1(1) of this code;

(9) Personal services;

(10) Preschool, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1(6) of this code;

(11) Professional and business offices;

(12) Public or governmental offices or semi-public uses which uses are similar to other uses permitted outright in this zone;

(13) Residential uses legally established as of December 31, 2004;

(14) Retail sales and services;

(15) Service station, subject to the special conditions of section 37-60.1(2) of this code;

(16) Small animal hospital, clinic or kennel, subject to the special conditions of section 37-69.1(2) of this code;

(17) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(18) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(19) Temporary vendors operating sixteen (16) days or less;

(20) Recreational vehicle park, subject to the standards of Chapter 23 of this code;

(21) Church. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 41, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 4, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4346, § 2, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 4390, § 6, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4398, § 14, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 4531, § 8, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4742, § 2R, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-82. Conditional uses permitted.
In a C-6 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the standards and requirements of Articles IV and IX:

(1) Public or semi-public use;

(2) Temporary vendors operating in excess of sixteen (16) days as defined by Chapter 21 of this code;

(3) Other limited arterial commercial uses which are not permitted outright but which are consistent with the purpose of the C-6 Zone, and are not detrimental to any of the outright permitted uses or other existing conditional uses;

(4) Homeless shelter, subject to the standards of section 37-125 of this code. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 42, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4346, § 2, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 4689, § 5, 4-24-17)

Sec. 37-83. Development standards.
In a C-6 Zone, the following development standards shall apply and be in force:

(1) Maximum height for buildings: None except forty-five (45) feet when a building on a lot abuts a residential zone.

(2) Maximum lot coverage: None.

(3) Minimum lot size: None.

(4) Minimum front yard: When fronting on an urban arterial street as defined by the general street plan of the city, the minimum front yard shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet if the adjoining right-of-way is less than eighty (80) feet wide and a minimum of twenty (20) feet if the adjoining right-of-way is eighty (80) or more feet wide. When fronting on other streets shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet measured from the front of the property line or forty-five (45) feet from the center line of the street, whichever is greater.

(5) Minimum side yard: None except fifteen (15) feet when a property abuts a residential zone.

(6) Minimum rear yard: None except fifteen (15) feet when a property abuts a residential zone.

(7) Signs: Signs shall be subject to the restrictions enumerated in the sign ordinance of the city.

(8) Off-street parking: Off-street parking shall be subject to the requirements enumerated in Article VII.

(9) Minimum screening: Side or rear yards abutting residential zones shall be screened by means of a sight-obscuring fence or approved landscaping materials. Such screening shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.

(10) Sidewalks: Portland cement concrete sidewalks shall be required in all commercial zones. See section 32-45(c) of this code. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4531, § 9, 7-13-09)

LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE M-1

Sec. 37-84. Light Industrial Zone M-1.
Purpose: To provide for light manufacturing, processing, storage, warehousing, distribution and commercial uses subject to stated standards. To provide for necessary community uses that are not appropriate in residential districts. Regulations are intended to prevent friction between uses in the zone and also to protect nearby residential districts. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 43, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4689, § 6, 4-24-17)

Sec. 37-85. Uses permitted outright.
In an M-1 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of Article IV:

(1) Auto, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, heavy equipment sales and service;

(2) Boat sales and marina;

(3) Commercial entertainment facility – indoor;

(4) Commercial or industrial laundry;

(5) Eating or drinking establishment;

(6) General contracting and storage yard;

(7) Greenhouses and nurseries;

(8) Manufacturing, fabricating, processing, repairing, packing or storage, except a use specifically listed as a use permitted outright or as a conditional use in an M-2 Zone;

(9) Mini-storage;

(10) Port facility;

(11) Public and semi-public use which use is similar to other permitted uses in this zone;

(12) Recycling center;

(13) Retail sales and service;

(14) Service station;

(15) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(16) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(17) Temporary vendors operating for sixteen (16) days or less;

(18) Tire recapping;

(19) Truck terminal;

(20) Veterinary clinic or kennel;

(21) Wholesale distribution. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. § 44, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 4, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4346, § 2, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 4387, § 1, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4742, § 2S, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-86. Conditional uses permitted.
In an M-1 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the provisions of Articles IV and IX:

(1) Bulk petroleum storage and distribution facilities;

(2) Commercial entertainment facility – outdoor;

(3) Grain storage;

(4) Homeless shelter, subject to the standards of section 37-125 of this code;

(5) Other light manufacturing uses which are not permitted outright but which are consistent with the purpose of the M-1 Zone and are not detrimental to any of the outright permitted uses or other existing conditional uses;

(6) Other public use;

(7) Other semi-public uses;

(8) Quarrying;

(9) Temporary vendors operating in excess of sixteen (16) days as defined by Chapter 21 of this code. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 45, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4346, § 2, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 4387, § 2, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4689, § 7, 4-24-17)

Sec. 37-87. Limitations on use.
In an M-1 Zone the following limitations on use shall apply:

(1) Any use which creates a nuisance because of noise, smoke, odor, dust or gas is prohibited.

(2) Materials shall be stored, and grounds shall be maintained in a manner which will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or otherwise create a health hazard.

(3) All service, processing and storage on property abutting or facing a residential zone or a through highway shall be wholly within an enclosed building or screened from view from the residential zone or a through highway by a permanently maintained, sight obscuring fence at least eight (8) feet high, approved landscaping material or a combination thereof.

(4) Access from a public street to properties in an M-1 Zone shall be so located as to minimize traffic congestion and avoid directing industrial traffic onto residential streets.

(5) Building entrances or other openings adjacent to a residential or commercial zone shall be prohibited if they cause glare, excessive noise or otherwise adversely affect the use or value of the adjacent property.

(6) Effluent from permitted uses cannot be returned to the rivers without prior treatment or processing to ensure compliance with state and federal water pollution control standards and city ordinances. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-88. Yards.
In an M-1 Zone a side yard or rear yard abutting a residential zone shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. Said required yard shall be screened by means of a sight obscuring fence, approved landscaping materials or a combination thereof. Such required screening shall be installed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

HEAVY INDUSTRIAL ZONE M-2

Sec. 37-89. Heavy Industrial Zone M-2.
Purpose: To provide for general manufacturing and closely related uses. Limitations on use for this zone are intended to provide protection principally against effects harmful to other zones. To provide for necessary community uses that are not appropriate in residential districts. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 46, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4689, § 8, 4-24-17)

Sec. 37-90. Uses permitted outright.
In an M-2 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of Article IV:

(1) Auto, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, heavy equipment sales and service;

(2) Boat sales and marina;

(3) Chemical and fertilizer storage and blending of fertilizers;

(4) Commercial entertainment facility – indoor;

(5) Commercial or industrial laundry;

(6) Concrete or concrete products manufacturing;

(7) General contracting and storage yard;

(8) Grain storage;

(9) Greenhouses and nursery;

(10) Manufacturing, fabricating, processing, repairing, packing or storage except a use specifically listed as a conditional use in the P Zone;

(11) Mini-storage;

(12) Petroleum products storage or distribution facility;

(13) Port facility;

(14) Public and semi-public uses which uses are similar to other permitted uses in this zone;

(15) Recycling center;

(16) Retail sales and service;

(17) Service station;

(18) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(19) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(20) Temporary vendors operating for sixteen (16) days or less;

(21) Tire recapping;

(22) Truck terminal;

(23) Veterinary clinic or kennel;

(24) Wholesale distribution;

(25) Wood processing plant. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 47, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 4, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4346, § 2, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 4387, § 3, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4742, § 2T, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-91. Conditional uses permitted.
In an M-2 Zone the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the provisions of Articles IV and IX:

(1) Asphalt plant;

(2) Cement manufacturing;

(3) Chemical storage and manufacturing, including farm fertilizers;

(4) Commercial entertainment facility – outdoor;

(5) Feed lot or stockyard;

(6) Heliport;

(7) Homeless shelter, subject to the standards of section 37-125 of this code;

(8) Meat packing plant excepting stockyards;

(9) Other public use;

(10) Other semi-public use;

(11) Temporary vendors operating in excess of sixteen (16) days as defined by Chapter 21 of this code;

(12) Wrecking yard. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 48, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4346, § 2, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 4387, § 4, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4689, § 9, 4-24-17)

Sec. 37-92. Limitations on use.
In an M-2 Zone the following limitations on use shall apply:

(1) Any use which creates a nuisance because of noise, smoke, odor, dust or gas is prohibited.

(2) Materials shall be stored, and grounds maintained in a manner which will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or otherwise create a health hazard.

(3) All service, processing and storage on property abutting or facing a residential zone or a through highway shall be wholly within an enclosed building or screened from view from the residential zone or a through highway by a permanently maintained, sight obscuring fence at least eight (8) feet high, approved landscaping material or a combination thereof.

(4) Access from a public street to properties in an M-2 Zone shall be so located as to minimize traffic congestion and avoid directing industrial traffic onto residential streets.

(5) Building entrances or other openings adjacent to a residential or commercial zone shall be prohibited if they cause glare, excessive noise or otherwise adversely affect the use or value of the adjacent property.

(6) Effluent from permitted uses cannot be returned to the rivers without prior treatment or processing to ensure compliance with existing city ordinances, state and federal water pollution control standards. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

FORM AND IMPACT BASED (FIB) ZONE

Sec. 37-93. Form and Impact Based (FIB) Zone.
(a) Intents and purposes. The city of Lewiston recognizes the value of the Clearwater and Snake Rivers as assets to the community and aspires to be the premier small-town waterfront city; facilitate the enhancement of the waterfront as a recreational, social, and economic activity center; and enhance the vitality of beautiful, downtown Lewiston. The intents and purposes of the FIB Zone are to maximize the intensity of use and the value of lands within its boundaries; to create a pedestrian priority environment; to create a visually interesting and appealing atmosphere; to prioritize land uses and building forms that contribute the most qualities toward achievement of these purposes, without unduly limiting use of private property; and to implement goals and objectives set forth in Chapter 12.2 of the Lewiston Comprehensive Plan (the Lewiston Waterfront Plan), as follows:

(1) Establish land use patterns along the rivers which maximize the potential of the rivers by increasing uses which create more outdoor recreation and pedestrian activity along the waterfront and which create a pleasing, enjoyable environment.

(2) Improve the attractiveness and sense of place of the built environment on public and private properties and to preserve and enhance views of the rivers and related open spaces and bridges.

(3) Improve Levee Trail and river access.

(4) Establish a mixed-use downtown waterfront zoning district to encourage land uses that promote enjoyment of the rivers; are complementary to beautiful, downtown Lewiston; and include a residential component. The FIB Zone is intended to bring higher concentrations of residents, workers, and visitors expected to frequent restaurant, retail, recreation, and entertainment businesses and facilities in the immediate area.

(5) Improve the sense of place, connectivity, and visual appearance of the built environment.

(6) Establish zoning development standards and incentive options to improve community design. The intent is to focus design of new construction and reconstruction on pedestrian-friendliness and a visually welcoming environment, including consideration of such things as, but not limited to:

a. Building materials, architecture, bulk, height, scale, setbacks, and orientation on the lot;

b. Historic preservation and enhancement;

c. Public and private pedestrian and bicycle amenities and improvements, including wayfinding, that improve nonmotorized access to the rivers and to adjoining public and private facilities;

d. Parking lot size, orientation on the lot, and related landscaping;

e. Landscape buffering between potentially incompatible uses or uses of substantially different intensity and landscaping simply as a beautification;

f. Formal and informal social gathering or resting areas;

g. View-shed and view corridor preservation and provision of river-view vantage stations/points;

h. Public artwork;

i. Burial of existing overhead utilities and of new utilities;

j. Reduced stormwater run-off amounts and/or rates; and

k. Increased stormwater run-off quality.

(7) Establish zoning and development incentives for provision of social and public gathering or resting spaces and amenities in new development and redevelopment.

(8) Reduce the amount of off-street parking required by the Lewiston City Code to encourage higher intensity land use and development and a pedestrian-oriented, destination environment. (Ord. No. 4725, § 2, 11-26-18)

Sec. 37-93.A. Interpretation and appeal.
Compliance with the provisions and requirements of the FIB Zone shall be determined by the community development department, utilizing the stated intents and purposes of the FIB Zone. A final decision of the community development department may be appealed by an affected person to the commission, in accordance with Section 37-192 of this code. (Ord. No. 4725, § 2, 11-26-18)

Sec. 37-93.B. Existing buildings and uses.
(a) Notwithstanding the nonconformity regulations in article X of this chapter, a building or land use in the FIB Zone that exists prior to October 27, 2018, that does not meet the requirements herein shall be considered legally nonconforming. Such building or land use shall be allowed to continue in existence and be structurally repaired, maintained, and/or improved to any extent not otherwise regulated by the FIB Zone.

(b) The allowable size of expansion of any such nonconforming building shall be at least a one to one (1:1) ratio of the percentage of the gross floor area expansion to the percentage of points necessary to qualify for new building construction, as set forth in section 37-93.D of this code. However, in every case, a building expansion shall generate a minimum of one (1) point. For purposes of this section, any fraction of a point up to and including one-half (1/2) shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number, and any fraction of a point greater than one-half (1/2) shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.

(c) Permits and business license applications for existing buildings or uses that were approved under the regulations of the FIB Zone and that propose construction, remodeling, or change of use or occupancy of the business in question shall be subject to approval by the community development director or designee. Approval of such applications by the community development director or designee shall be subject to the following findings:

(1) The proposal will result in a condition that generates more allowable land use and development qualifier points than the existing or most recent condition of the building, site, and/or use;

(2) The proposal will not result in a condition that would have the effect of eliminating points that previously qualified the building or use for approval, or, if so, the proposal includes elements of equal or greater value within the qualification point system;

(3) The proposal will not create an element of noncompliance with the FIB Zone that did not already exist; and

(4) The proposal will further the intents and purposes of the FIB Zone. (Ord. No. 4725, § 3, 11-26-18)

Sec. 37-93.C. Temporary vendors.
Temporary vendors, as defined in Chapter 21 of this code, may be permitted in the FIB Zone regardless of the allowances and requirements of the FIB Zone, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21 of this code. (Ord. No. 4725, § 4, 11-26-18)

Sec. 37-93.D. Building form and orientation standards.
(a) The construction of a new building in the FIB Zone, other than an accessory building, or the reconstruction of an existing building in the FIB Zone, other than an accessory building, shall comply with the building form and orientation standards contained in this section, except that: (1) development proposals that generate a minimum of one and one-half (1 1/2) times the minimum point threshold required by section 37-93.E of this code shall be exempted from the building height or floor area ratio standard, and (2) development proposals that generate a minimum of one and one-third (1 1/3) times the minimum point threshold required by section 37-93.E of this code shall be exempted from any one (1) of the other building form and orientation standards of the developer’s choosing.

(b) For purposes of this section, reconstruction of an existing building shall mean work that exceeds eighty (80) percent of the building value, as determined by one (1) of the following options chosen by the building owner:

(1) The assessed value, as determined and on file at the Nez Perce County assessor’s office on the date of a building permit application;

(2) The appraised value, as determined by an appraiser licensed by the Idaho Real Estate Appraiser Board Bureau of Occupational Licenses, within not more than one (1) year from the date of a building permit application filed after October 27, 2018; or

(3) Sixty-five (65) percent of the value used to determine a building permit fee to reconstruct the building based upon the most recently adopted International Building Code, as determined by the city of Lewiston building official.

(c) Standards.

(1) Building height. Height allowance: Eighty-four (84) feet maximum, not counting any parapet of three (3) feet in height or less and not counting any architectural appurtenance exempted from maximum allowable building height, pursuant to section 37-159 of this code; or a maximum of eight (8) stories, as determined by the city of Lewiston building official based upon the International Building Code.

(2) Floor area ratio (FAR). FAR: one-half (1/2) minimum, which means that the total building gross floor area shall be equal to at least fifty (50) percent of lot square footage. Basements designed for occupancy or a parking garage shall be included in the FAR calculation. Any floor level or roof-top parking shall be included in the FAR calculation. Faux or false stories shall not be included in the FAR calculation. This FAR standard shall not apply to a building with a primary use of a commercial entertainment facility. Determination of “primary use” shall be made on a case-by-case basis, as determined by the community development department, based upon factors including, but not limited to, amount of floor area occupied, number of employees, parking demands, hours of operation, number and type of associated accessory uses, and other physical building characteristics and operating characteristics of the uses in question.

(3) Building location relative to Levee Bypass Road right-of-way line: Ten (10) feet minimum.

(4) Building location relative to a street right-of-way line other than Levee Bypass Road: Ten (10) feet maximum at first floor level, unless necessary to accommodate a fire access road required by the Lewiston fire department, and except for a hotel as specified below. Upper floors (those above the first floor) may be set back not more than an additional five (5) feet per floor or per fourteen (14) feet of building height above the first floor, whichever yields the greater setback, unless such upper floor additional setback is to accommodate an outdoor terrace.

If the space between the first floor of the building and street right-of-way line is used for outdoor dining, gathering, or other improved open space that is designed for access and use by the public, occupants, or patrons of the building, then the building may be set back a maximum of twenty (20) feet from the street right-of-way line.

A hotel building shall not be located farther than fifteen (15) feet from a street right-of-way line, unless: (a) the lot has multiple street frontages and the hotel building maintains the fifteen (15) feet maximum setback from at least one (1) street frontage; or (b) it is for purposes of accommodating a porte-cochere for loading/unloading guests of the hotel. If the hotel building is set back farther than fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way line to accommodate a porte-cochere, then the hotel building shall be attached to the porte-cochere, and the porte-cochere shall not be set back from the street right-of-way line farther than twelve (12) feet. Upper floor levels of a hotel building may be set back farther from the street right-of-way line than the first floor at a ratio not to exceed ten (10) feet of additional setback per floor level greater than one (1).

(5) Building access. Location, design, and orientation of building access: Building walls facing streets shall contain at least one (1) public, architecturally defined pedestrian building entrance. Such entrance shall be designed and oriented so as to be clearly identifiable from the street and sidewalk as a public pedestrian entrance to the building. Architectural definition of the building entrance may include recession or protrusion of the entrance and/or an awning or a roof protrusion directly above the entrance.

(6) First floor street-facing building wall transparency. A minimum of forty (40) percent of the area of a street-facing first floor building wall shall be clear, non-opaque window area, unless it is shown by the applicant that compliance with this standard is inherently in conflict with the type of use within the building and the proposal incorporates decorative or architectural features into the wall of the building as mitigation. Any such conflict shall be justified by the applicant, in writing, and accepted by the community development department.

(7) Upper floor (above the first floor) street-facing building wall transparency. A minimum of thirty (30) percent of the area of a street-facing upper floor building wall shall be clear, non-opaque window area or incorporate architectural features that have similar visual effect in breaking up the appearance of the wall mass, unless it is shown by the applicant that compliance with this standard is inherently in conflict with the type of use within the building and the proposal incorporates decorative or architectural features into the wall of the building as mitigation. Any such conflict shall be justified by the applicant, in writing, and accepted by the community development department.

(8) Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting for parking lots, walkways, usable open space, and exterior doorways shall be installed and designed to provide a safe and comfortable pedestrian environment. All such lighting shall be: (a) a full cutoff design so that there is not light dispersion or direct glare above a 90-degree horizontal plane from the base of the fixture, or (b) contained within an opaque or semi-transparent globe or housing that does not produce glare from the light source (e.g., the light bulb).

(9) Dumpster screening. Dumpsters shall be fully screened from view at ground level, unless located such that they are not visible from a street, public pedestrian path, and an adjoining property under separate ownership. (Ord. No. 4725, § 5, 11-26-18)

Sec. 37-93.E. Allowable land use and development qualifiers.
(a) Use of a property solely for public parking (including free, permit, pay by hour, or leased), including a parking garage, shall be exempt from having to qualify in the point system set forth in this section.

(b) Accessory buildings shall be exempt from having to qualify under the point system set forth in this section. Accessory building uses shall not be recognized for point earning purposes under the “multiple use” category set forth in this section.

(c) Proposed construction and reconstruction shall incorporate use and/or design elements sufficient to generate a minimum of eighteen (18) points from the list below in order to qualify for zoning approval to obtain a building permit. Development proposals that generate a minimum of one and one-half (1 1/2) times the minimum point threshold required herein shall be exempted from the building height or floor area ratio standard enumerated in section 37-93.D(c) of this code if the developer so chooses, and development proposals that generate a minimum of one and one-third (1 1/3) times the minimum point threshold required herein shall be exempted from any one (1) of the other building form and orientation standards of the developer’s choosing, if the developer so chooses.

(d) Interpretational decisions about whether a specific proposal qualifies for points in any of the categories listed in this section shall be determined by the community development department, which shall consider the stated intents and purposes of the FIB Zone.

(e) As an alternative to development qualification pursuant to this section, any development or redevelopment may be permitted by conditional use permit pursuant to article IX of this chapter. Any such conditional use permit, in addition to meeting the required relevant criteria and standards set forth in article IX of this chapter, shall also be found to be consistent with the stated intents and purposes of the FIB Zone and shall generate a minimum of one-third (1/3) of the points required by this section.

(f) Point system qualifiers.

(1) Multiple use property: Two (2) points for each use greater than one (1), up to a maximum of twelve (12) points; however, four (4) points shall be awarded for a commercial entertainment facility (not including adult bookstore, adult entertainment facility, or adult theater) or a hotel with a minimum of sixty (60) guest rooms, and two (2) points shall be awarded for each four (4) multifamily residential or residential condominium dwelling units.

a. No single use counted toward this point allowance shall be less than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the building, or if an outdoor use such as an outdoor commercial entertainment use, then not less than thirty-three (33) percent of the square footage of the lot.

b. Multiple uses of the same category (e.g., two (2) retail stores in the same building) shall qualify as multiple uses for this point category only if they have separate business licenses and are physically separated by a wall or floor such that the business spaces are not open to each other.

(2) Minimum of one (1) employee per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area, excluding any single meeting or conference room of which the square footage exceeds the minimum required for all employees to meet together in the same room: three (3) points. Qualification for this point category shall be supported by submittal of a five-year business plan and building floor plan(s) that together show justification for this point qualifier and that shall be approved by the community development department for such purpose.

(3) Floor area ratio (FAR) increases above the one-half (1/2) minimum standard shall be awarded one (1) point for each 0.15 above the one-half (1/2) minimum standard, up to a maximum of six (6) points. Basements designed for occupancy or a parking garage shall be included in the FAR calculation. Any floor level or roof-top parking shall be included in the FAR calculation. Faux or false stories shall not be included in the FAR calculation.

(4) Open space and amenities for social gathering or active or passive recreation, such as courtyards, plazas and gardens, ball courts, and playgrounds (privately owned and maintained and consisting of at least one (1) percent of the development project area or two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet, whichever is greater): two (2) points. Outdoor dining and/or drinking areas for eating and drinking establishments shall not qualify for points in this category.

(5) Parkland dedication for public use, on the condition that the parkland dedication is accepted by the applicable public agency: two (2) points per two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of parkland area dedicated.

(6) Public art (outdoors): three (3) points. Public art, as used herein, shall mean works “commissioned” at a cost of not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) or two (2) percent of the building permit valuation, whichever is greater, for locations of open public access. Such works may be inanimate, interactive, representational, abstract, aesthetic, didactic, functional, and/or symbolic art pieces or artistic projects or displays. Public art proposals shall be reviewed by a committee appointed by the Lewiston city council for such purpose. Said committee shall make recommendations on proposal acceptance or denial to the community development department for decision to accept or deny a proposal.

(7) New levee trail or river access: twelve (12) points. To qualify for points, the proposal shall be accepted and approved by all entities having authority, which may include, but is not limited to, the city of Lewiston, the United States Army Corps of Engineers, and the Idaho Transportation Department. The levee trail or river access shall be within a dedicated public right-of-way or granted public easement for legal public access and include physical improvements necessary for public use, including compliance with applicable Americans with Disabilities Act standards.

(8) Outdoor café located not farther than twenty (20) feet from and within clear view of a public street and with seating providing for a minimum of twelve (12) seats: two (2) points.

(9) Rooftop garden, patio, deck, or other type of rooftop open space with amenities to invite use (shall be at least twenty (20) percent of the area of the building footprint or two thousand (2,000) square feet, whichever is less): two (2) points.

(10) Alternative transportation mode support: This category includes public transit, carpool, bicycle, wayfinding, and electric vehicle accommodations, as well as public trail or walkway connections and implementation or participation in programs focused on transportation modes other than single occupancy fossil fuel burning vehicles.

a. Unsheltered bicycle racks: one-quarter (1/4) point for each two (2) bicycles, up to a maximum of three (3) points.

b. Sheltered bicycle parking racks, bike lockers, or bike room (shall accommodate a minimum of four (4) bicycles or fifteen (15) percent of the minimum number of required off-street parking stalls, whichever is greater): one (1) point for each four (4) bicycles, up to a maximum of three (3) points.

c. Electric car charging stations: one (1) point for each charging station up to three (3) and one-half (1/2) point for each additional charging station, up to a total maximum of five (5) points.

d. Provision of public transit system improvement, which shall be subject to approval and acceptance by the community development and public works directors, or their designees:

1. Dedication of public right-of-way or easement to accommodate bus stop, on the condition that such dedication or easement is accepted by the applicable public agency: two (2) points.

2. Construction of street improvements necessary to accommodate bus stop: two (2) points.

3. Installation of bus stop shelter with bench: one (1) point.

(11) Conference facilities (shall be open to or for rent by the general public and allow related meal service, which may or may not be provided by the facility owner):

a. With accommodations for a minimum of one hundred (100) people in one (1) room: three (3) points.

b. With accommodations for a minimum of one hundred (100) people cumulatively in more than one (1) room: two (2) points.

c. With accommodations for a minimum of fifty (50) people in one (1) room (cannot be combined with points awarded under subsection (11)(a) or (b) of this section): one (1) point.

(12) Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certified building: LEED Certificate: two (2) points; Silver Certificate: three (3) points; Gold Certificate: six (6) points; Platinum Certificate: seven (7) points.

(13) Relocate overhead utilities underground, subject to approval of the entities having jurisdiction over such utilities: three (3) points for each utility pole removed.

(14) Minimum ten (10) percent landscaping of the development site, including any required landscaping: three (3) points.

(15) Tripartite design of street facing building walls: three (3) points for vertical tripartite design, two (2) points for horizontal tripartite design, or five (5) points for both vertical and horizontal tripartite design. This design option is to create the appearance of three (3) distinct building sections by change in color and/or texture, by incorporation of recessed or protruding doorways, doorway overhangs, columns (structural or faux), horizontal and/or vertical bands, balconies, reveals, canopies or awnings, cornices, protruding parapets, and other architectural features that contribute to the appearance of three (3) distinct building sections.

(16) Reinforced building corner at street intersection: three (3) points. This design option shall include a pedestrian building entrance within six (6) feet of the corner of the building on each street frontage or a single entrance in any diagonal wall at the building corner, where such wall is at least ten (10) feet wide. The building corner shall be designed with increased building height, mass, façade angles, or change(s) in depth for increased prominence of that portion of the building. It may also include architectural features, such as cupolas, turrets, or change in roof pitch.

(17) Exterior decks or balconies on upper floor(s) (minimum one (1) floor level above the ground floor) where cumulative deck or balcony width is at least thirty (30) percent of the width of the wall on that particular floor level; or a minimum of one (1) deck or balcony per floor level where the cumulative deck or balcony width for all floor levels is at least thirty (30) percent of the width of the wall: two (2) points. Any such deck or balcony shall be functionally accessible by occupants of the building.

(18) Shared parking arrangement for fifty (50) percent minimum of the off-street parking requirement pursuant to section 37-149 of this code: two (2) points.

(19) Covered, enclosed, or sheltered off-street parking shall be awarded points for only one (1) of the following categories:

a. Surface level parking garage(s) or carports: one-half (1/2) point per four (4) cars for fully enclosed garages or one-half (1/2) point per four (4) cars for carports, up to a maximum of four (4) points.

b. Multi-level parking garage with no other uses in it, where the parking is for private land use and not a public parking garage and the parking garage is attached to the building it is providing parking for: five (5) points.

c. Rooftop parking with commercial and/or residential uses below: five (5) points.

d. First floor parking garage with businesses or homes above and/or below: five (5) points.

e. Mid-floor parking with residential and/or commercial uses above and/or below: six (6) points.

f. Below ground parking garage with businesses and/or homes above: seven (7) points.

(20) First floor street frontage walls that are at least sixty (60) percent visually penetrable: one (1) point.

(21) Provision of all required stormwater detention underground or integration of all required stormwater detention with required landscaping or a combination of providing part of the required stormwater detention underground and integrating the remainder of the required stormwater detention with required landscaping: two (2) points.

(22) On-site retention of the stormwater from a two-year, 24-hour storm: one (1) point per two thousand (2,000) square feet of impervious surface area retained, up to a maximum of ten (10) points.

(23) Incorporation of best management practices and facilities designed to remove a minimum of ninety (90) percent of sediment, sand, and oil from stormwater prior to release to the city of Lewiston stormwater conveyance system: three (3) points.

(24) Permeable pavement for a parking lot: two (2) points.

(25) High reflectance (cool) pavement material for a parking lot: two (2) points.

(26) Enclosing or otherwise hiding rooftop equipment from view at ground level, or locating rooftop equipment such that it is not visible, within a 100-foot radius of the building footprint: two (2) points.

(27) Preservation of an existing, ground level view from a public street or sidewalk of the Railroad Bridge or Blue Bridge by site planning and/or building design specifically for this purpose: two (2) points.

(28) Historic preservation or enhancement of or contribution to the character of the existing historic district, as determined by the city of Lewiston historic preservation commission (may only be used for property outside of the existing historic district): three (3) points. (Ord. No. 4725, § 6, 11-26-18)

Sec. 37-93.F. Off-street parking requirements and allowances.
(a) Notwithstanding the central business district parking exemptions enumerated in section 37-145 of this code, the minimum number of off-street parking stalls required in the FIB Zone shall be fifty (50) percent of that required by section 37-149 of this code. The reduced parking set forth in section 37-149 of this code for residential and commercial residential uses in the central business district shall not apply to lands within the FIB Zone.

(b) The maximum allowable number of off-street parking stalls shall be one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of that required by section 37-149 of this code; however, this provision shall not apply to parking located in a multi-level parking garage.

(c) Not more than thirty-three (33) percent of the off-street parking provided shall be located between a building and the street; however, this provision shall not apply to the Levee Bypass Road. For a corner lot, the total number of off-street parking spaces located between the building and the two (2) adjoining streets shall not exceed fifty (50) percent.

(d) Parking lots with more than thirty (30) parking stalls shall include improved, delineated pedestrian walkways connecting the parking stalls to the associated building or outdoor use. Such walkways shall be at least three (3) feet wide and constructed of asphalt, concrete, compacted gravel, or other alternative surface that is safe and convenient for pedestrian use.

(e) Parking structures providing parking above a first floor shall be designed and constructed to prevent vehicle headlights from shining directly onto adjoining buildings. (Ord. No. 4725, § 7, 11-26-18)

Sec. 37-93.G. Limitations and prohibitions.
(a) Building footprint. No building footprint in the FIB Zone shall exceed forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet, unless:

(1) The floor area ratio (FAR) is at least one (1); or

(2) The project incorporates use and/or design elements from the list of qualifiers contained in section 37-93.E of this code, whereby the project generates at least six (6) points more than the minimum necessary to qualify for a building permit; or

(3) The building provides pedestrian and vehicular access through the building or between two (2) buildings connected by a shared roof, according to the following:

a. The buildings are attached with a common roof and have a minimum exterior wall separation of ten (10) feet of improved pedestrian walkway and/or improved, useable open space; or

b. The buildings are attached with a common roof and have a minimum exterior wall separation of twenty (20) feet with a minimum 12-foot-wide, one-way driveway and a minimum four-foot-wide sidewalk on each side (This option may be substituted as follows: the buildings are attached with a common roof and have a 28-foot-wide minimum building separation with a 20-foot-wide driveway and a four-foot-wide sidewalk on each side if the driveway width is required by the city of Lewiston fire department to be twenty (20) feet wide); or

c. The buildings are attached with a common roof and have a minimum exterior wall separation of thirty-two (32) feet, with a minimum 24-foot wide, two-way driveway and a four-foot-wide sidewalk on each side.

(b) Properties within the FIB Zone that are also within a designated historic district shall be subject to the adopted rules and procedures of the historic district, in addition to the FIB Zone.

(c) No drive-thru windows or drive-thru service facilities shall be permitted in the FIB Zone.

(d) No detached, single-family residential use as the only use of a building or lot shall be permitted in the FIB Zone.

(e) No homeless shelter shall be permitted in the FIB Zone.

(f) No adult bookstore, adult entertainment facility, or adult theater shall be permitted in the FIB Zone.

(g) No direct train or barge shipping of freight shall be permitted in the FIB Zone (passenger transport is allowed), except for continuation of an existing use, reuse of a train loading dock in an existing building, or expansion of a nonconforming shipping use or building pursuant to section 37-93.B of this code.

(h) No unmitigated particulate matter, as defined or determined by the Environmental Protection Agency or Department of Environmental Quality as being an air pollutant, shall be released into the air within the FIB Zone.

(i) No tractor trailer or shipping container storage that is visible from beyond the property lines of the subject property shall be permitted in the FIB Zone. Any such storage shall be either within a building or covered by a roof and surrounded by sight-obscuring fencing that is at least seven (7) feet tall.

(j) No other outdoor storage shall be permitted in the FIB Zone, except for licensed, registered, operating vehicles; outdoor recreational equipment; outdoor furniture; and other items related to an on-site business that are incidental and ancillary to such business and that are made for outdoor usage related to the type of on-site business.

(k) Barbed and razor wire fencing shall be prohibited within the FIB Zone. (Ord. No. 4725, § 8, 11-26-18)

Sec. 37-93.1. Bryden Avenue Special Planning Area.
(a) Purpose: To provide a special planning area for development of limited commercial use that minimizes impacts on nearby residential uses and fosters creative residential development compatible with anticipated high traffic volumes on Bryden Avenue.

(b) Description: The Bryden Avenue Special Planning Area shall be described with the following boundaries:

This area extends from approximately 5th Street east to 10th Street along Bryden Avenue, and includes land situated between Linden Avenue on the north and Airway Avenue to the south.

(c) The Bryden Avenue Special Planning Area shall be divided into distinct planning areas:

(1) Planning Sub-Area A – Approximately two hundred (200) feet west of 5th Street to 10th Street, inclusive of an area approximately two hundred eighty (280) feet north and south of Bryden Avenue. This is an area defined by Linden Drive on the north, Bryden Drive on the south, 10th Street on the east, and 5th Street to the west, as depicted on the official zoning map of the city of Lewiston.

(2) Planning Sub-Area B – Approximately two hundred (200) feet west of 5th Street to 10th Street, exclusive of the area identified as Planning Area A. (Ord. No. 4372, § 1, 4-11-05)

Sec. 37-93.2. Uses permitted.
(a) Area A: In the Bryden Avenue Special Planning Area A the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright subject to standards of Article IV of this chapter:

Planning Area A

(1) Single-family dwellings.

(2) Two-family dwellings.

(3) Multifamily dwellings.

(4) Professional offices.

(5) Bed and breakfast type lodging, limited to six (6) guestrooms.

(6) Retail sales, not including fuel or auto sales, limited to forty thousand (40,000) square feet of gross floor area.

(7) Restaurants; provided, that a restaurant may serve alcohol with meals, but shall not be permitted a separate lounge for serving alcoholic beverages.

(8) Personal services, including repair and maintenance (not related to automobiles or motorcycles).

(9) Public and semi-public uses.

(10) Churches.

(11) Financial institutions.

(12) Hotels, motels.

(13) Conference centers.

In the Bryden Avenue Special Planning Area A the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with Articles IV (Supplementary Regulations) and IX (Conditional Uses) of this chapter:

(1) Restaurants that have separate lounges for serving alcoholic beverages.

(2) Fuel and auto sales.

(3) Commercial entertainment facilities.

(4) Other uses determined to be compatible with the intent, uses, and standards of Planning Area A.

(b) Area B: In the Bryden Avenue Special Planning Area B the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright subject to the standards of Article IV of this chapter:

Planning Area B

(1) Single-family dwellings.

(2) Two-family dwellings.

(3) Multifamily dwellings.

(4) Class A manufactured home.

In the Bryden Avenue Special Planning Area B the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted conditional uses when authorized in accordance with Articles IV and IX of this chapter:

(1) Intermediate care facility, subject to the special conditions of section 37-44.1 of this code.

(2) Long-term care facility, subject to the special conditions of section 37-44.1 of this code.

(3) Church, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1 of this code.

(4) School, subject to the special conditions of section 37-20.1 of this code.

(5) Family day care, subject to the special conditions of section 37-13.1 of this code. (Ord. No. 4372, § 1, 4-11-05; Ord. No. 4531, § 10, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4670, § 1, 10-24-16; Ord. No. 4694, § 1, 8-21-17)

Sec. 37-93.3. Lot size.
Within the Bryden Avenue Special Planning Area, lot size shall be determined by individual parcel boundaries, not including public right-of-way:

(1) Planning Area A.

Minimum Lot Size:

None

(2) Planning Area B.

Minimum lot size, single-family dwelling:

7,500 square feet

Minimum lot size, two-family dwelling:

7,500 square feet

Minimum lot size, multifamily dwelling:

7,500 plus 1,500 square feet per unit for every unit over two

Minimum Lot Width:

50 feet

Minimum Lot Depth:

80 feet

(Ord. No. 4372, § 1, 4-11-05)

Sec. 37-93.4. Building height.
(a) Planning Area A.

(1) Commercial structures within thirty-two (32) feet of the boundaries of Planning Area B shall be no greater than sixteen (16) feet in height. Building height may increase one (1) foot for every one (1) foot increase in distance beyond thirty-two (32) feet from the boundaries of Planning Area B. However, this provision shall not apply when the structure in question is on a lot or development site that is under single ownership or control and such lot is divided by the boundary line of the BASPAA and BASPAB zones.

(2) Multifamily structures within thirty-two (32) feet of the boundaries of Planning Area B shall be no greater than sixteen (16) feet in height. Building height may increase one (1) foot for every one (1) foot increase in distance from thirty-two (32) feet from the boundaries of Planning Area B. However, this provision shall not apply when the structure in question is on a lot or development site that is under single ownership or control and such lot is divided by the boundary line of the BASPAA and BASPAB zones.

(3) Maximum building height shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet.

(b) Planning Area B. Maximum building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. (Ord. No. 4372, § 1, 4-11-05; Ord. No. 4657, § 1, 6-13-16)

Sec. 37-93.5. Setbacks and yards.
(a) Planning Area A.

(1) Front: Within Planning Area A, the front yard shall be considered that area adjacent to Bryden Avenue along the length of the Bryden Avenue right-of-way. A front yard shall be minimum five (5) feet in depth.

(2) Rear: Within Planning Area A, the rear yard shall be considered that area furthest from and parallel to Bryden Avenue. Where a structure containing a commercial use abuts Planning Area B, the commercial structure must be set back a minimum fifteen (15) feet from the property line or thirty-five (35) feet from an established residential structure within Planning Area B, whichever is greater.

(3) Side: Within Planning Area A, there shall be no minimum side yard.

(4) Dedication of right-of-way: Dedication to the city of a minimum ten (10) feet of property abutting and parallel to Bryden Avenue shall be required of development along Bryden Avenue. Dedication shall be required at the time of new development or at major remodeling.

(b) Planning Area B.

(1) Front yards: minimum fifteen (15) feet.

(2) Rear yards: minimum fifteen (15) feet.

(3) Side yards: minimum five (5) feet, and the total of both side yards shall be ten (10) feet. (Ord. No. 4372, § 1, 4-11-05)

Sec. 37-93.6. Standards for development.
(a) Planning Area A.

(1) Lots.

a. Commercial development shall be restricted to those properties with a minimum fifty (50) feet of dedicated access to Bryden Avenue.

b. Access easements shall not be considered dedicated access.

(2) Structures.

a. Building facades fronting Bryden Avenue shall have a minimum fifteen (15) percent window area on the Bryden Avenue side of the building.

b. Facades greater than fifty (50) feet in length shall incorporate wall plane projections extending over twenty (20) percent of the length of the facade. Plane projections shall be a minimum three (3) inches in depth and a minimum height equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the height of the wall.

c. Building facades shall include at least two (2) of the following at a ratio of four to one (4:1):

1. Color change,

2. Texture change,

3. Building material change.

d. All roofs shall give the appearance of a hip or gable roof with a minimum 3:12 pitch. Gable or hip roof treatments or dormers shall be used to conceal flat roofs. All such roof treatments shall be sufficient to hide rooftop equipment from view at grade.

e. Gable and hip roofs shall include eaves a minimum eighteen (18) inches in length measured from the intersecting wall.

f. No external, amplified loudspeakers may be installed, except as allowed with a use permitted as a conditional use.

(3) Landscaping and screening.

a. A five (5) foot landscaped strip shall be planted along the entire length of the Bryden Avenue right-of-way at the time of new construction or major remodeling. The landscaped strip shall include trees as follows:

b. Trees shall be placed along rights-of-way every thirty-five (35) feet;

c. Tree species shall be limited to:

1. Frontier elm (Ulmus frontier);

2. Littleleaf linden (Tilia cordata);

3. “Green vase” zelkova (Zelkova serrata);

4. Other species approved by the community development director in consultation with the urban forester.

(4) Property in commercial use and abutting residential uses shall have a sight-obscuring fence or landscaping along the property boundary adjacent to those residential uses.

(5) Parking areas abutting residential uses in Planning Area B shall have a five (5) foot landscaped buffer between the parking area and residential uses in addition to subsection (a)(2) of this section.

(6) Where required parking is located wholly to the side or rear of the primary structure, the required landscape buffer between the parking area and residential uses may be decreased by two (2) feet of width.

(7) All lighting shall be shielded from residential uses and shall not trespass upon residential uses.

(8) The following parking standards shall apply:

a. Multifamily dwellings, two (2) spaces per dwelling unit.

b. Offices, including medical offices; retail sales and service; personal services; financial institutions:

1. One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of usable office space, examination room, reception area (including lobby), sales area, display area, or service area;

2. No parking in excess of fifty (50) percent of required parking may be placed in the front of the primary structure.

c. Bed and breakfast type lodging, limited to six (6) guestrooms, one (1) space per guestroom plus one (1) space per dwelling unit.

d. Restaurant, including lounge:

1. One space per four (4) seats;

2. No parking in excess of fifty (50) percent of required parking may be placed in the front of the primary structure.

e. In addition to design standards provided in sections 37-146 to 37-148 and sections 37-151 to 37-155 of this chapter:

1. Where parking areas contain three (3) or more parking aisles, pedestrian walkways through the parking area separate from vehicle travelways shall be installed;

2. Such pedestrian walkways shall be incorporated into the required interior landscaping, if any.

f. Stormwater controls shall be incorporated into required landscaped buffers.

g. Reduction in parking stall size may be allowed upon approval of the city engineer.

(9) New construction or major remodeling within Planning Area A shall require a statement of anticipated traffic generation signed and stamped by a design professional licensed in the state of Idaho. The statement of traffic generation shall include:

a. A statement of anticipated average trips per day;

b. A statement of anticipated peak-hour trips.

Within fifteen (15) days of submittal of the statement of anticipated traffic generation, the city engineer shall determine if a traffic impact analysis meeting city of Lewiston standards will be required. Implementation of the recommendations of a traffic impact analysis shall be the responsibility of the applicant/developer, unless otherwise determined by the city manager.

(10) Signage for individual businesses shall meet the requirements of Chapter 30 of this code.

a. The number of freestanding signs, as defined in Chapter 30 of this code, shall be limited to one (1) per two hundred (200) linear feet of Bryden Avenue frontage;

b. Maximum sign height for such freestanding signs shall not exceed thirty (30) feet.

(b) Planning Area B.

(1) Structures: Residential building facades, excluding the facades of accessory structures, fronting local residential and residential collector streets shall have a minimum fifteen (15) percent window area on the street side of the building.

(2) All roofs shall be hip or gable with a minimum 3:12 pitch.

(3) Roofs shall include eaves a minimum eighteen (18) inches in length measured from the intersecting wall.

(4) All required off-street parking shall be paved with an asphalted material acceptable to the city engineer.

(5) Required off-street parking for multifamily dwellings shall meet the parking lot requirements of sections 37-151 to 37-155. (Ord. No. 4372, § 1, 4-11-05; Ord. No. 4462, § 1, 12-11-06; Ord. No. 4692, § 13, 10-30-17)

Sec. 37-93.7. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4670, § 2, adopted October 24, 2016, repealed § 37-93.7, pertaining to notification of construction or major remodeling in the heavy industrial zone, which derived from Ord. No. 4372, § 1, adopted April 11, 2005.

Sec. 37-93.8. Access, streetscape, and sidewalks.
(a) Planning Area A.

(1) Access to/from Bryden Avenue shall be limited to:

a. One (1) access per one hundred (100) linear feet of curb as measured from the edge of right-of-way at the intersection of Bryden Avenue and streets designated as arterials or residential collectors;

b. Or, where access to a property from Bryden Avenue would be eliminated by subsection (a)(1)(a) of this section, a single access shall be allowed to the property no more than twenty-six (26) feet in width.

(2) Access driveways to a single parcel to/from Bryden Avenue may not exceed twenty-six (26) feet in width.

(3) Access driveways to multiple parcels to/from Bryden Avenue may not exceed thirty (30) feet in width.

(4) No vehicle access from/to Bryden Drive or Linden Drive shall be allowed, except where required for emergency vehicles.

(5) Planter strips a minimum of five (5) feet wide shall be incorporated into the right-of-way of Bryden Avenue and separate the sidewalk from the street, unless otherwise determined by the city manager.

(6) Planter strips shall contain one (1) street tree every thirty-five (35) feet. Street tree species shall be limited to:

a. Frontier elm (Ulmus frontier);

b. Littleleaf linden (Tilia cordata);

c. “Green vase” zelkova (Zelkova serrata);

d. Other species approved by the community development director in consultation with the urban forester.

(7) Sidewalks shall be constructed to standards published as City of Lewiston Standard Drawing D-4A (Residential Collector), Option 1 or Option 2, as determined by the public works director or his/her designee. Option 1 will be utilized unless existing sidewalk placement makes Option 1 unsafe or impractical.

(b) Planning Area B.

(1) No commercial access to local residential or residential collector streets shall be allowed across property with an established residential use.

(2) At the time of new construction or major remodeling, sidewalk and curbing shall be installed along all rights-of-way abutting the subject property or properties. (Ord. No. 4372, § 1, 4-11-05; Ord. No. 4522, § 1, 11-24-08)

PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONE PUD3

Sec. 37-94. Planned Unit Development (PUD) Zone.
(a) Purpose:

(1) To allow a planned and coordinated mix of land uses which are compatible and harmonious, but heretofore not permitted under conventional zoning procedures;

(2) To encourage a more creative and efficient utilization of land, a concentration of open space in more usable areas, and a preservation of the natural resources of the site;

(3) To allow a variety in the types of environment available to the people of Lewiston;

(4) To provide the means for greater creativity and flexibility in environmental design than is provided under the strict application of the zoning and subdivision ordinances, while at the same time preserving the health, safety, order, and general welfare of the city of Lewiston and its residents;

(5) To encourage the overall planning and designing of large land areas;

(6) To provide a better means of cooperation between the city of Lewiston and private developers in the urbanization of new lands and the renewal of existing deteriorated or underutilized areas. (Ord. No. 4270, § 3, 10-30-00)

Sec. 37-95. Designation.
All planned unit development districts shall be so designed on the official zoning maps and records of the city. (Ord. No. 4270, § 3, 10-30-00)

Sec. 37-96. Regulation.
(a) The tract of land for which a planned unit development project is proposed shall be a minimum of five (5) acres. Areas of less than five (5) acres may qualify as a planned unit development project if the applicant can show to the planning commission that the waiver of this requirement is in the public interest and that at least one (1) of the following conditions exist:

(1) Unusual physical features of the site or the surrounding neighborhood are such that development under the standard zoning provisions would not conserve the unique physical features of the site or would not allow functional or environmental compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood.

(2) The site is adjacent to an area which has been developed under the provisions of the planned unit development district and will contribute to the amenity and functionality of the neighborhood.

(b) Application for a planned unit development designation shall be made by the owner or owners of the property, except that an option holder may apply for the planned unit development designation provided the application is accompanied by a signed statement indicating no objection to this designation from the owner or owners.

(c) The proposed land uses are to be mutually harmonious, compatible with adjacent land uses, and in agreement with the adopted comprehensive plan.

(d) Variances from traditional zoning requirements are to be granted when they are consistent with the purposes of this section, provide greater functionality and higher amenity to the neighborhood, and are in the interest of the neighborhood and entire community.

(e) Private roadways shall be permitted within the project, provided they are approved by the city council and are installed to city specifications for similar public streets.

(f) Sidewalks shall be required within the project in accordance with city standards.

(g) During development the developer is to comply with all the requirements of the city regarding lighting, noise abatement, traffic control and regulation, maintaining order, and keeping the premises free from debris. After development the owner shall be responsible for the same. (Ord. No. 4270, § 3, 10-30-00)

Sec. 37-97. Administrative procedure.
(a) Approval is to be obtained for a planned unit development project (hereinafter referred to as PUD) in two (2) stages. First, the planning and zoning commission and city council are to review and give approval to a concept development plan for the total area of the proposed PUD district. Then approval is to be obtained for a detailed development plan by the community development department for the total area, or for sub-areas of the PUD district. If desired by the developer, the concept development plan and the detailed development plan can be approved concurrently.

(b) Concept development plan:

(1) The proponents of a PUD project shall submit a concept development plan to the planning department for review, comments, and recommendations. A fee shall be charged in accordance with section 37-188 of this code. An application shall be submitted, along with two (2) twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch prints and one (1) eight-and-one-half-inch by eleven-inch print of the plan, and shall be submitted at least twenty (20) working days prior to the planning and zoning commission meeting at which time it shall be considered.

(2) The concept development plan shall consist of the following (see required format):

a. A legal description of the area;

b. A map showing existing structures and features of the proposed site;

c. A map, drawn to scale, showing the proposed site and its proposed land uses, and the adjacent properties and their present urban or projected urban land uses;

d. Development densities, lot coverage, and building heights, if applicable, for each sub-area within the proposed site;

e. A map showing the major transportation routes within and serving the site;

f. Proposed open space and source of public utilities;

g. An outline for the anticipated schedule and sequence of development of the sub-areas for the total PUD district.

(3) In reviewing the plan, the city planner shall determine if the proposed development is consistent with the intended purposes of the PUD district, with the city comprehensive plan and is beneficial to the overall development of the city of Lewiston. The city planner is to submit the proposed plan and staff report findings to the city planning and zoning commission.

(4) The proponents of the PUD project will secure the approval of the PUD district designation (concept development plan) from the planning and zoning commission and the city council by the procedure outlined in section 37-184 of this code.

(5) Approval of a concept development plan of a PUD is an agreement between the city of Lewiston and the developer, or future developers, as to the land use pattern and intensity of development to occur within the project boundaries. Approval of the concept development plan will constitute a PUD zoning district with the full legal approval of the stated land use, but no building permit may be obtained from the community development department until submittal and approval of the detailed development plan. This agreement shall be in the form of an ordinance approved by the city council supplemented with a development agreement which will contain any conditions of approval and standards of development that may be set by the council.

(6) Upon final approval of the concept development plan, the developer shall submit the development in an electronic form acceptable to the city of Lewiston, one (1) twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch reproducible print and one (1) eleven-inch by seventeen-inch print of the approved plan to the community development department.

(7) Upon the final approval of the concept development plan, the developer may, at the developer’s option, construct roads and utilities and submit plats on all or part of the PUD, in accordance with the approved concept development plan. Building permits shall not be issued for buildings or other structures within the PUD until a detailed development plan has been submitted and approved.

(c) Detailed development plan:

(1) In order to secure a building permit within a PUD district for a proposed sub-area, the applicant will submit to the community development department a detailed development plan of any or all sub-areas. A fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall accompany all detailed development plan applications. The detailed development plan shall be submitted for approval to the community development department. An application shall be submitted along with two (2) twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch prints and one (1) eight-and-one-half-inch by eleven-inch print of the plan.

(2) The community development director shall consult with the appropriate officials and agencies of local government; a report will subsequently be prepared setting out whether or not the detailed development plan meets the requirements of the concept plan, city code, and the Lewiston comprehensive plan. The report shall be transmitted to the applicant either verbally or in writing within twenty (20) working days from the date it is received.

(3) The detailed development plan shall consist of the following:

a. A subdivision plat or replat (as appropriate) of the area under consideration. Fees for subdivisions shall be as set forth in section 32-7 of this code.

b. A map of the proposed site illustrating the following (see required format):

1. Size, location, and arrangement of proposed buildings;

2. Parking areas and streets (including cross-sections thereof), sidewalks, and other transportation facilities;

3. Landscaping, screening and storm water drainage pattern;

4. Common open spaces and recreational area;

5. Proposed public and private water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, lightning, and any other utilities.

c. A written statement outlining the ownership and maintenance responsibilities of the common areas, open spaces and recreational areas, and documentation of the same.

d. An illustration of the architectural style and appearance of the proposed building or buildings.

e. The proponents of the planned unit development (detailed development) project shall secure approval from the community development department.

f. Upon approval by the community development department, the detailed development plan is attached to, and is part of, the ordinance establishing the zoning designation of the land.

(4) Upon final approval of the detailed development plan, the developer shall submit in an electronic form acceptable to the city of Lewiston, one (1) twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch reproducible print and one (1) eleven-inch by seventeen-inch print of the approved plan to the community development department.

(d) Amendment to a planned unit development:

(1) Any material change in land use or increase in development density or intensity of ten (10) percent or more, in an approved concept development plan, will require a resubmission to the city planning and zoning commission and the city council by the procedures defined in section 37-184 of this code. The proposed change, if approved, will become an amendment to the approved plan.

(2) A fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall accompany the request.

(3) An application shall be submitted, along with two (2) twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch prints of the proposed amended plan and one (1) eight-and-one-half-inch by eleven-inch print of the plan, and shall be submitted at least twenty (20) working days prior to the planning and zoning commission meeting at which the same shall be considered.

(4) Upon final approval of the proposed amended concept development plan, the developer shall submit the revised development in an electronic form acceptable to the city of Lewiston, one (1) twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch reproducible print and one (1) eleven-inch by seventeen-inch print of the approved plan to the community development department.

(e) Amended detailed development plan:

(1) Changes in the approved detailed development plan involving rearrangement of structures; building size modifications; change in location of open spaces, signage, sidewalks, parking spaces, bikeways, access; setback requirements; impervious surface area; and landscaping may be authorized by the community development department when such special changes are consistent with the design intent of the approved detailed development plan.

(2) Changes involving the storm water drainage pattern, the locations or relocations of utilities, and construction or modifications of public works within the PUD may be authorized by the public works department.

(3) An application shall be submitted, along with two (2) twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch prints of the revised plan.

(4) Upon final approval of the proposed amended detailed development plan, the developer shall submit the detailed development plan in an electronic form acceptable to the city of Lewiston, one (1) twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch reproducible print and one (1) eleven-inch by seventeen-inch print of the approved plan to the community development department.

(f) Appeal process for detailed development plans: Any person aggrieved by any final decision of the community development department and/or the public works department denying any application permit or approval relating to a detailed development plan may initiate an appeal to the planning and zoning commission in conformance with section 37-185 of this code. (Ord. No. 4270, § 3, 10-30-00; Ord. No. 4389, § 1, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4531, § 11, 7-13-09)

AIRPORT ZONE A

Sec. 37-98. A Airport Zone.
(a) Purpose: To provide for uses, buildings, and structures in which airport or aviation related facilities may be installed and used, including taxiways and runways, commercial aviation, general aviation, terminal buildings, aircraft hangars, air navigation aids, related accessory uses and other uses, structures, and facilities as may be compatible with and useful to the airport. Development shall be in conformance with the adopted Airport Master Plan and Federal Aviation Administration regulations. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 51, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4497, § 1, 1-7-08)

Sec. 37-99. Uses permitted outright.
In an “A” Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when they are in conformance with the standards and requirements of this chapter and the adopted Airport Master Plan, and when they have received written authorization from the Lewiston city council and board of commissioners of Nez Perce County, Idaho, as owners of the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Airport.

(1) Commercial aviation uses;

(2) Hangars, public and private;

(3) Municipal terminal building;

(4) Navigation aids;

(5) Repealed by Ord. No. 4497;

(6) Taxiways, runways and aprons;

(7) Any conditional use hereafter listed when located within the terminal building;

(8) Agricultural uses;

(9) Recreational or cultural facility associated with aviation uses;

(10) Recreational vehicle park, subject to the standards of Chapter 23, Article II of this code;

(11) Public use;

(12) Air freight carriers;

(13) Mini-storage units;

(14) Light industrial uses, consisting of manufacturing, fabricating, processing, repairing, packing or storage; including industrial park uses and warehousing consistent with light industrial uses;

(15) Eating and drinking establishment;

(16) Semi-public use;

(17) Fueling center, including convenience retail sales not to exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet of retail sales area. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 52, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4497, § 1, 1-7-08; Ord. No. 4698, § 18, 10-30-17)

Sec. 37-100. Conditional uses permitted.
In an “A” Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when they are in conformance with the standards and requirements of this chapter and the adopted Airport Master Plan, and when they have received written authorization of the Lewiston city council and board of commissioners of Nez Perce County, Idaho, as owners of the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Airport prior to the submittal of a request for a conditional use permit:

(1) Business or professional offices;

(2) Barber or beauty shop;

(3) Repealed by Ord. No. 4497;

(4) Repealed by Ord. No. 4497;

(5) Motel or hotel;

(6) Retail store not associated with a fueling center. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 53, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4497, § 1, 1-7-08)

Sec. 37-101. Height of buildings.
In an “A” Zone, no building shall exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet or three (3) stories, except a flight control building. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4497, § 1, 1-7-08)

Sec. 37-102. Airport specific standards.
In an “A” Zone, airports may adopt and enforce design standards separate from and not listed within this chapter. All construction must meet the design standards adopted by the governing body of the airport in addition to the standards listed here. Where design or site standards of the airport may conflict with standards of this chapter, the standards of the airport shall supersede those of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4497, § 1, 1-7-08)

Sec. 37-103. Yards.
(a) In an “A” Zone, a yard abutting a residential zone shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet.

(b) In an “A” Zone, a yard abutting a commercial zone, or a legally established commercial use in a residential zone, shall be fifteen (15) feet, all of which shall be landscaped in accordance with a landscape plan approved by the community development director. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 11-22-99; Ord. No. 4497, § 1, 1-7-08)

Sec. 37-104. Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this article:

Airport shall mean the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Airport.

Approach surface shall mean the area that extends for ten thousand (10,000) feet of the east end of Runway 26 at the airport as depicted on the official Approach and Clear Zone Plan Map. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4497, § 1, 1-7-08)

Sec. 37-105. Adoption of official map.
There is hereby adopted the official Approach and Clear Zone Plan Map for the city of Lewiston. Originals of said map shall be kept on file in the office of the airport manager for the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Airport. Said maps shall accurately depict for public inspection the height limitations adopted hereafter. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4497, § 1, 1-7-08)

Sec. 37-106. Reserved.
Editor’s Note – Ord. No. 4497, § 1, adopted Jan. 7, 2008, repealed § 37-106, relating to approach surface height limitations, which derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2, adopted Aug. 15, 1994.

Sec. 37-107. Transitional surface and horizontal surface height limitation.
No manmade structure or object or natural growth shall exceed one hundred (100) feet in height, measured at the location of the structure or object, in the transitional surface and horizontal surface areas of the airport as depicted by the official Approach and Clear Zone Plan Map. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4497, § 1, 1-7-08)

Sec. 37-108. Violations.
(a) Manmade structures that violate the provisions of this article are declared a public nuisance and constitute a misdemeanor as provided in section 37-193 of this chapter.

(b) Objects of natural growth that violate the provisions of this article are declared a public nuisance and constitute a misdemeanor as provided in section 37-193 of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4497, § 1, 1-7-08)

PORT ZONE P

Sec. 37-109. Port Zone P.
(a) Purpose: To provide zoning for uses, buildings and structures in which port facilities may be installed and used for port or port oriented development. Port facilities may include the following in accordance with the comprehensive plan for port development as adopted or amended by the Port of Lewiston, Idaho: Piers, wharves, cranes, derricks, railroad spurs, aprons, transit storage, dolphins, and other uses, buildings, and structures which may be compatible with and useful to the development of the port. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 54, 10-25-99)

Sec. 37-110. Uses permitted outright.
In the “P” Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when they are in conformance with the standards and requirements of Article IV of this chapter:

(1) Auto, manufactured home, recreational, heavy equipment sales and service;

(2) Boat sales and marina;

(3) Chemical and fertilizer storage, blending and distribution facilities;

(4) Commercial entertainment facility – indoor;

(5) Commercial marina;

(6) Commercial or industrial laundry;

(7) Concrete or concrete products manufacturing;

(8) Eating and drinking establishments;

(9) General contracting and storage yard;

(10) Grain storage;

(11) Greenhouses and nursery;

(12) Manufacturing, fabricating, processing, repairing, packing or storage except a use specifically listed as a conditional use in the M-2 Zone;

(13) Mineral storage;

(14) Mini-storage;

(15) Offices;

(16) Petroleum products storage and distributing facilities;

(17) Port facilities as described above;

(18) Public uses which uses are similar to other permitted uses in this zone;

(19) Recycling center;

(20) Retail sales and service;

(21) Service station;

(22) Solid waste handling facilities;

(23) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(24) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(25) Tire recapping;

(26) Transportation facilities;

(27) Truck terminal;

(28) Veterinary clinic or kennel;

(29) Warehouse;

(30) Wholesale distribution;

(31) Wood processing plant;

(32) Wood products storage. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4160, § 1, 6-3-96; Ord. No. 4249, § 55, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 4, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4387, § 5, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4742, § 2U, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-111. Conditional uses permitted.
In a “P” Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the provisions of Articles IV and IX:

(1) Other public use;

(2) Semi-public use;

(3) Scrap metal storage;

(4) Asphalt plant;

(5) Meat packing plant excepting stockyards;

(6) Cement manufacturing;

(7) Chemical storage and manufacturing, including farm fertilizers;

(8) Rendering plant;

(9) Heliport;

(10) Quarrying;

(11) Other manufacturing uses which are not permitted outright but which are consistent with the purpose of the port zone and are not detrimental to any of the outright permitted uses or other existing conditional uses. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4160, § 2, 6-3-96; Ord. No. 4249, § 56, 10-25-99)

Sec. 37-112. Limitations on use.
In a “P” Zone, the following limitations on use shall apply:

(1) Any use which creates a nuisance because of noise, smoke, odor, dust or gas is prohibited.

(2) Materials shall be stored and grounds maintained in a manner which will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or otherwise create a health hazard.

(3) All service, processing, and storage on property abutting or facing a residential zone or a through highway shall be wholly within an enclosed building or screened from view from the residential zone or a through highway by a permanently maintained, sight obscuring fence at least eight (8) feet high.

(4) Access from a public street to properties in the “P” Zone shall be so located as to minimize traffic congestion and avoid directing industrial traffic onto residential streets.

(5) Building entrances or other openings adjacent to a residential or commercial zone shall be prohibited if they cause glare, excessive noise, or otherwise adversely affect the use or value of the adjacent property.

(6) Effluent from permitted uses cannot be returned to the rivers without prior treatment or processing to insure compliance with existing city ordinances and state and federal pollution control standards. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

BILLBOARD OVERLAY ZONE BB

Sec. 37-113. BB Billboard Overlay Zone.
(a) Purpose: The purpose of the Billboard Overlay Zone is to permit the construction and maintenance of billboards in limited areas within the city according to specified standards. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-114. Standards.
(a) Any billboard constructed hereunder shall be located adjacent to a roadway designated as part of the Billboard Overlay Zone according to the official zoning map of the city of Lewiston and in a location approved by the planning and zoning commission.

(b) A conditional use permit shall be required to construct a billboard. An applicant shall apply for a conditional use permit as provided in Article IX of this chapter. In determining whether to grant or deny a conditional use permit for a billboard, the planning and zoning commission shall consider compliance with the standards contained in Chapter 30 of this code; whether the billboard would substantially block the view of any existing sign from the public right-of-way; and, if the billboard is an illuminated sign, whether the billboard complies with industry practices for eliminating or reducing up-lighting and light trespass. For purposes of this section, billboard, sign, public right-of-way, and illuminated sign shall have the same meanings as defined in Chapter 30 of this code.

(c) The construction, modification, repair, and demolition of a billboard shall comply with the provisions and procedures set forth in Chapter 30 of this code. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4692, § 14, 10-30-17)

CONTRACT ZONING AGREEMENTS

Sec. 37-115. Contract zoning agreements.
(a) Purpose: Contract zoning agreements are development agreements which are a discretionary tool to be used by the city. Contract zoning agreements would allow a specific project with a specific use and/or development scheme on real property in an area which may not be appropriate for all uses allowed or conditional uses in the requested zone. Approval of the contract zoning agreement, pursuant to this article, would permit the zoning or rezoning requested but such zoning or rezoning will be conditioned on the performance of the provisions of the terms of the contract zoning agreement. No contract zoning agreement shall be enacted which would allow permitted

uses or conditional uses for the zone which would not otherwise be allowed in that zone. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-116. Implementation.
(a) A contract zoning agreement may be permitted or required at the discretion of the planning and zoning commission and the city council for the zoning or rezoning of a particular parcel of real property or collection of parcels of real property through the following methods:

(1) Application of the owner or developer of the real property;

(2) Upon recommendation of the community development director at any stage during the zoning or rezoning process, whether or not the developer made application for a contract zoning agreement;

(3) By decision of the commission or the council at any stage during the zoning or rezoning process, whether or not the owner or developer made application for a contract zoning agreement or it was recommended by the community development director.

(b) The commission or the council may require a contract zoning agreement be executed to allow a particular project to proceed, if, in the opinion of the commission or council:

(1) The proposed land use zone would allow undesirable land uses or development schemes for the character of the real property in question or the surrounding neighborhood; and

(2) The specific project and/or use contemplated by the application before the commission or council has value to the community and is an appropriate project or use for the real property.

(c) In the event, during the zoning or rezoning process, the commission determines that a contract zoning agreement should be entered into, the commission shall retain jurisdiction of the zoning or rezoning process, defer consideration of the application before the commission and set a time limit for the submittal of the contract zoning agreement.

(d) In the event, during the zoning or rezoning process, the council determines that a contract zoning agreement should be entered into, the council shall remand the matter back to the commission for submittal of the contract zoning agreement, set time limits for the submission of the contract zoning agreement and give whatever direction to the commission as it deems appropriate.

(e) All time limits set pursuant to this section may be extended upon an affirmative vote of the commission or council. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-117. Form of agreement.
(a) Agreement between city and developer. Prior to the approval by the city council of the contract zoning agreement, the developer or owner shall execute an agreement between himself and the city which shall be reviewed and approved for form by the city attorney prior to action by the city council and shall address the following:

(1) Identification of uses to be allowed under the contract zoning agreement;

(2) Identification of development standards that shall be required under the contract zoning agreement;

(3) Planned implementation of improvements and planned construction schedule.

(b) Adherence to approved plans. The improvements and standards approved in the contract zoning agreement shall be constructed as approved unless an amendment to the agreement is approved by the city council;

(c) Disposition of abandoned or uncompleted work. The agreement shall identify means by which the project may be completed if abandoned or uncompleted under the original agreement.

(d) Any other matter mutually agreeable to the council and developer.

(e) A provision that failure to comply with the terms of the contract zoning agreement shall be deemed a consent of the owner and developers to rezone the real property to the initial zone existing immediately prior to the execution of the contract zoning agreement or to any zone recommended by the commission and approved by the council to reflect changes that may have occurred in the land uses since the approval of the contract zoning agreement. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-118. Approval of contract zoning agreements.
(a) Contract zoning agreements may be approved at the sole discretion of the city council following a public hearing on the related zone change application.

(b) After the public hearing the commission or the council may add conditions and terms to the contract zoning agreement.

(c) After approval of the contract zoning agreement by the council, it shall not become effective until adoption and publication of the zone change ordinance and execution of the contract zoning agreement by all parties.

(d) Following approval and execution of the contract zoning agreement, the city clerk shall cause said contract zoning agreement to be recorded in the office of the Nez Perce County Recorder. The contract zoning agreement and all conditions, terms, duties and obligations included in said agreement shall be an encumbrance on the real property. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-119. Duty to comply with contract zoning agreement.
An owner, co-owner, developer, agent of owner or developer, assignee of owner or developer and all subsequent owners or developers of the real property that is encumbered by the contract zoning agreement shall comply with all conditions, terms, obligations, and duties contained in said agreement. Failure to comply shall subject the real property to the provisions of section 37-121 and section 37-122 of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-120. Modification of contract zoning agreement.
Contract zoning agreement may be modified in the sole discretion of the city council upon proper notification of the owner or developer and after public hearing and notice as required by section 37-184(b)(2) of this chapter. A modification shall not allow a use that is not an outright use or conditional use in the existing land use zone of the real property as set forth in the Contract Zoning Agreement. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-121. Termination of contract zoning agreement.
(a) Upon a preliminary finding by the city council of noncompliance of a contract zoning agreement by the owner or developer of real property encumbered by said agreement, the council shall establish a date for a public hearing on said noncompliance. Notice of said public hearing shall be given pursuant to section 37-184(b)(2) of this chapter.

(b) After the public hearing the city council, in its sole discretion, shall adopt, by majority vote, a written decision with appropriate findings. The decision of the council shall:

(1) Find the owner and/or developer is in compliance with the contract zoning agreement and find that said agreement shall continue in force, or

(2) Find the owner and/or developer is in noncompliance and direct the owner and/or developer to make a proper application to modify the contract zoning agreement as provided in section 37-120 of this chapter, or

(3) Find the owner and/or developer is in noncompliance and terminate the contract zoning agreement.

(c) In the event the city council terminates the contract zoning agreement, the city council shall adopt an ordinance reverting the real property that was encumbered by the contract zoning agreement to the initial land use zone applicable to the real property prior to the adoption of the contract zoning agreement. All uses which are not consistent with said initial zone shall cease and shall not be considered a pre-existing use. The owner or developer may apply for a conditional use permit for uses which are allowable conditional uses in said initial zone. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-122. Enforcement.
Contract zoning agreements may be enforced by the city through any means deemed to be appropriate, including, but not limited to, specific enforcement, injunctive relief, monetary damages, criminal penalties and/or termination as provided in section 37-121 of this chapter. Enforcement options available to the city shall not be considered exclusive. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

ARTICLE IV. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
Sec. 37-123. Numerical standard deemed met.
Any numerical standard contained in this chapter shall be deemed met when within one (1) percent of the numerical standard; however, this provision shall not be applied in conjunction with the rounding of fractions specified in section 37-123.1 of this code. (Ord. No. 4676, § 25, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-123.1. Fractions of a dwelling unit or parking space.
In calculating the allowable number of dwelling units on a lot based on lot area, and in calculating the required number of parking spaces based on land use, any fraction of a dwelling unit or parking space that is sixty-six-one-hundredths (0.66) or less shall be rounded down to the next whole number, and any fraction of a dwelling unit in excess of sixty-six-one-hundredths (0.66) shall be rounded up to the next whole number. (Ord. No. 4676, § 25, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-123.2. Lot access.
Every lot shall abut an improved public street right-of-way, other than an alley, to an improvement standard accepted by the city engineer, for at least the width of:

(1) The minimum allowed width of a lot in the zoning district; or

(2) The minimum allowed width for access provided for in standards for flag lots, section 37-124 of this code; or

(3) If the lot is in a zoning district that has no minimum lot width and is not a flag lot, then twenty (20) feet; or

(4) In the case of a private street approved by the city council through a subdivision plat, each lot shall hold a recorded access easement and maintenance agreement for that lot’s share of access and maintenance of the street. Alternately, access and maintenance may be shared by each lot in the subdivision through homeowner association ownership of the street. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4498, § 1, 1-7-08; Ord. No. 4676, § 26, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-124. Standards for flag lot development.
(a) Purpose: Flag lots are intended to allow limited development of deep interior lots that may otherwise be underused. They shall be permitted only when the shape of the parcel being developed precludes the use of private or public streets.

(b) No turns or corners shall be allowed in the flagpole connecting the flag lot to the public right-of-way.

(c) No more than one flag lot may be created unless the property is being subdivided by use of the preliminary and final plat process as identified in Chapter 32 of this code.

(d) Minimum width requirements and construction standards for flagpoles shall be:

(1) Where a single flagpole is created that does not abut any other flagpole:

a. The minimum flagpole width for each flag lot shall be twenty (20) feet in width;

b. The flagpole shall be constructed as an approved fire department access road where the front lot line of a flag lot is in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the edge of the public right-of-way; or

c. The flagpole may be constructed of gravel or similar durable surfacing if an approved fire department access road is not required.

(2) Where two (2) flagpoles are created that abut each other:

a. The minimum flagpole width for each flag lot shall be fifteen (15) feet;

b. A shared driveway a minimum twenty (20) feet in width shall be designed and constructed to specifications of the approved driveway design of the Lewiston Engineering Standard Drawings as directed by the city engineer;

c. A single shared access to the public right-of-way shall be constructed as provided in Lewiston Engineering Standard Drawings #ST-5, or as directed by the city engineer.

(3) Where more than two (2) flagpoles are created that abut each other:

a. The minimum flagpole width for each flag lot shall be ten (10) feet;

b. A shared driveway a minimum twenty (20) feet in width shall be designed and constructed to specifications of the approved driveway design of the Lewiston Engineering Standard Drawings as directed by the city engineer;

c. A single shared access to the public right-of-way shall be constructed as provided in Lewiston Engineering Standard Drawings as directed by the city engineer.

(4) Where shared driveways are required or provided, mutual maintenance agreements and nonexclusive access easements shall be submitted for review at the time of submittal of a final plat creating more than one (1) flag lot, and incorporated into deeds for each lot.

(5) Approved fire department access roads may be shared by abutting properties using a shared driveway.

(6) No more than three (3) flagpoles shall be abutting.

(7) No more than six (6) dwelling units may be accessed by a shared driveway providing access over abutting flagpoles.

(e) The minimum area, width, and depth for a flag lot shall be:

(1) Ten thousand (10,000) square feet, unless a greater area is required by the zone, and fully contained within the flag lot and shall not include any portion of the flagpole connecting the flag lot to the public right-of-way; or

(2) The minimum lot size allowed in the zone and fully contained within the flag lot and not included in any portion of the flagpole where an approved fire department access road is shared by abutting properties.

(3) Minimum lot width shall be eighty (80) feet.

(4) Minimum lot depth shall be eighty (80) feet.

(f) Lot line, front, shall be determined by the owner at the time of application for building permits for the primary residential structure. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4486, § 2, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 4531, § 12, 7-13-09)

Sec. 37-124.1. Standards for multifamily development.
Where multifamily dwellings are allowed as a use permitted outright or as a conditional use, the following standards shall apply:

(1) Parking must be paved and meet all requirements of Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading.

(2) Where more than one (1) detached single-family dwelling exists on one (1) lot, the minimum required lot area shall be the minimum required by the zoning district multiplied by the number of detached single-family dwellings. (Ord. No. 4499, § 3, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 4676, § 27, 11-28-16)

Sec. 37-125. Homeless shelter standards.
Where homeless shelters are allowed as a use permitted outright or as a conditional use, the following standards shall apply, unless otherwise amended by a conditional use permit or variance approval:

(1) Location shall be within one quarter (0.25) mile of a public transportation route, as measured along the shortest route on the city street system, between the public transportation route and the closest point of the subject property;

(2) Parking shall be provided as set forth in Article VII of this chapter;

(3) Outdoor open space consisting of an area at least sixteen (16) square feet for each two (2) beds shall be provided;

(4) Notwithstanding section 37-153 of this code, a six (6) foot tall minimum sight obscuring fence or equivalent landscape screening shall be provided along all neighboring property lines, excluding a street or alley right-of-way;

(5) Outdoor trash cans or dumpsters shall be screened from view from any street, sidewalk, or neighboring property;

(6) Fixed night lighting sufficient to provide illumination and clear visibility of all outdoor areas during the hours between thirty (30) minutes after sunset and thirty (30) minutes before sunrise shall be provided in a manner that does not glare or trespass onto adjoining property;

(7) Indoor client intake waiting area adequately sized to accommodate waiting clients shall be provided. (Ord. No. 4689, § 10, 4-24-17)

Sec. 37-126. Sales from mobile carts.
Sales may be made from a portable cart meeting the following standards and conditions from property zoned C-3, C-4, C-5 or C-6. Such uses in the C-1 and C-2 Zones shall require the approval of a conditional use permit by the planning and zoning commission:

(1) Only one cart may be placed on any zone lot;

(2) No cart shall be placed in any required setback, nor may a cart be placed in a parking lot when it would replace a required parking space;

(3) No permanent attachment to the ground shall be allowed. Any screening shall be accomplished with portable, removable screens, awnings or umbrellas which shall be removed when the sales cart is closed for business;

(4) The cart and all associated items including but not limited to tables, chairs, trash disposal and similar items, shall be wholly located on private property and shall not be allowed to intrude into the public right-of-way;

(5) No cart shall exceed eight (8) feet in length or four (4) feet in depth;

(6) Trash disposal shall be provided within five (5) feet of the cart and shall be kept neat and sanitary at all times;

(7) One sign may be placed on the face of the cart identifying the business name and goods offered. No portable or other permanent sign is allowed;

(8) All carts shall meet the requirements of the North Central Health District office;

(9) During the hours the cart is not in operation, the cart and all associated items including but not limited to tables, chairs, trash disposal and similar items shall be stored in an enclosed, locked area;

(10) The applicant shall provide written evidence of the right to place the mobile cart on private property from the owner or manager of the property. This evidence may be in the form of a lease or other agreement and shall include the terms of the placement; it shall also include provisions for the use of sanitary facilities by the operator of the mobile cart and the patrons of the cart;

(11) No cart shall be placed without the approval of the community development director upon receipt of a site plan addressing items 1 through 10 above and upon receipt of a valid business license from the city of Lewiston. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-126.1. Temporary vendors – Standards for issuance of conditional use permit.
The planning and zoning commission may issue a conditional use permit for the operation of the temporary vendor business on the following standards:

(1) Paved parking with controlled access onto public streets approved by the city’s public works department;

(2) No outside, overnight storage of merchandise, equipment or other items;

(3) No spillover of security lighting onto nearby residential properties;

(4) Provision of restroom facilities for employees;

(5) Compliance with all adopted codes regulating electrical, plumbing and mechanical features;

(6) Compliance with International Fire Code as determined by the fire marshal;

(7) Compliance with appropriate setbacks and lot coverage requirements;

(8) Compliance with other conditions established by the planning and zoning commission or city council to protect health, safety and welfare. (Ord. No. 4346, § 2, 11-17-03)

Sec. 37-127. Reserved.
Editor’s Note – Ord. No. 4692, § 15, adopted October 30, 2017, repealed § 37-127, relating to seasonal sale of Christmas trees, derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94.

Sec. 37-128. Use of commercial coaches as offices in manufacturing and port zones.
Commercial coaches may be used as business offices in manufacturing and port zones subject to the following conditions:

(1) The manufactured unit shall not be used as a residence;

(2) The manufactured home shall be skirted in accordance with section 23-22(d) of this code; skirting shall be kept in reasonable repair;

(3) The manufactured unit shall be placed at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines;

(4) Parking lots and travelways serving the unit shall be in accordance with provisions of Article VII of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-128.1. Temporary use of manufactured homes for construction offices.
Manufactured homes may be allowed as temporary offices at construction sites in the city of Lewiston upon approval by the community development director provided all of the following provisions are met:

(1) The manufactured unit shall not be used as a residence;

(2) The manufactured unit shall be a commercial coach as defined by the State of Idaho and bear the appropriate insignia of the approval of the Department of Labor and Industrial Services;

(3) The manufactured unit shall be skirted in accordance with section 23-22(d) of this code if the use is intended to last more than six months and shall be kept in a reasonable state of repair;

(4) The manufactured unit shall be placed at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines;

(5) Parking lots and all travelways serving the temporary office shall be gravelled and a dust palliative applied by June 1 of each year. Such dust palliative shall be reapplied as necessary to reduce dust generation. Parking lots and driveways shall be kept graded for proper drainage, and shall not have more than one entrance or exit to a public right-of-way unless approved in writing by the city engineer. No entrance shall exceed twenty (20) feet in width without the written approval of the city engineer;

(6) The manufactured unit may remain on the site for the duration of the construction for which the permit is issued. The unit must be removed prior to the issuance of a permit for occupancy;

(7) The use of semi-truck trailers and similar mobile units may be used for the purposes of tool and equipment storage. Such units must be placed at least twenty (20) feet from any property line and may be in place for the duration of the construction for which the permit was issued. Such units may not be used for construction offices or living quarters. Such units must be removed from the site prior to the issuance of a permit for occupancy of the project for which the building permit was issued;

(8) Other conditions that may reasonably be established by the community development director in order to maintain the character of the surrounding neighborhood area. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-129. Use of prefabricated containerized transport units as accessory buildings or storage units.
(a) The use of prefabricated containerized transport containers or dry freight containers as accessory buildings or storage buildings shall not be permitted in the city of Lewiston on property with Residential (R), Local Commercial (C-1), Tourist Commercial (C-2) or Central Commercial (C-5) Zones. Said units may be placed on other property zoned commercially (C-3, C-4 or C-6) on a temporary basis subject to the following limitations:

(1) The unit may not be placed on the property for longer than a period of ninety (90) days in any calendar year;

(2) The unit shall not be located in any setback required in the zone nor may it be placed in any clear vision area or required landscaping area;

(3) The unit shall not be located so as to reduce the number of parking or loading spaces below the minimum required for the use of the property;

(4) Any such unit placed with ancillary compressors, chillers or other similar devices which produce audible noise shall be so placed and located so that the noise generated by said device shall be inaudible from any adjacent residential uses.

Said temporary uses shall be subject to the approval of the community development department upon receipt of a site plan clearly showing the following information:

(1) The location of the existing buildings, structures, parking and loading areas, required landscaping and setbacks, signs and other physical features of the site;

(2) Use of adjacent properties;

(3) Size and location of the unit proposed to be located on the site and the proposed use of said unit;

(4) Other information as may be reasonably required by the community development department in order to properly evaluate the request.

A building permit shall be required for the placement of these structures; said permit shall be in conformance with the requirements for said permits under the Lewiston City Code.

(b) Said units may be placed on any property zoned Port (P), Airport (A) or Manufacturing (M) subject to the receipt of a building permit and conformance to the setback requirements of the zone in which the unit is to be located.

This prohibition does not preclude their use in conjunction with bona-fide shipping and transport activities. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-130. Parking and temporary use of recreational vehicles on residential property.
(a) The outside parking of unoccupied recreational vehicles are permitted on property with an established residential use, regardless of zone. Said parking shall be within the side, rear, or front yard and shall not extend into the public right-of-way nor obstruct the clear vision area. An unoccupied recreational vehicle shall not be used for living quarters or business while parked or stored.

(b) Reserved.

(c) A recreational vehicle may be used as temporary accommodation to allow the owner to construct a permanent residence or remodel an existing residence on the lot. The use of the recreational vehicle shall be authorized with the written approval of the community development department upon receipt of an approved site plan and construction schedule and such use shall not exceed one (1) year in duration, unless authorized by the department. The unit shall comply with all yard setbacks appropriate to the zone in which it is to be placed. The unit shall not be parked on nor in any way obstruct any public right-of-way. The unit may be placed on the site only upon receipt of a valid building permit and must be removed from occupancy within seven (7) days of the receipt of a certificate of occupancy. No person other than the owner of the property shall occupy the temporary unit and the unit shall not be used as a temporary rental unit by the property owner.

(d) The use of one (1) recreational vehicle as temporary accommodation for guests may be allowed on property with an established residential use, regardless of zone. The unit shall not be parked on nor in any way obstruct any public right-of-way, shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any other structure and no stay shall exceed fourteen (14) days at any one (1) time or forty-five (45) days in any calendar year. The unit shall not be skirted and the discharge of any gray water or sewage onto the ground is prohibited.

(e) The use of one (1) recreational vehicle as temporary accommodation for a period greater than allowed in subsection (d) of this section may be allowed at the discretion of the community development director for the purposes of a medical hardship. The hardship shall be a result of an illness or medical emergency, with proof of said hardship submitted to the community development director. The director shall approve the hardship for a period not to exceed one (1) year. The standards for placement of the recreational vehicle shall be the same as described in subsection (d) of this section. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4172, § 1, 11-18-96; Ord. No. 4198, § 1, 6-2-97; Ord. No. 4473, § 2, 7-9-07)

Sec. 37-130.1. Lighting.
At the time of new construction or major remodel as defined in section 32-2 of this code, or at the time of installation of exterior lighting, such lighting shall be screened, shielded, designed, placed, and/or located so as not to cause nuisance glare or trespass onto neighboring properties. (Ord. No. 4434, § 1, 2-13-06; Ord. No. 4531, § 13, 7-13-09)

Sec. 37-131. General provisions, accessory buildings.
Purpose and applicability. To establish standards for accessory buildings. These provisions shall not apply to garden or gateway features, such as trellises, pergolas, arbors, or other features, which are erected for no purpose other than decoration or to make a visual statement and that do so using posts, poles, columns, lattice, fencing, or shade cloth, and do not include a bona fide roof and walls. These provisions shall apply to all accessory buildings, unless otherwise specified herein, by the underlying zoning district, or otherwise by a conditional use permit. These provisions shall not apply to buildings accessory to a commercial use or other nonresidential use, unless located in a residential zoning district. These provisions shall not apply to buildings exempt from building permits, such as agricultural buildings, and that are documented as such, except that such buildings shall meet the required minimum front and street side yard setbacks of the applicable zoning district and shall maintain five-foot minimum side and rear yard setbacks.

(1) Regardless of zone and in accordance with the standards set forth in this section, accessory buildings are permitted on any lot: (a) with an established permitted use, or (b) for which a building permit has been issued and such building is under construction.

(2) An accessory building shall not contain a dwelling unit or business, unless otherwise explicitly permitted by the particular zoning district or as a permitted home occupation. If any portion of an accessory building is converted into a dwelling unit or business, said conversion shall be considered a change of use, subject to the applicable requirements of the zoning, building, fire and other codes administered by the city.

(3) Accessory buildings that are attached to the primary building or that otherwise do not comply with the definition of detached building, as set forth in section 37-3 of this code, shall comply with the minimum setbacks and minimum building height required for the primary building according to the applicable zoning district.

(4) Standards for the placement of buildings detached from and accessory to a single-family or two-family dwelling upon a lot are as follows:

a. The footprint shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) percent of the footprint of the dwelling, including any attached garage, carport, and patio cover; or seventy (70) percent of the habitable floor area of the dwelling; or one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, whichever is greater, but in no case shall exceed two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet.

b. Such buildings shall comply, in combination with all the buildings on the lot, with the maximum allowable lot coverage of the applicable zoning district.

c. Those that do not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet may be located in the front, side, or rear yard with a minimum setback of three (3) feet from any side or rear lot line. The front yard and street side yard setbacks shall be required by the zoning district.

d. Those that are greater than one hundred twenty (120) square feet and less than one thousand one (1,001) square feet may be located in the front, side, or rear yard. The front yard and street side yard setbacks shall be those required by the applicable zoning district. The minimum side and rear yard setbacks shall be five (5) feet. However, the required five-foot minimum side and rear yard setbacks shall increase by a ratio of one (1) foot to one (1) foot, or fraction thereof, when the building height exceeds sixteen (16) feet.

e. Those that are greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet and less than two thousand one (2,001) square feet shall be located only in the side or rear yards. No such building shall be located closer to the street than the street-facing wall of the dwelling, unless it is on a flag lot or on the street side of a corner lot and complies with the minimum street side yard setback of the applicable zoning district. The minimum side and rear yard setbacks shall be five (5) feet or five (5) feet increased by a ratio of one (1) foot to one (1) foot, or fraction thereof, for any building height in excess of sixteen (16) feet; however, if the roof line of the building facing the property line exceeds thirty-two (32) feet in length, then the minimum setback from that property line shall be ten (10) feet, regardless of the building height.

f. Those that are greater than two thousand (2,000) square feet shall be located in the rear yard only. No such building shall be located closer to a street than the rear wall of the dwelling, unless it is on a flag lot or the street side of a corner lot and complies with the minimum street side yard setback of the applicable zoning district. The minimum side and rear yard setbacks shall be twenty (20) feet.

g. An accessory building shall not contain a second story floor level, unless constructed to comply with main building setbacks and except for an accessory apartment above a garage in the Normal Hill North or Normal Hill South zoning district and subject to the standards thereof. Mezzanines open to the floor below and not exceeding thirty-three (33) percent of the floor area below shall not count as a second story floor level.

h. If on a through lot, an accessory building shall conform to the front yard setback required for the dwelling on both street rights-of-way.

(5) Standards for the placement of buildings detached from and accessory to a use other than a single-family or two-family dwelling shall be the same as required for the primary use building, according to the underlying zoning district. (Ord. No. 4197, § 2, 4-21-97; Ord. No. 4321, § 1, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4525, § 3, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 4531, § 13, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4672, § 2, 12-13-16)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4197, § 1, adopted April 21, 1997, repealed § 37-131, which derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2, adopted Aug. 15, 1994.

Sec. 37-131.1. Swimming pools.
Swimming pools may be located in the front, side, or rear yard with a minimum setback of five (5) feet from all property lines. (Ord. No. 4672, § 3, 12-13-16)

Sec. 37-131.2. Accessory apartments.
Only one (1) accessory apartment, detached or attached to a single-family dwelling, may be constructed on any residential lot that is at least five thousand (5,000) square feet and has only one (1) lawful single-family dwelling located on such lot, subject to the following requirements, except as otherwise provided for in the Normal Hill North and Normal Hill South Zoning Districts:

(1) An accessory apartment shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet or thirty (30) percent of the habitable floor area of the associated single-family dwelling, whichever is greater; provided, however, that an accessory apartment shall never exceed nine hundred (900) square feet;

(2) An accessory apartment shall not contain more than two (2) bedrooms;

(3) At least one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for an accessory apartment;

(4) An accessory apartment shall meet the minimum required front, interior side, and street side setbacks for the associated single-family dwelling;

(5) A detached accessory apartment shall not be located in front of or project beyond the front wall of the associated single-family dwelling;

(6) An accessory apartment shall maintain a minimum of ten (10) feet from the rear property line, or three (3) feet if abutting a rear alley;

(7) An accessory apartment shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height if such accessory apartment is a single story or twenty-eight (28) feet in height if such accessory apartment is a two-story; and

(8) An accessory apartment shall be owned by the same person who owns the single-family dwelling to which such accessory apartment is attached to or detached from. (Ord. No. 4755, § 5, 9-9-19)

Sec. 37-132. Development of ravines and drainageways.
(a) Ravines/Drainageways, Category A: Open drainage channels defined as category A drainages within Chapter 37-3 of this code may be altered, relocated, or improved and shall maintain the estimated flow of storm water throughout the channel. Improvements may include the use of pipes, culverts, or concrete lining. Relocation or improvement of a category A drainage shall be reviewed by the city engineer, and may not commence without the engineer’s approval.

(b) Ravines/Drainageways, Category B: Open drainage channels defined as category B drainages within Chapter 37-3 of this code shall not be altered, improved, or relocated without approval of the Lewiston planning and zoning commission. Alteration, modification, relocation, or construction within category B drainage channels shall require a conditional use permit. (Ord. No. 4344, § 2, 11-17-03)

ARTICLE V. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Sec. 37-133. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined in Article II of this chapter, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common usage.

Accessory structure means a structure on the same lot or parcel as a principal structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to the principal structure. An insurable building should not be classified as an accessory or appurtenant structure.

Appeal means a request for review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of provisions of this article or request for a variance.

Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.

Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Zone designations on FIRMs include the letters A, AE, or V. Also known as the special flood hazard area (SFHA).

Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded each year. Also known as the “regulatory flood.”

Base flood elevation (BFE) means the water surface elevation during the base flood in relation to a specified datum. The base flood elevation (BFE) is depicted on the FIRM to the nearest foot and in the FIS to the nearest one-tenth (0.1) of a foot.

Basement means the portion of a structure including crawlspace with its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

Building. See “Structure.”

Critical facility means a facility that is critical for the health and welfare of the population and is especially important following hazard events. Critical facilities include essential facilities, transportation systems, lifeline utility systems, high potential loss facilities and hazardous material facilities.

Datum. The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of points has been the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical datum currently adopted by the federal government as a basis for measuring heights is the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88).

Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures, or the construction of additions or substantial improvements to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of mobile homes; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of materials; specifically including the construction of dikes, berms and levees. The term “development” does not include the operation, cleaning, maintenance or repair of any ditch, canal, lateral,

drain, diversion structure or other irrigation or drainage works that is performed or authorized by the owner thereof pursuant to lawful rights and obligations.

Digital FIRM (DFIRM) means digital flood insurance rate map. It depicts flood risk and zones and flood risk information. The DFIRM presents the flood risk information in a format suitable for electronic mapping applications.

Existing construction means a structure for which the “start of construction” commenced before January 20, 1982.

Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision where the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before January 20, 1982.

Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.

Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is the agency with the overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.

Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or

(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

Flood fringe means the portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway covered by floodwaters during the regulatory flood.

Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A. The FHBM usually is the initial flood hazard map.

Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.

Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles, floodway boundaries and water surface elevations of the base flood.

Floodplain means the land that has been or may be covered by floodwaters, or is surrounded by floodwater and inaccessible, during the occurrence of the regulatory flood. The riverine floodplain includes the floodway and the flood fringe (Idaho Code, Section 46-1021).

Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

Flood protection elevation (FPE) means an elevation that corresponds to the elevation of the one (1) percent chance annual flood (base flood), plus any increase in flood elevation due to floodway encroachment, plus one (1) foot of freeboard. Therefore the flood protection elevation for the city of Lewiston is equal to BFE plus allowed floodway elevation plus one (1) foot of freeboard.

Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to discharge and store the floodwater or flood flows associated with the regulatory flood.

Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams and the hydrologic effects of urbanization in a watershed.

Functionally dependent facility means a facility that cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.

Highest adjacent grade (HAG) means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. Refer to the Elevation Certificate, FEMA Form 81-31, for HAG related to building elevation information.

Historic structure means a structure that is:

(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or to a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:

a. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or

b. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

Letter of map change (LOMC) means an official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs are issued in the following categories:

(1) Letter of map amendment (LOMA). A revision based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard area.

(2) Letter of map revision (LOMR). A revision based on technical data showing that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination that a structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is excluded from the special flood hazard area.

(3) Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR). A formal review and comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does NOT amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, or flood insurance studies.

Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed according to sound engineering practices, to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

Levee system means a flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.

Lowest adjacent grade (LAG) means the lowest point of the ground level next to the structure. Refer to the Elevation Certificate, FEMA Form 81-31, for LAG related to building elevation information.

Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) used for living purposes, which includes working, storage, cooking and eating, or recreation, or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use including a basement or crawl space. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a structure’s lowest floor. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business.

Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s FIRM are referenced.

New construction means a structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

New manufactured home park or subdivision means a place where the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after January 20, 1982.

Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is:

(1) Built on a single chassis;

(2) Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty truck; and

(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.

Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.

Start of construction includes substantial improvement and means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the “actual start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.

Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.

Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of its market value before the damage occurred.

Substantial improvement means reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. The term does not include either:

(1) A project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications, which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(2) Alteration of a historic structure; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.

Variance is a grant of relief by the governing body from a requirement of this article.

Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other specified datum) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4190, § 1, 4-7-97; Ord. No. 4579, § 2, 9-10-12)

Sec. 37-134. General provisions.
(a) Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the city of Lewiston. Nothing in this article is intended to allow uses or structures that are otherwise prohibited by the zoning ordinance.

(b) Basis for area of special flood hazard. The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS) for the city of Lewiston, Idaho, Nez Perce County, dated July 20, 1981, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) or digital flood insurance rate maps (DFIRM), and other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. The FIS and the FIRM are on file at the office of community development with the building official, 218 D Street, Lewiston, Idaho.

(c) Establishment of floodplain development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required prior to development activities in special flood hazard areas established in subsection (b) of this section.

(d) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be:

(1) Considered as minimum requirements;

(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.

(e) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city of Lewiston or by any officer or employee thereof for flood damages that result from reliance on this article or an administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4579, § 3, 9-10-12)

Sec. 37-135. Administration.
(a) Designation of floodplain ordinance administrator. The building official is hereby appointed as the floodplain administrator who is responsible for administering and implementing the provisions of this article.

(b) Permit procedures. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by the administrator or the administrator’s designee prior to starting development activities. Specifically, the following information is required:

(1) Application stage.

a. Plans in duplicate drawn to scale with elevations of the project area and the nature, location, dimensions of existing and proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment and drainage facilities;

b. Elevation in relation to the flood protection elevation, or highest adjacent grade, of the lowest floor level, including crawlspaces or basement, of all proposed structures;

c. Elevation to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed;

d. Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in section 37-136(f)(2) of this code;

e. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and

(2) Construction stage.

a. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the floodplain administrator an as-built certification of the floor elevation or floodproofing level, using appropriate FEMA elevation or floodproofing certificate, immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same.

b. Certificate deficiencies identified by the floodplain administrator shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to work proceeding. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections shall be cause for the floodplain administrator to issue a stop-work order for the project.

(3) Technical review. If the community does not have the expertise to evaluate the technical data that is part of the application, the community may contract for an independent engineering review or require a review by FEMA through the letter of map revision process. The applicant will pay the costs of an independent technical review.

(4) Expiration of floodplain development permit. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the commencement of work within one hundred eighty (180) days. A floodplain development permit shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance unless the permitted activity has been substantially begun and thereafter is pursued to completion.

(c) Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to:

(1) Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied.

(2) Review proposed development to assure that necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C. 1531 through 1544; and State of Idaho Stream Channel Alteration permits, Idaho Code 42, Chapter 38, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file.

(3) When base flood elevation data or floodway data are not available, then the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of this article.

(4) When base flood elevations or other current engineering data are not available, the floodplain administrator shall take into account the flood hazards, to the extent they are known, to determine whether a proposed building site will be reasonably safe from flooding.

(5) Obtain and record the actual elevation in relation to the vertical datum on the effective FIRM, or highest adjacent grade, of the lowest floor level, including basement, of all new construction or substantially improved structures.

(6) Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to the vertical datum on the effective FIRM, to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.

(7) When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the floodplain administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect.

(8) Where interpretation is needed of the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard including regulatory floodway (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article.

(9) All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city/county clerk or his/her designee and shall be open for public inspection. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4579, § 4, 9-10-12)

Sec. 37-136. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
(a) Subdivision standards.

(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

(2) All subdivision preliminary plats/development plans shall include the mapped flood hazard zones from the effective FIRM.

(3) Base flood elevation data shall be generated and/or provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less.

(4) All subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

(5) All subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

(b) Construction standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required.

(1) New construction and substantial improvements of an existing structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.

(2) New construction and substantial improvements of an existing structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

(3) New construction or substantial improvements of an existing structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

(4) All new construction or substantial improvements of an existing structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, that includes a fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by the foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for complying with this requirement must be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria:

a. Provide a minimum of two (2) openings with a total net area of not less:

1. Than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;

2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the higher of the exterior or interior grade or floor immediately below the opening;

3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions without manual intervention.

b. To comply with the “lowest floor” criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area.

c. The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.

d. For crawlspace foundation types, construction must follow the guidelines in FEMA TB 11-01, Crawlspace Construction for Structures Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas: National Flood Insurance Program Interim Guidance, specifically:

1. Below grade crawlspaces are prohibited at sites where the velocity of floodwaters exceeds five (5) feet per second;

2. Interior grade of the crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than two (2) feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG);

3. Height of the below grade crawlspace, measured from the lowest interior grade of the crawlspace to the bottom of the floor joist, must not exceed four (4) feet at any point;

4. Contain an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace.

(5) All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other facilities shall be designed and/or elevated to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during flooding.

(6) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or to eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.

(7) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or to eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.

(8) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid functional impairment, or contamination from them, during flooding.

(9) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure that is not compliant with the provisions of this article shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is minimal in order to meet health and safety standards.

(c) Manufactured home standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where the flood protection elevation is established, these standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles that are an allowed use under the zoning ordinance shall apply:

(1) Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved:

a. On individual lots or parcels;

b. In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions;

c. In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood protection elevation.

(2) Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either:

a. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to the flood protection elevation or one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation, whichever is higher.

b. The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches above the highest adjacent grade.

(3) Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to, and consistent with, applicable state requirements.

(4) Manufactured homes placed on solid perimeter walls shall meet the flood vent requirements in subsection (b)(4) of this section.

(d) Accessory structures. Relief from the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be granted for an accessory structure containing no more than two hundred (200) square feet. Such a structure must meet the following standards:

(1) It shall not be used for human habitation;

(2) It shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;

(3) It shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;

(4) It shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;

(5) Services such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or flood-proofed to or above the flood protection elevation;

(6) It shall meet the opening requirements of subsection (b)(4) of this section.

(e) Recreational vehicle standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, recreational vehicles must either:

(1) Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;

(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached structures or addition; or

(3) The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for “new construction,” including the anchoring and elevation requirements.

(f) Floodway standards. The following provisions shall apply in a floodway:

(1) A project in the regulatory floodway must undergo an encroachment review to determine its effect on flood flows. An encroachment analysis must include:

a. Determination and documentation that the filling, grading or construction of a structure will not obstruct flood flows and will not cause an increase in flood heights upstream or adjacent to the project site;

b. Determination and documentation that grading, excavation, channel improvements, bridge and culvert replacements that remove an obstruction do not cause increases in downstream flood flows;

c. Certification and documentation by a licensed professional engineer that the project will not result in a rise in flood heights;

d. The administrator may make the encroachment determination for minor projects, such as projects that do not increase the natural grade (e.g., paving a driveway or parking lot at existing grade, open fences and small isolated obstructions such as a mailbox or telephone pole).

(2) Upon demonstrating that there are no alternatives, the applicant may propose an encroachment in the floodway that will cause an increase in the base flood elevation in excess of the allowable level; provided, that the applicant obtain a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA before the development can be approved and permitted.

(g) Standards for zones with base flood elevations. In special flood hazard areas designated A1-30, AE, AH, or A (with estimated BFE), the following provisions are required.

(1) New residential construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, constructed at or above the community’s flood protection elevation. If solid foundation perimeter walls are used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with the construction standards in subsection (b)(4) of this section.

(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure located in zones A1-30, AE, or AH must be floodproofed if the new construction or improvement is not elevated. The structure and attendant utility and sanitary facilities must be designed to be water tight to the flood protection elevation or to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect must certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting these provisions, and shall provide certification to the administrator.

(3) Where the floodway has not been determined, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted in Zones A1-30 and AE on the effective FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. Applicants of proposed projects that increase the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot are required to obtain and submit to the floodplain administrator a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) preconstruction.

(4) Post construction, the applicant must apply to FEMA for a letter of map revision for changes to the flood hazard map proposed in the CLOMR.

(5) In AH Zones, drainage paths shall be provided to guide flood water around and away from proposed and existing structures.

(h) Standards for zones without base flood elevations and/or floodway (A Zones). These standards apply in special flood hazard areas where streams exist but no base flood elevation data have been provided (A Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated.

(1) When base flood elevation or floodway data have not been identified by FEMA in a flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, then the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer this article. If data are not available from any source, only then the provisions of subsections (h)(2) and (3) of this section shall apply.

a. Where the floodplain administrator has obtained base flood elevation data, applicants of proposed projects that increase the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot shall obtain a conditional letter of map revision preconstruction and a letter of map revision post construction.

(2) No encroachments, including structures or fill, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or fifty (50) feet, whichever is greater, measured from the ordinary high water mark, unless certification by a licensed professional engineer documents that the encroachment will not result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood.

(3) In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement or crawlspace) elevated no less than two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with the construction standards in subsections (b) and (c) of this section.

(i) Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). Shallow flooding areas designated AO Zones are areas of special flood hazard that have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply.

(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the adjacent grade at least as high as the flood depth number specified in feet on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade.

Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with the construction standards in subsection (b)(4) of this section.

(2) New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure and attendant utility and sanitary facilities must be designed to be watertight to the specified base flood level or at least two (2) feet above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting these provisions, and shall provide certification to the floodplain administrator.

(3) Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from all proposed and existing structures.

(j) Alteration of a watercourse. A watercourse is considered altered when any change occurs within its banks.

(1) The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development and submit certification by a registered professional engineer that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished.

(2) Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Idaho Department of Water Resources stream channel alteration program must be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a water source. Evidence of notification must be submitted to the floodplain administrator and to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

(3) The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished.

(4) The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data in subsections (k)(1) and (2) of this section when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts.

(k) Requirement to submit new technical data.

(1) For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six (6) months of the date such information becomes available. These development proposals include:

a. Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood elevations or alter floodway boundaries;

b. Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard area in accordance with subsection (a)(3) of this section;

c. Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts;

d. Subdivision or large-scale development proposals requiring establishment of base flood elevations according to subsection (a)(3) of this section.

(2) It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data prepared in a format required for a conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4190, § 2, 4-7-97; Ord. No. 4579, § 5, 9-10-12)

Sec. 37-137. Variance and appeal procedures.
(a) Variance.

(1) An application for a variance must be submitted to the Lewiston building official on the form provided by the city of Lewiston and include at a minimum the same information required for a development permit and an explanation for the basis for the variance request.

(2) Upon receipt of a completed application for a variance, the variance request will be set for public hearing at the next building code board of appeals meeting in which time is available for the matter to be heard.

(3) Prior to the public hearing, notice of the hearing will be published in the official newspaper of the city of Lewiston at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. In addition to the newspaper publication, written notice shall be provided to all adjoining property owners.

(4) The burden to show that the variance is warranted and meets the criteria set out herein is on the applicant.

(b) Criteria for variances.

(1) Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a small or irregularly shaped lot contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

(2) Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

(3) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

(4) Variances may be issued upon:

a. A showing by the applicant of good and sufficient cause;

b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances.

5. Variances pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods.

(c) Variance decision. The decision to either grant or deny a variance shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for such approval and denial. If the variance is granted, the property owner shall be put on notice along with the written decision that the permitted building will have its lowest floor below the flood protection elevation and that the cost of flood insurance likely will be commensurate with the increased flood damage risk.

(d) Appeals. The building code board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals from the interpretations of the administrator.

(1) An appeal must be filed with the city of Lewiston clerk within fourteen (14) days of the date of any permit denial or interpretation of the administrator. Failure to timely file an appeal shall be considered a failure to exhaust the administrative remedies. The appeal must set out the interpretation of the administrator and a narrative setting forth the facts relied upon by the appellant and the appellant’s claim regarding the error in the interpretation.

(2) Upon receipt of a completed appeal, the appeal will be scheduled for the next available building code board of appeals meeting to be heard. The building code board of appeals shall consider the following in ruling on an appeal:

a. All technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this article, including:

1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effects of such damage on the individual landowner;

4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

5. The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where applicable;

6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

9. The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

11. The cost of providing government services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.

(e) Decision. The building code board of appeals decision on appeal shall be in writing and set out the facts, technical information and the legal basis for the decision. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4579, § 6, 9-10-12)

Sec. 37-138. Penalties for violation.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered unless in full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations.

Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or imprisoned for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city of Lewiston from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. No. 4579, § 7, 9-10-12)

ARTICLE VI. HOME OCCUPATIONS
Sec. 37-140. Statement of purpose.
It is the intent of this chapter to promote and encourage economic activity and entrepreneurship within the city while protecting residential neighborhoods from the negative impacts of commercial use of residential dwellings. The city of Lewiston recognizes that, in general, unrestricted commercial activity, and specifically certain types of businesses, are incompatible with the enjoyment of residentially zoned property and may be detrimental to residential property values. The city of Lewiston further recognizes that homeowners have an expectation that their investment in their home is also an investment in their neighborhood, and that this investment comes with certain rights and responsibilities. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4393, § 2, 3-14-05)

Sec. 37-140.1. General provisions.
(a) A home occupation is an activity, profession, or craft carried on entirely within a residence or associated accessory buildings by the occupants, which activity is clearly incidental to the use of said residence as a dwelling and does not change the residential character of it; is conducted in such a manner as to not give any outward appearance of a business in the ordinary meaning of the term; so located and conducted that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its existence; and which does not infringe upon the rights of neighboring residents to enjoy a peaceful occupancy of their homes.

(b) Home occupations may occupy an area of a dwelling or an accessory building not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling. Home occupations may occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling or accessory building when approved with a conditional use permit as provided in Article IX of this chapter, except that swimming instruction shall be exempt from this requirement.

(c) Not more than one (1) person other than members of the family residing in the residence shall be engaged in such occupation at the premises.

(d) No exterior displays, including window displays or lawn displays, are allowed.

(e) No outdoor storage shall be permitted.

(f) No regularly occurring outdoor activity, except as allowed in this chapter.

(g) No home occupation shall be conducted in such a manner, and/or no materials or mechanical equipment shall be used, which will be detrimental to the residential use of said residence or cause a nuisance to surrounding residences, because of vibration, noise, dust, smoke, odor, interference with radio or television reception, or other factors.

(h) The cumulative impact of multiple home occupations licensed at a single address shall not exceed the criteria set for a single home occupation.

(i) Where a combination of dwelling unit and accessory building is used for a home occupation, the total area in use may not exceed that allowed for a single home occupation. (Ord. No. 4393, § 3, 3-14-05; Ord. No. 4531, § 14, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4692, § 16, 10-30-17)

Sec. 37-141. Permitted home occupations.
Authorized home occupations include, but are not limited to, the following and are subject to the following provisions:

(1) Artists and craftpersons, including but not limited to visual artists, photographers, authors, sculptors, dressmakers, seamstresses, tailors, gunsmiths, and home crafters. Conditional use permits authorizing this home occupation to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling shall be approved only for the applicant for said permit and shall not be transferable to a subsequent owner.

(2) Family day care, not to exceed six (6) children excluding the children, stepchildren, or foster children of the day care provider.

(3) Instruction, including but not limited to tutoring, music, craft, dance, yoga, or athletic instruction.

Conditional use permits authorizing this home occupation to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling shall be approved only for the applicant for said permit and shall not be transferable to a subsequent owner.

No more than twelve (12) persons shall receive instruction at any one time.

(4) Professions, generally those that require state licensing or board certification, including but not limited to physicians, chiropractors, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers, counselors, real estate, business services, and financial consulting.

(5) Personal services, including but not limited to hairdressers, barbers, and masseurs.

(6) Construction/contracted trades and services, including but not limited to general contractors, carpenters, plumbers, electricians, landscape contracting, lawn care services, and pest control. Conditional use permits authorizing this home occupation to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling shall be approved only for the applicant for said permit and shall not be transferable to a subsequent owner;

a. No construction material shall be stored outside;

b. No pesticides or herbicides may be stored outside;

c. No heavy equipment such as backhoes, dump trucks, or scrapers may be stored on the premises;

d. Contractors may not operate a contractor’s storage yard in any residential zone.

(7) Sales, including but not limited to phone sales, Internet sales, in-home product presentation, and travel agents, but not including on-site retail sales from the premises, with the following limitations:

a. All inventory must be stored within the allowed area of the home occupation.

b. No more than two (2) delivery trips per day may be generated by the business.

(8) Repair and refinishing, including but not limited to electronics, appliances, and bicycles. The items being repaired or refinished shall not be stored outside.

Conditional use permits authorizing this home occupation to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling shall be approved only for the applicant for said permit and shall not be transferable to a subsequent owner.

(9) Farm stand, limited to sales of fruits and vegetables grown by the owner and for sale at property of the owner, with the following limitations:

a. Sales in the required front yard shall not obstruct traffic or cause a sight obstruction for traffic.

b. Sales must be seasonal in nature.

(10) Other uses not specifically enumerated herein may apply for a conditional use permit in accordance with provisions of Article IX of this chapter, Conditional Use Permits. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4393, § 4, 3-14-05; Ord. No. 4531, § 14, 7-13-09)

Sec. 37-142. Home occupations not permitted.
The following uses, by the nature of the investment or operation, have a pronounced tendency, once started, to rapidly increase beyond the limits permitted for home occupation, or have a tendency to produce objectionable noise and other nuisances, and thereby impair the use and value of a residentially zoned area for residential purposes. Therefore, the uses specified below shall not be permitted as home occupations:

(1) Auto repair, minor or major, including customization or painting;

(2) Motorcycle repair, major or minor, including customization or painting;

(3) Cabinet shop;

(4) Furniture refinishing or upholstery;

(5) Gift shop or antique shop;

(6) Painting of vehicles, trailers or boats;

(7) Photo developing, retail;

(8) Wood lots and on-premises firewood sales;

(9) Businesses in which more than one (1) person, not an occupant of the residence, reports to the site of the business office to receive work assignments, material or payroll;

(10) Repair of any internal combustion engines;

(11) Nursery or garden shop;

(12) Contractor’s storage yard;

(13) Manufacturing, except those activities consistent with the statement of purpose for home occupations;

(14) Machining. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4393, § 5, 3-14-05)

Sec. 37-143. Administration.
(a) All home occupations must have an approved city of Lewiston business license.

(b) Application for home occupations must be made on forms provided by the city of Lewiston and all applicable fees must be paid. Applications shall be reviewed by all applicable departments of the city of Lewiston and outside agencies. Additional conditions for operation of the home occupation may be required by the community development director in addition to the standards provided in section 37-141. Decisions regarding approval or denial of a home occupation may be appealed to the Lewiston planning and zoning commission pursuant to section 37-192.

(c) Licenses for home occupations must be renewed annually. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4393, § 6, 3-14-05)

Sec. 37-144. Reserved.
Editor’s Note – Ord. No. 4393, § 7, adopted March 14, 2005, repealed § 37-144, relating to conditional use permits for home occupations, which derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2, adopted Aug. 15, 1994.

ARTICLE VII. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Sec. 37-145. Requirement of off-street parking and loading.
At the time a new structure or parking lot is constructed or an existing structure or parking lot is enlarged or the use of an existing structure is changed, off-street parking spaces shall be provided as set forth in this chapter. If parking space has been provided in connection with an existing use or is added to an existing use, the parking space shall not be eliminated if it would result in less space than is required by this chapter, except when providing handicapped parking spaces in accordance with section 37-148 of this code.

Provided, however, that the number of off-street parking spaces required for properties in the FIB Zone shall be provided as set forth in the FIB Zone; and provided, further, that the number of off-street parking spaces required by section 37-149 of this code, except those required for residential and commercial residential uses, shall not apply within the central business district of the city, which district is described by the following boundaries:

Commencing at the intersection of Fifth Street and “F” Street, then east on “F” Street to Ninth Street, then north on Ninth Street to “D” Street, then northerly along the extension of Ninth Street to the Dike Bypass Road, then northwesterly along the Dike Bypass Road to Fifth Street, thence continuing along the Dike Bypass Road in a northwesterly then southerly direction to its intersection with Main Street, thence east along Main Street to its intersection with the railroad tracks, then southerly along the tracks to Prospect Avenue, Prospect Boulevard and Prospect Boulevard extended, to the point of beginning, said point being the intersection of Fifth Street and “F” Street. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4178, § 1, 1-27-97; Ord. No. 4205, § 3, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 4504, § 1, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4725, § 9, 11-26-18)

Sec. 37-146. General provisions, off-street parking and loading.
The general provisions for off-street parking and loading shall be as follows:

(1) The provision and maintenance of off-street parking and loading spaces is a continuing obligation of the property owner. No building or other permit shall be issued until plans are presented which show property that is and will remain available for exclusive use as off-street parking and loading space. The subsequent use of property for which the building permit is issued shall be conditional upon the unqualified continuance and availability of the amount of parking and loading space required by this chapter. Should the owner or occupant of any lot or building change the use to which the lot or building is put, thereby increasing off-street parking or loading requirements, it shall be a violation of this chapter to begin or maintain such altered use until such time as the increased off-street parking or loading requirements are complied with.

The construction, reconstruction or expansion of any parking lot within the city of Lewiston or the installation of impervious surfaces in excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet shall require approval of a parking or storage lot construction permit issued by the community development department. All said construction, reconstruction or expansion of parking lots shall comply with the provisions of this article and city standards and construction of all other impervious surfaces shall comply with city standards.

Application for said parking or storage lot construction permit shall be accompanied by a review fee as provided by resolution of the city council, except when said construction is a part of the construction or reconstruction of a structure permitted under a valid building permit issued by the department.

(2) The zoning official may utilize surveys of similar uses or nationally recognized sources to determine the requirements for types of buildings and uses, whether or not specifically listed herein or at the request of the land owner.

(3) Outdoor seating areas shall be included in calculating floor area for determining off-street parking requirements.

(4) When several uses occupy a single structure or parcel of land, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the several uses computed separately, unless it can be determined that the hours of operation for the uses do not overlap.

(5) Owners of two (2) or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may agree to utilize jointly the same parking and loading spaces when the hours of operation do not overlap; provided, that satisfactory legal evidence is presented to the city in the form of deeds, leases, or contracts to establish the joint use.

(6) Off-street parking spaces for dwellings shall be located on the same lot with the dwelling.

(7) Outside of the Central Business District, required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building or use they are required to serve, or, if located on a different lot, then they shall not be farther than three hundred (300) feet from the building or use they are required to serve, as measured in a straight line from the building. Within the Central Business District, required parking spaces shall not be located farther than one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet from the building or use they are required to serve, as measured in a straight line from the building.

(8) Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of passenger automobiles for residents, customers, patrons, and employees only, and shall not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the parking of trucks used in conducting the business or use.

(9) Unless otherwise provided, required parking and loading spaces shall not be located in a yard required by this chapter. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4178, § 2, 1-27-97; Ord. No. 4388, § 1, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4504, § 2, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4506, § 1, 5-12-08; Ord. No. 4703, § 1, 10-30-17)

Sec. 37-147. Preexisting parking and vehicle storage lots.
The standards enumerated in sections 37-146, 37-151(b)(2) and 37-153 of this code shall not apply to parking and vehicle storage lots developed prior to April 22, 1991, but shall apply to said lots when new construction or major remodeling, as defined by section 31-2 of this code, occurs on the property which the parking or vehicle storage lot serves. In addition thereto a dust palliative is required on all preexisting unpaved parking and vehicle storage lots. The owner shall apply a dust palliative approved by the city engineer prior to June 1st of each year. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-148. Requirement for handicapped parking spaces.
(a) At the time a new structure or parking lot is constructed or an existing structure or parking lot enlarged or the use of an existing structure is changed or at the time an existing parking lot is repainted or redesigned, and in all cases no later than January 1, 1999, parking specifically designed and properly marked and located for the use of persons with disabilities shall be provided as set forth in this section.

(b) For the purposes of this section, a handicapped designated space shall be a minimum of one hundred thirty-two (132) inches in width with a sixty (60) inch wide access aisle. The lines delineating the handicapped space shall be blue in color, a minimum width of four (4) inches and each space shall be marked with the international accessibility symbol as provided in Idaho Code, Section 49-410. Painting shall be in conformance with city standards.

(c) Each designated handicapped space shall also be posted immediately adjacent to and visible from each space, with a sign, which is at least eighty-four (84) inches above the ground, consisting of the international accessibility symbol as shown in Idaho Code, Section 49-410. Signs shall be in conformance with city standards.

(d) The number of required handicapped parking spaces shall be as provided below:

Total Parking Spaces Req’d

Minimum Handicapped Spaces

1 – 25

1

26 – 50

2

51 – 75

3

76 – 100

4

101 – 150

5

151 – 200

6

201 – 300

7

301 – 400

8

401 – 500

9

501 – 1,000

2% of total

 

Total Parking Spaces Req’d

Minimum Handicapped Spaces

1,001 and over

20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000

(Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4205, § 4, 11-17-97; Ord. 4349 § 1, 4-12-04)

Sec. 37-149. Parking requirements based on land use.
Parking shall be provided according to the use of the structure or land. When square feet are specified, then the area measured shall be the gross floor area of the building, but shall exclude any space within a building devoted to off-street parking or loading. When the number of employees is specified, persons counted shall be those working on the premises, including proprietors, during the largest shift at peak session.

(1) Residential uses:

a. One- or two-family dwellings: Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit or one (1) space per bedroom, up to a maximum of four (4), whichever is greater. Multifamily dwellings outside of the central business district: Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit. Multifamily dwellings within the central business district: One (1) space per dwelling unit.

b. Rooming or boarding house or dormitory outside of the central business district: Spaces for eighty (80) percent of the guest accommodations plus one (1) additional space for the owner or manager. Rooming or boarding house or dormitory within the central business district: Spaces for forty (40) percent of the guest accommodations plus one (1) additional space for the owner or manager.

c. Multifamily housing designated for the use of elderly persons: One (1) space for each unit occupied by an elderly person in a multifamily dwelling designated for use by elderly persons. The term “elderly person” shall mean a person meeting the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s then-current definition of that term.

d. Group home: One (1) space per each employee in the largest work shift, plus one (1) per five (5) clients or fraction thereof.

(2) Commercial residential:

a. Motel or hotel outside of the central business district: One (1) space per guest room or suite plus one (1) space per three (3) employees on the largest work shift, plus one (1) space per three (3) persons to the maximum capacity established by the occupancy loading of the International Building Code of each public meeting and/or banquet room, plus fifty (50) percent of the spaces otherwise required for accessory uses such as restaurants and bars. Motel or hotel within the central business district: One (1) space per guest room or suite.

b. Club or lodge: Spaces to meet the combined requirements of the uses being conducted such as hotel, restaurant, auditorium, etc.

c. Homeless shelter: one (1) space per four (4) beds; one (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of office area or per employee/volunteer on the largest shift, whichever is greater; and one (1) bicycle parking rack space per three (3) beds.

(3) Institutions:

a. Convalescent hospital, nursing home, sanitarium, rest home, or home for the aged: One (1) space per employee on the largest shift and one (1) space per five (5) clients.

b. Hospital.

1. Spaces equal to 0.75 times the number of licensed beds; plus

2. One (1) space for every two (2) employees, volunteers, trainees, active or associate doctors on staff; plus

3. Office and/or clinic or out-patient facilities (including emergency room and X-ray department): One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area assigned to such use; plus

4. Retail facilities (including gift shop, bookstore, coffee shop, drugstore and/or other similar uses): One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area; plus

5. Training facilities: One (1) space per ten (10) seats in classrooms, provided students have not been included as hospital employees.

c. College or university: One (1) space per two (2) students plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift.

d. Correctional facility: One (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space for each vehicle assigned to the station plus one (1) space per twenty-five (25) inmates;

e. Fire or police station: One (1) space for each employee and one (1) space for each volunteer personnel on a normal shift, plus one (1) space for each vehicle assigned to the station. If a business office is included, one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of that office space is required in addition.

f. Other government buildings shall provide parking based on the use of the building as if it were in private ownership.

(4) Place of assembly:

a. Church: One (1) space for each four (4) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load in the main auditorium under the International Building Code.

b. Library or reading room: One (1) space per four hundred (400) square feet of floor area plus one (1) space per two (2) employees.

c. Preschool nursery or kindergarten (primary school): Two (2) spaces per teacher.

d. Elementary or junior high: One (1) space per classroom, plus one (1) space per administrative employee, or one (1) space per four (4) seats or eight (8) feet of bench length in the auditorium, whichever is greater.

e. High school: One (1) space per employee, plus one (1) space for each three (3) students, or one (1) space per four (4) seats or eight (8) feet of bench length in the main auditorium, whichever is greater.

f. Other auditorium or meeting room: One (1) space for each two (2) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load allowed under the International Building Code.

(5) Commercial amusements:

a. Stadium, arena, or indoor theater: One (1) space for each two (2) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load allowed under the International Building Code.

b. Bowling establishment without restaurant: Six (6) spaces per alley plus one (1) space per two (2) employees.

c. Bowling establishment with restaurant: Eight (8) spaces per alley plus one (1) space per two (2) employees.

d. Dance hall or skating rink: One (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet of floor area plus one (1) space per two (2) employees.

(6) Commercial:

a. Retail stores, except as provided in subsection (6)(m) of this section: One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor space;

b. Beauty and barber shops: Three (3) spaces per operator chair;

c. Day care center: Two (2) spaces, plus one (1) space for every employee on the maximum shift; a paved unobstructed pick up space with adequate stacking area (as determined by the community development director) shall be provided in addition to standard driveway and parking requirements;

d. Diet clinic: Four (4) spaces for each doctor or practitioner, and one (1) space for each two (2) seats assigned for food service;

e. Gas station: One (1) space for every employee on the maximum shift;

f. Health club: One (1) parking space per patron based on the occupancy load established by the International Building Code, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest working shift;

g. Indoor racquet courts or tennis courts: Three (3) spaces per court plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift;

h. Outdoor storage: One (1) space per employee on the largest shift;

i. Outdoor retail: One (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of open sales and/or display area, plus one (1) space per employee;

j. Dance school: Five (5) spaces, plus one (1) space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of dance floor in excess of five hundred (500) square feet;

k. Self service storage facility: Three (3) spaces plus one (1) space per one hundred (100) units plus one (1) per employee;

l. Restaurant, fast food: One (1) space per four (4) seats, plus one (1) space per two (2) employees where seating is at tables, or one (1) space per two (2) seats, plus one (1) space per two (2) employees where seating is at a counter. For a fast food restaurant with no seating facilities: One (1) space per sixty (60) square feet of net floor area with a minimum of five (5) spaces;

m. Service or repair shop; retail store handling exclusively bulky merchandise such as automobiles and furniture: One (1) space per six hundred (600) square feet of floor area plus one (1) space per two (2) employees;

n. Bank or office (except medical or dental clinic): One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area;

o. Medical and dental clinic: Two (2) spaces for each examination room, treatment room, or patient station plus one (1) space for each doctor;

p. Eating or drinking establishment: One (1) space per four (4) seats;

q. Mortuary: One (1) space per four (4) seats or eight (8) feet of bench length in chapels;

r. Nursery or greenhouses: One (1) space per each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of indoor retail sales; greenhouse sales area shall provide one (1) space per one thousand (1,000) square feet and one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet above one thousand (1,000) square feet; exterior nursery sales area shall provide one (1) space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of exterior nursery sales area.

(7) Industrial:

a. Storage warehouse, manufacturing establishment, air, rail, or trucking freight terminal: One (1) space per employee on the largest shift.

b. Wholesale establishment: One (1) space per employee on the largest shift plus one (1) space per seven hundred (700) square feet of patron service area. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4178, § 3, 1-27-97; Ord. No. 4388, § 2, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 4504, § 3, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 4671, § 1, 10-24-16; Ord. No. 4676, § 28, 11-28-16; Ord. No. 4689, § 11, 4-24-17)

Sec. 37-149.1. Drive-thru service facilities.
(a) Number of car queue spaces required: The minimum number of car queue spaces for drive-thru service facilities shall be as follows, unless otherwise justified by a trip generation and site design study performed by a traffic engineer licensed in the state of Idaho specific to the proposed drive-thru service facility and accepted by the city engineer:

(1) Eating and drinking establishments that have an ordering station separate from the pick-up window: nine (9) spaces total with at least four (4) spaces from the pick-up window to the ordering station; or, if two (2) ordering stations in different lanes merge into a single pick-up window lane, then eleven (11) spaces total with at least five (5) spaces from the pick-up window to the ordering station and at least three (3) spaces per ordering station.

(2) Eating and drinking establishments without an ordering station separate from the pick-up window and where ordering, payment, and pick-up are done at the same service window: five (5) spaces for a one (1) window facility or four (4) spaces per window for two (2) service windows.

(3) Car washes: four (4) spaces for a single bay automated system; or two (2) spaces per bay for a multiple bay automated system; or one (1) space per bay if the car wash is a non-automated system whereby the driver gets out of the vehicle to wash the vehicle in the wash bay.

(4) Pharmacies: four (4) spaces.

(5) Banks and automated teller machines: three (3) spaces per service station; or, if more than one (1) non-tandem service station (i.e., multiple service station lanes), then two (2) spaces per service station.

(6) Gas pumps: one (1) space from each end of each pump island.

(7) Other: For other types of drive-thru service facilities not included in a category listed above, the minimum number of car queue spaces shall be four (4).

(8) A minimum of two (2) car queue spaces shall be required for the exiting of a drive-thru service facility, as measured from the forward end of the final point of service to any point of anticipated traffic stoppage, such as the intersection of the drive-thru exit lane with another queue lane or with a driveway exit from the property. This minimum number of exit car queue spaces may be increased, as determined by the city engineer, based upon the design and traffic flow conditions specific to the site.

(b) Design standards and requirements: Drive-thru service facilities shall comply with the following design standards and requirements:

(1) Minimum car queue space length: twenty (20) feet per space.

(2) Minimum drive-thru lane and car queue space width: ten (10) feet.

(3) Minimum drive-thru lane inside turn radius: twenty (20) feet.

(4) Minimum buffer (not required for gas pumps):

a. Each drive-thru service facility shall provide a five (5) foot wide minimum irrigated landscape strip planted with a minimum of one (1) one-and-one-half (1.5) inch diameter caliper shade tree and five (5) shrubs every thirty-five (35) feet along its street frontage(s).

b. Each drive-thru facility shall provide at least one (1) of the following buffers between the drive-thru lane, including all minimum required car queue spaces and the required two (2) exit car queue spaces, and an adjoining property:

1. Fifteen (15) foot minimum distance between outside line of drive-thru lane and property line;

2. A six (6) foot tall minimum sight obscuring fence (no chain link with slats) or wall; provided, that it shall not cause a vehicular or pedestrian traffic hazard due to interference with sight distance triangles;

3. A five (5) foot wide minimum irrigated landscape strip planted with a minimum of one (1) one-and-one-half (1.5) inch diameter caliper shade tree and five (5) shrubs every twenty-five (25) feet; provided, that the plantings shall not cause a vehicular or pedestrian traffic hazard due to interference with sight distance triangles;

4. Any combination of reduced versions of the buffers listed above, if the community development director determines it provides equal or greater benefit than the individual buffers listed above.

(5) Car queue space measurement shall begin from the forward end of the car queue space located at the point of service.

(6) Drive-thru lanes, including all minimum required car queue spaces and the two (2) required exit car queue spaces, shall be paved.

(7) Drive-thru lanes shall not be located within a public right-of-way, required parking stall access maneuvering area, or drive aisle.

(8) Drive-thru lanes shall be clearly demarcated with striping or curbing.

(9) If a drive-thru lane is located between a building entrance and parking spaces for the building, a minimum four (4) foot wide pedestrian crossing shall be striped across the drive-thru lane directly in front of the building entrance. The pedestrian crossing shall be clearly identified as such and include a “KEEP CLEAR” or “DO NOT BLOCK” sign or message. The width of the pedestrian crossing shall not count toward the minimum required car queue space length for the drive-thru service facility.

(10) If provided as part of a drive-thru service facility, an ordering station using a speaker system shall not be located less than ten (10) feet from a residential property without a noise attenuation wall designed to ensure compliance with Chapter 24, Article II of this code (Noise Control Regulations).

(11) Site plans showing compliance with the requirements for drive-thru service facilities set forth herein shall be prepared by a design professional licensed in the state of Idaho.

(12) Operation of a drive-thru service facility shall only be permitted when ingress and egress to and from a public right-of-way does not generate conflicting turning movements or traffic congestion deemed hazardous by the city engineer. The city engineer may deny an application for a drive-thru service facility or impose limitations as necessary to prevent any such hazardous turning movements or traffic congestion.

(13) Applicants proposing a car wash shall provide a written statement on the site plan for the building permit application documenting the following:

a. The proposed car wash and any associated vacuuming service facilities, based upon the particular equipment and site design proposed, will comply with Chapter 24, Article II of this code (Noise Control Regulations), and that if a noise violation is found by the city, the property owner will be responsible for implementing measures as necessary to abate the noise violation; and

b. Based upon the particular car wash and site design proposed, spray that may exit the car wash will not cause a nuisance, and that if said spray is determined by the city to be a nuisance, the property owner will be responsible for implementing measures as necessary to abate the nuisance. (Ord. No. 4671, § 2, 10-24-16)

Sec. 37-150. Off-street loading.
Off-street loading shall be required as provided in this article.

(1) A school having a capacity greater than twenty-five (25) students shall have a driveway designed for continuous forward flow of passenger vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading children.

(2) Buildings or structures to be built or substantially altered and which receive and distribute material or merchandise by truck shall provide and maintain off-street loading berths in sufficient numbers and sizes to handle adequately the needs of the particular use.

(3) Vehicles in the berth shall not protrude into a public right-of-way or sidewalk. When possible, loading berths shall be located so that vehicles are not required to back or maneuver in a public street.

(4) Loading space that has been provided in connection with an existing use or is added to an existing use shall not be eliminated if it would result in less space than is required to handle the needs of the particular use. Off-street parking space used to fulfill the requirements of this chapter shall not be used for loading and unloading except during periods of the day when it is not required to meet the parking needs. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-151. Design requirements for parking lots.
(a) Parking required by section 37-149 of this code and associated driveways and vehicle maneuvering areas shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, brick, other impermeable surface or other permeable pavers or other surface system of materials manufactured and designed specifically for vehicular parking and constructed so as to uphold the weight of fire fighting apparatus. A gravel surface, compacted or not, shall not qualify as a permeable surface system of materials manufactured and designed specifically for vehicular parking. Parking spaces required under this code shall be striped. Wheel stops shall be provided for any required parking that abuts a public or private sidewalk or path improved and intended for people to walk, except where such sidewalk or walking path is six (6) feet or more in width. Required parking shall meet the dimensional design standards for the development of parking areas established by the public works department of the city, including storm water runoff.

(b) Overflow parking areas or parking provided in excess of that required by section 37-149 of this code may be gravel. Parking areas for the display of vehicles associated with a car sales lot shall not qualify as overflow parking. Overflow parking areas for churches, schools, and other similar places of assembly and for commercial amusement and outdoor entertainment facilities may be of any surface. Overflow parking areas shall provide stormwater runoff facilities approved by the public works department of the city, and shall be designed and maintained to prevent dirt from being tracked onto a public street and to prevent dust trespass onto neighboring properties. Exiting for overflow parking areas shall be arranged such that the vehicles must pass over a minimum of twenty (20) feet of asphalt, concrete or brick to allow any mud to track off prior to vehicle entry onto a public street. Dust palliative shall be applied as necessary to prevent dust trespass onto adjoining properties. Vehicular access to any overflow parking areas which does not utilize existing approved access from a public street is subject to approval of the department of public works. Overflow parking shall provide six (6) foot tall sight-obscuring fencing or landscaping in accordance with section 37-153(b)(1) of this code along any abutting residentially zoned property line. Overflow parking shall not be located within any yard/setback area required by this chapter if such yard/setback is adjoining a residential zoning district.

(c) Except for parking in connection with dwelling, parking and loading area adjacent to or within a residential zone or adjacent to a dwelling shall be designed to minimize disturbances of residents by the erection between the uses of a sight-obscuring fence of not less than five (5) nor more than six (6) feet in height, except where vision clearance is required.

(d) Parking spaces along a property line shall be contained by a bumper rail, curb, or wheel stops at least four (4) inches high and set back a minimum of two (2) feet from the property line. Such containment shall not be required if the property line in question is common between two (2) lots which have a shared parking and/or access design and the bumper rail, curb or wheel stops would interfere with the shared parking and/or access design.

(e) Except for single-family and two-family dwellings, groups of more than two (2) parking spaces shall be so located and served by a driveway that their use will require no backing movement or other maneuvering within a street right-of-way other than an alley.

(f) Service drives and street approaches to off-street parking areas shall be designed and spaced to provide maximum safety for vehicles and pedestrians. The number of service drives shall be limited to the minimum that will accommodate anticipated traffic. Service drive approach widths, design and spacing shall be in accordance with the adopted design standards of the department of public works and subject to approval by the department of public works.

(g) Creation of any parking lot or parking area described in this section shall be subject to approval of a parking lot development permit and associated plan submitted by the property owner or appropriate representative to the community development department and routed to the public works and fire departments for approval. The plan shall show compliance with the design standards of this code section. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4531, § 15, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4575, § 1, 2-27-12)

Sec. 37-152. Completion time for parking lots.
Required parking spaces shall be improved as required and made available for use before the final inspection is completed by the building inspector. If the parking space is not required for immediate use, an extension of

time may be granted by the community development director, providing that a performance bond or its equivalent is posted equaling the cost to complete the improvements as estimated by the building inspector. If the improvements are not completed within one (1) year’s time, the bond or its equivalent shall be forfeited and the improvements constructed under the direction of the city. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-153. Landscaping.
(a) Purpose: Landscaping requirements are to be an integral part of all development. The intent is to mitigate pollution, buffer incompatible uses, reduce the barren appearance of parking lots, create aesthetic environments, create shade and reduce heat buildup while maintaining design flexibility.

(b) Landscaping shall be required for all off-street parking areas for more than five (5) vehicles, except for those uses enumerated in subsection (j) of this section and to provide landscaped buffers between public rights-of-way and parking lot areas, subject to the following provisions:

(1) A five (5) foot minimum buffer strip is required between the parking lot and public rights-of-way with a minimum of one (1) one-and-one-half-inch caliper shade tree and five (5) shrubs every thirty-five (35) linear feet.

(2) All parking lots under ten thousand (10,000) square feet of vehicular surface area shall have a minimum of two (2) foot wide perimeter planting area around that portion of the parking area not adjacent to the public rights-of-way. All lots over ten thousand (10,000) square feet are to have a minimum of five (5) foot perimeter planting strip around that portion of the parking area not adjacent to the public right-of-way. All perimeter planting strips are to have a minimum of one (1) shade street of one-and-one-half-inch caliper and five (5) shrubs every thirty-five (35) linear feet.

(3) Interior landscaping is to be a percentage of the total vehicular surface area and is in addition to the perimeter and right-of-way landscaping requirements.

Vehicular surface area

Percent of interior landscaping

2,500 – 6,999 square feet

3%

7,000 – 49,999 square feet

5%

 

Vehicular surface area

Percent of interior landscaping

50,000 – 149,000 square feet

8%

150,000 or larger

10%

Interior plantings are to include trees with a minimum size of one-and-one-half-inch caliper. To ensure proper growth of vegetation, all interior planting beds shall have a minimum dimension of six (6) feet at the narrowest point with a soil depth appropriate for the trees selected. See city of Lewiston tree planting standards and techniques for proper tree planting procedures. No shrub landscaping is required for interior planting.

Required shade trees will be of such species and canopy shape to provide a predicted fifty (50) percent canopy cover of the parking lot area after a ten (10) year growth period.

All tree species shall be classified by the City Tree Selection Guide as drought, insect and disease resistant. Exceptions may be approved by the community development director upon the recommendation of the city forester. Preservation of healthy trees existing on the site before construction may be used to satisfy species and landscaping requirements.

(4) An irrigation system shall be provided for all required landscaping.

(c) In the Commercial (C), Manufacturing (M) zones, Airport (A) and Port (P) zone, all required front yard setbacks shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall consist of a minimum of one (1) tree of one-and-one-half-inch caliper and five (5) shrubs per thirty-five (35) linear feet.

(d) In the Commercial (C), Manufacturing (M), Airport (A), and Port (P) zones, when abutting a residential zone, the required side and rear yards, which share a common property line with the residential zone, shall be landscaped or fenced except as provided for in this section. Landscaping shall consist of a minimum of sixty (60) percent coniferous plants, a minimum of six (6) feet in height at the time of planting, spaced in a manner to create a complete visual screen between the abutting land uses within three (3) years from time of planting. Fencing shall consist of six (6) foot tall wood, slatted chained link or masonry panels. Prior to installation of the landscaping or fencing, the adjacent residential property owner shall be contacted and asked for input whether the buffer will be landscaping or fencing. The adjacent residential owner may also waive the buffer. The adjacent residential property owner shall be given fifteen (15) days to indicate their preference. If no response is provided within fifteen (15) days, the nonresidential property owner may install fencing or landscaping as described above.

(e) Trees and shrubs may be arranged to achieve the desired effect provided the required number is provided.

(f) A performance bond may be required to ensure compliance with this section and to cover maintenance for a period not to exceed one (1) year after time of planting.

(g) An occupancy permit shall not be issued by the community development department until the required landscaping is completed. Occupancy of a building is not allowed unless the following condition applies:

(1) If, due to seasonal weather considerations, it is not feasible to install required landscaping, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued after a performance bond or other security instrument acceptable to the city attorney has been posted with the city in the amount of one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the value of the required improvements.

(h) It is not the intent of this chapter to inhibit creative solutions to land use problems. An alternative design or modification of these requirements may be allowed with the approval of the community development director. This is not a variance of or waiver of existing standards and the proposed alternative must meet or exceed existing requirements. Requirements may be modified when:

(1) Soil or slope limitations make strict adherence impractical;

(2) Safety considerations are involved, especially in the clear vision triangles;

(3) Due to a change of use of an existing site, the required buffer yard is larger than can be provided.

(i) In all manufacturing and commercial zones, all undeveloped land areas that were disturbed during the construction phase, excluding the building footprints and parking areas, shall be leveled to grade, removing all surface irregularities, weed growth and construction debris in preparation for installation of approved erosion control measures. All areas that were previously disturbed during the construction phase and subsequently prepared for seeding, must be properly planted with specified grass during the first seasonally appropriate planting period. All areas which will not be seeded with grasses shall be stabilized with approved erosion control measures prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the primary structure.

(j) Exemptions:

(1) Single-family residential off-street parking areas;

(2) Properly licensed auto and vehicle dealers are exempt from providing landscaping within the interior of the sales and display area. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4400, § 1, 7-11-05)

Sec. 37-154. Incentives for landscaping.
(a) The community development director may reduce the parking requirements by up to five (5) percent of the required number of spaces if the proposed landscape plan incorporates the retention of significant trees, particularly in the interior of the site, or if the proposed landscaping area exceeds the requirements of this chapter by fifteen (15) percent or more. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-155. Parking and landscape plan requirements.
(a) A plan, drawn to scale, indicating how the off-street parking and loading requirements and landscaping requirements will be met shall be submitted to the community development director for review and approval at the time of application for a building permit. The plan shall show all elements necessary to indicate that the requirements are being met, including the following:

(1) Individual parking and loading spaces showing parking space striping and capacity calculations;

(2) Circulation area necessary to serve spaces;

(3) Access to off-street and property to be served;

(4) Curb cuts;

(5) Dimensions, continuity, and substance of screening, if any;

(6) Grading, surfacing, drainage, and subgrading details;

(7) Obstacles, if any, to parking and traffic circulation in finished parking area;

(8) Specifications for signs and bumper guards;

(9) Footprint and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures;

(10) All sidewalks and pedestrian ways;

(11) Location, height and materials for all fences and walls;

(12) Boundaries and dimensions of the site;

(13) Location and spacing of all plant material;

(14) Common and scientific names of all plant materials;

(15) Size of plants at time of planting;

(16) Type and depth of mulch;

(17) Required irrigation systems;

(18) Other pertinent details.

(b) All tree planting shall conform to procedures contained in the most recent edition of “Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual”, distributed by International Society of Arboriculturalists, a copy of which is maintained in the office of the city forester. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

ARTICLE VIII. EXCEPTIONS
Sec. 37-156. Projections from buildings.
In residential zones, cornices, eaves, canopies, sunshades, gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, headers, sills, pilasters, lintels, and other similar architectural features may extend into the required rear or side yard setback to a point not closer than two (2) feet from the property line.

In residential zones, cornices, eaves, canopies, sunshades, gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, headers, sills, pilasters, lintels, and other similar architectural features may extend into the required front yard setback to a point not closer than ten (10) feet from the property line. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4424, § 1, 11-21-05)

Sec. 37-157. Reserved.
Editor’s Note – Ord. No. 4531, § 22, adopted July 13, 2009, repealed § 37-157, relating to general exceptions of lot size requirements, which derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2, adopted Aug. 15, 1994.

Sec. 37-158. General exceptions to front yard requirements.
(a) The following exceptions to the front yard requirements are authorized for a lot in any zone:

(1) On corner lots, the owner of the lot may determine which street the front of the lot shall face.

(2) If there are dwellings on both abutting lots with front yards of less than the required depth of the zone, the front yard for the lot need not exceed the average front yard of the abutting dwellings.

(3) If there is a dwelling on one abutting lot with a front yard setback of less than the required setback for the zone, the front yard setback for the lot need not exceed a depth one-half (1/2) way between the setback of the abutting lot and the required front yard setback.

(4) The planning and zoning commission may establish greater yard requirements when the yard abuts a street which the city has designated for widening.

(b) The community development director shall, upon written application therefor, grant permits allowing exceptions to front yard setback requirements in residential (R) zones, permitting encroachments up to ten (10) feet from the front property line, when all of the following standards are met:

(1) No structure or other encroachment shall be permitted closer than thirty-five (35) feet from the centerline of any adjacent street.

(2) The height of any structure or encroachment placed in the encroachment area (the “encroachment area” being any area within twenty (20) feet of the front lot line) shall be restricted as follows: structure height at the 10-foot line shall be zero feet; height may be increased three (3) feet for each foot beyond the 10-foot line, measured parallel with the front lot line. Height shall be measured from the top of the centerline of the adjacent street.

(3) No front yard setback exception permit shall be granted until all owners of record of property within three hundred (300) feet of the property for which the exception is requested shall be notified by mail of the proposed exception and afforded an opportunity, within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of notice, to object in writing to the granting of such permit; nor until the director of community development and the director of public works of the city shall have been notified of the permit request. If no written objections from the director of community development, the director of public works, or any other person entitled to notice are received within fifteen (15) days of such notice, the zoning official shall approve the request and issue the permit, subject to the requirements of subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section.

(4) If any written objection to the granting of the permit is received within fifteen (15) days of such notice from any person entitled to notice, a hearing shall be held before the planning and zoning commission, pursuant to section 37-184 of this code. Following such hearing, if the planning and zoning commission finds that:

a. Traffic visibility and safety;

b. Aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood; and

c. Neighboring property values will not be adversely affected by the granting of the permit;

the permit shall be granted. Decisions of the planning and zoning commission may be appealed by any person entitled to notice of the proceedings, in accordance with section 37-185 of this code. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4438, § 1, 4-10-06)

Sec. 37-159. General exceptions to building height limitations.
Except in the airport zone or in the airport approach and clear zone, the following types of structures or structural parts are not subject to the building height limitations of this chapter: Chimneys, tanks, church spires, belfries, domes, monuments, fire and hose towers, observation towers, transmission towers, smokestacks, flagpoles, radio and television towers, masts, aerials, cooling towers, elevator shafts, and other similar projections. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-159.1. Setback from overhead electrical transmission lines.
Structures shall be set back a minimum of eleven (11) feet from the edge of the right-of-way or easement for overhead high voltage electrical transmission lines or the minimum setback for the zone in which the property is located, whichever is greater. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

ARTICLE IX. CONDITIONAL USES
Sec. 37-160. Authorization to grant or deny conditional uses.
(a) Uses designated in this chapter as conditional uses may be permitted upon authorization by the commission in accordance with the standards and procedures established in this article. The commission may impose, in addition to those standards and requirements expressly specified by this chapter, any additional conditions which it considers necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or the city as a whole. Those conditions may include, but are not limited to:

(1) More restrictive standards than generally required, such as increased lot or yard size, with limitations or increased parking space requirements;

(2) Minimizing adverse impacts, such as limiting the number, size and location of signs and requiring screening, diking, fencing or landscaping;

(3) Controlling the timing, sequence, and duration of development;

(4) Designating the exact location and nature of development and assuring that it is maintained properly;

(5) Requiring the provision of on-site or off-site public facilities.

(b) Pursuant to Idaho Code Section 67-6512(f), exceptions or waivers of standards, other than use, in this chapter may be permitted by the commission through issuance of a conditional use permit only when the exceptions or waivers of standards are incidental to the conditional use permit being considered by the commission.

(c) The commission shall consider the following relevant criteria and standards when considering whether to grant a conditional use permit and/or an exception or waiver of standard that is incidental to a conditional use permit:

(1) The proposed use (will/will not) result in conditions that will tend to generate nuisances (including but not limited to noise, dust, glare, vibrations, odors and the like) or, if so, that any anticipated nuisances will be appropriately mitigated.

(2) The proposed use (is/is not) a public necessity (and/but) (is/is not) justified by the applicant and deemed to be of benefit to the public.

(3) The character of the proposed use, if developed according to the plan as submitted, (will/will not) be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located.

(4) The proposed use (will/will not) endanger the environment or the public health or safety.

(5) The proposed use (will/will not) be in substantial conformance with the comprehensive plan.

(d) Any use which is granted and permitted as a conditional use in a particular zone under the terms of this chapter shall be deemed to be a conforming use in said zone. A use existing prior to August 15, 1994, and which is classified in this chapter as a conditional use, shall be considered a conforming use. Any future change or alteration in existing structures shall be permitted outright, provided required permits are obtained and standards complied with. Any change in use shall be subject to the regulations of the zone in which it is located.

(e) Any increase in lot area for a use allowed by conditional use shall require the approval of the planning and zoning commission in the same manner as the original application.

(f) Upon approval by the planning and zoning commission of the findings of fact, conclusions of law and decision, those decisions that create uses that may be transferred with the land shall be filed on record in the office of the Nez Perce County recorder.

(g) Authorization of a conditional use shall be void after twelve (12) months unless:

(1) A building permit pursuant thereto has been applied for;

(2) Where no building permit is required, the intent of the conditional use has been fulfilled; or

(3) Substantial progress towards completion of the project has been accomplished, as determined by the community development director.

(h) The community development director may extend the expiration date of a conditional use permit to six (6) months upon written request of the applicant. The decision to grant or deny the extension shall be based on the following criteria:

(1) Application for extension is received prior to the expiration date;

(2) The conditional use remains consistent with the comprehensive plan and conditional uses allowed with the zone;

(3) The applicant can show progress towards establishing the conditional use;

(4) The applicant can show that circumstances specific to the conditional use and beyond the applicant’s control warrant an extension of time. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4530, § 1, 4-27-09; Ord. No. 4631, § 1, 7-13-15; Ord. No. 4651, § 1, 2-22-16)

Sec. 37-161. Application for a conditional use.
(a) A property owner or his agent may initiate a request for a conditional use or for the modification of an existing conditional use by filing an application with the community development department on forms prescribed in Article XIII. The application shall be submitted at least twenty (20) working days prior to the meeting at which it will be considered. The application for a conditional use shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn neatly and accurately and to an appropriate scale showing at least the following items:

(1) Property lines;

(2) Street address or legal description;

(3) Zoning of the property;

(4) Setbacks measured from the property lines;

(5) All building locations, size of buildings and overhangs;

(6) Driveways and parking spaces;

(7) Landscaping;

(8) The size, location and nature of the requested use;

(9) The location and size of all existing and proposed signs;

(10) Location of solid waste disposal and collection facilities;

(11) Other information, as directed by the community development department, necessary to fully explain and describe the nature of the request.

(b) The general site plan, as approved or modified by the commission, shall be made a part of the applicant’s file and all construction and development shall comply with the conditions of approval set by the commission as well as all applicable city codes. Nothing in this general site plan approval shall be interpreted as allowing the owner or applicant variation from current ordinances that were not specifically addressed at the time of permit approval. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-162. Public hearing on a conditional use.
Before the commission shall act upon a request for a conditional use, it shall hold a public hearing pursuant to section 37-184 of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-163. Standards governing conditional uses.
A conditional use shall comply with the standards of the zone in which it is located, except as the planning and zoning commission may modify these standards in authorizing the conditional use or as otherwise provided as follows:

(1) Adult bookstores, adult theaters and adult entertainment facilities. The city of Lewiston planning and zoning commission may authorize an adult bookstore, adult theater, or adult entertainment facility within the appropriate zone as a conditional use only when the subject structure, building, place or portion thereof is located more than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet from all residential zoning districts within the city, is located more than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet from all educational facilities for minors, places of worship, city parks or playgrounds, or public meeting facilities catering substantially to minors. The planning and zoning commission shall review each application for a conditional use permit for adult bookstores, adult theaters, or adult entertainment facilities and shall cause the use of the property to be restricted in such a manner that the intended use shall be properly, adequately landscaped and that all signage for the facility shall be limited in size so as to be unobtrusive and compatible with adjoining land uses.

(2) Repealed by Ord. No. 4742.

(3) Churches. The planning and zoning commission may authorize a church as a conditional use, if, in its judgment, the size of the site is adequate for the intended use, access to the site is adequate, and the surrounding property will not otherwise be adversely affected. A church may exceed the height limitations of

the zone in which it is located to a maximum of fifty (50) feet, if the total floor area of the building does not exceed one and one-half (1-1/2) times the area of the site and if the yard dimensions in each case are equal to at least two-thirds (2/3) of the height of the principal structure.

(4) Multifamily dwelling. Where permitted as a conditional use, all standards for multifamily dwellings required of this chapter shall be met, and:

a. For multifamily dwellings exceeding one (1) story:

1. Side yards shall be twice that required in the zoning district; or

2. Side yards may be those required in the zoning district where the structure is designed such that the second story wall begins at least twenty (20) feet from the property line.

b. No more than fifty (50) percent of required parking for a multifamily dwelling may be allowed in the front of the building. For purposes of this requirement, the front of the building shall be that closest to street frontage(s). The planning and zoning commission or the city council may, as a condition of approval, require recreational and boat parking or additional open space.

(5) Repealed by Ord. No. 4354.

(6) Medical or dental clinic. The planning and zoning commission may authorize a medical or dental clinic as a conditional use in a residential zone when the location does not conflict with the established character of the neighborhood. In general, the planning and zoning commission will encourage a grouping of medical facilities in locations convenient to hospitals and which are located on arterial or collector streets and on the periphery of neighborhoods, rather than in their midst.

(7) Public utility. In considering an application for a public utility use, the planning and zoning commission shall determine that the site, easement, or right-of-way is located so as to best serve the immediate area, and in the case of a right-of-way easement will not result in the uneconomic parceling of land. As far as possible, transmission towers, poles, overhead wires, pumping stations, and similar gear shall be so located, designed, and installed as to minimize their effect on scenic values and interference in radio and television receivers in the vicinity.

(8) Wrecking yard or junkyard. A wrecking yard or junkyard shall be enclosed by a sight-obscuring fence not less than eight (8) feet high. A five-foot minimum buffer strip is required between the yard and the public right-of-way or residential zone or use with a minimum of one (1) one-and-one-fourth-inch caliper shade tree and five (5) shrubs every thirty-five (35) linear feet. When the use abuts a residential zone or use, the required yard shall be a minimum of sixty (60) percent coniferous plants, a minimum of six (6) feet in height at the time of planting, spaced in a manner to create a complete visual screen.

(9) Individual minimum five thousand (5,000) square foot lots.

a. Minimum lot size shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet with a minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet and minimum lot depth of eighty (80) feet.

b. Two (2) family units constructed so as to share a common or adjoining side wall shall be allowed to be legally split into two (2) minimum five thousand (5,000) square foot lots, provided all other setback and design criteria have been met. The side yard opposite the zero lot line shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet.

c. Setbacks and other design criteria shall be consistent with the zone except as otherwise stated.

d. Maximum lot coverage shall be forty (40) percent.

e. Accessory buildings shall be limited to twenty (20) percent of the total lot area and at no time shall more than fifty (50) percent of the floor area of all structures on the lot be accessory uses.

f. When applying for a building permit, the owner shall present a verification of survey stakes or a resurvey. He shall also show the present or future location of the garage and access drive.

g. Neighborhood compatibility must be proven. Any proposal which radically or adversely affects the density, typical pattern of development or style of housing will not be permitted.

(10) Heliports.

a. Definitions.

Helicopter: A rotary wing aircraft that depends principally upon the lift generated by one (1) or more power-driven rotors rotating on substantially vertical axes for its support and motion in the air, capable of hovering and flying backward and sideways in addition to forward flight.

Heliport: An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, used for the landing and take-off of helicopters.

Helistop: A minimum facility heliport, either at ground level or on a structure, without such auxiliary facilities as a waiting room hangar, parking, fueling and maintenance.

Landing and take-off area: That specific area in which the helicopter actually lands and takes off, including the touchdown area.

Obstruction clearance slopes: Imaginary planes leading outward and upward from the take-off and landing area at angles compatible with the flight characteristics of the helicopter and the type of operations anticipated.

Peripheral area: A safety zone that provides an obstruction-free area on all sides of the landing and take-off area.

Touchdown area: That part of the landing or take-off area where it is preferred that the helicopter alight.

b. Classification of heliports.

1. Public use. A heliport shall be classified public when it is used for transportation by the general public.

2. Private use. A heliport that is used privately for a special-use facility without scheduled air taxi operations for the public shall be classified private.

3. Classes of heliports shall be as follows:

A. Class I – Private.

B. Class II – Public (small).

C. Class III – Public (large).

4. Subclassification of heliports is based upon support facilities and shall be as follows:

A. Subclass A: Minimum support facilities – No buildings, maintenance or fueling.

B. Subclass B: Limited support facilities – No maintenance or fueling.

C. Subclass C: Complete support facilities – Including maintenance and fueling.

c. General site considerations. For the purposes of reviewing heliport sites under conditional use, the planning and zoning commission shall encourage approach-departure paths over watercourses, beaches, parks, golf courses, industrial areas, vacant land or highways with minimum amount of obstructions. Highly populated areas including residential developments, playgrounds, schools and shopping districts shall not be used for approach-departure paths to the heliport.

d. Heliport dimensions.

1. The length and width of the landing and take-off area shall be one and five-tenths (1.5) times the overall length of the helicopter.

2. The peripheral area surrounding the landing and take-off area shall have a minimum width of one-fourth (1/4) the overall length of the helicopter, but not less than ten (10) feet.

3. A safety barrier along the outside edge of the peripheral area shall consist of a chain link fence constructed to three (3) feet in height which shall be the minimum and maximum height. A heliport used for private use shall not be required to construct the safety barrier if the heliport property is enclosed within a security fence.

4. No heliport shall be constructed or continued to be operated where the touchdown area is located within a horizontal distance to the nearest building as measured on an obstruction clearance slope ratio of two (2) feet

distance to one (1) foot height of the nearest building except for structures built for the operation of any heliport. A touchdown area for a heliport located on a building roof shall have either the same or a higher elevation of the nearest building as measured on the obstruction clearance slope ratio of two (2) feet distance to one (1) foot height.

5. The landing and take-off area shall be paved with plant mix asphalt or portland cement concrete.

e. Conditional use for heliport. The planning and zoning commission may grant a conditional use permit for a heliport for a period of five (5) years, which shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission within six (6) months of its expiration. The commission is hereby authorized to terminate the conditional use permit upon such review should land use development within the vicinity warrant revocation at the expiration of the initial five-year period.

(11) Ravines and drainageways.

a. Open drainage channels defined as category B drainages within section 37-3 of this code shall not be altered, improved, or relocated without approval of the Lewiston planning and zoning commission. Improvements may include the use of pipes, culverts, or concrete lining.

1. Requests for alteration, improvement or relocation of a category B drainage shall be submitted with drawings of improvements or alterations, and a statement that the estimated flow of storm water will be maintained throughout the channel. The drawings and statement shall be signed and stamped by an engineer registered in the state of Idaho.

2. The city engineer shall review requests for alteration, improvement or relocation within fifteen (15) working days of complete submittal. Complete submittal shall include:

A. Proof of application for a section 404 permit from the Army Corps of Engineers or a letter from the Corps of Engineers stating no permit is required;

B. Proof of application for a stream channel alteration permit from the Idaho Department of Water Resources or a letter from the Department of Water Resources stating no permit is required; and

C. Proof of compliance with the city of Lewiston’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or Idaho Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (IPDES) permit, as applicable.

3. The city engineer shall make a recommendation to the planning and zoning commission within forty-five (45) working days of complete submittal.

4. The planning and zoning commission shall approve or deny a conditional use permit for the proposed alteration, improvement or relocation at a public hearing as provided in Article XIII of this chapter. The commission may consider impacts of the proposed project on upstream property owners, water quality, wildlife habitat, and other considerations pertinent to the site and the proposed project. The commission may request documentation of land use impacts, both existing and proposed, through studies, presentations, or other documents, and may require said documentation to be stamped and signed by professionals deemed qualified by the commission.

5. Open drainage channels that meet the definition of waters of the U.S. as determined by the Army Corps of Engineers shall not be altered, improved, or relocated without a Department of the Army permit and a stream channel alteration permit issued by the state of Idaho, or a letter of “no permit required” from both agencies.

b. Ravine/drainageway standards.

1. Grading standards for alteration, excavation, fill, relocation, or modification of drainageways identified in the Lewiston storm water master plan shall be those standards provided in the 1997 Uniform Building Code, Appendix Chapter 33, Excavation and Grading, except that Sections 33.6.2 and 3310 shall not apply.

2. All slopes disturbed by project grading, including on-site slopes which are not necessary for construction staging, shall be reseeded with native shrubs, grasses, etc., consistent with recommendations from a qualified erosion control professional, or an equivalent approved by the community development director. Reseeding shall be completed within three (3) months of completion of final grading. These areas shall be bonded to ensure proper reestablishment of the vegetation, with temporary irrigation if deemed necessary based on seed mix and time of year.

3. An erosion control plan meeting requirements of the city of Lewiston’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or Idaho Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (IPDES) permit, as applicable, shall be submitted to the public works director for review and approval.

4. Drainageways will not be piped and/or filled unless there are no alternatives.

5. Engineered improvements to the drainageway shall emphasize reducing erosion, improving water quality, and controlling velocities.

(12) Class B manufactured homes on individual building lots.

a. No Class B manufactured home shall be allowed on any individual building lot within the city of Lewiston unless the Class B manufactured home has been inspected and approved by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and bears the seal of that department, and the planning and zoning commission of the city of Lewiston, Idaho, shall find that approval of the application for a conditional use permit will be compatible with the general character of the neighborhood or to the property values of other property within the neighborhood. In making its determination, the commission shall consider at least the following criteria:

1. Existence of other similar Class B manufactured homes in the neighborhood within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed location.

2. The general character of the neighborhood within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed site, including the existing land uses, compatibility of types and types and styles of buildings and condition of housing.

b. Approval of a conditional use permit application shall be conditional upon the applicant complying with the following requirements:

1. The Class B manufactured home shall be permanently attached to the real property of the lot upon which the manufactured home is situated by anchoring the manufactured home to a concrete foundation, removing the tongue and wheels from the manufactured home and installing skirting around the entire circumference of the manufactured home.

2. A building permit for the placement of the Class B manufactured home on the foundation on the lot shall be obtained from the community development department of the city of Lewiston.

3. A certificate of occupancy for the Class B manufactured home shall be obtained from the community development department of the city of Lewiston.

(13) Repealed by Ord. No. 4573.

(14) Home occupations not specifically enumerated in Article VI of this chapter, Home Occupations.

a. Within fifteen (15) days of application for a home occupation not specifically enumerated in Article VI of this chapter, Home Occupations, the community development director shall determine if the proposed home occupation is substantially similar to uses listed in section 37-142 of this code, Home occupations not permitted.

b. If the community development director determines that the proposed home occupation is substantially similar to uses listed in section 37-142 of this code, and not allowed, the application will be administratively denied.

c. If the community development director determines that the proposed home occupation is not similar to uses listed in section 37-142 of this code, the planning and zoning commission shall consider the application at the next regularly scheduled public hearing date.

(15) Kennel standards.

a. Where kennels are permitted as a conditional use, the following standards shall apply:

1. The floor of an indoor kennel shall be made or covered with a durable, impervious surface sloped to a floor drain to allow the area to be cleaned and disinfected;

2. The outdoor dog runs shall be enclosed with fences or walls of a minimum of eight (8) feet in height;

3. All laws applicable to the public health shall be complied with for the entire period of the operation of the kennel;

4. All outdoor kennels, play yards or pens associated with the kennel shall be located only in the side or rear yard and shall be set back one hundred (100) feet from any residentially zoned property;

5. A minimum ten-foot-wide landscaped buffer shall be installed along any side or rear property line adjacent to residentially zoned property. Landscaping shall consist of one (1) one-and-one-half-inch caliper deciduous tree or one (1) six-foot evergreen tree and five (5) one-gallon shrubs per thirty-five (35) linear feet.

(16) Manufactured homes as sales offices.

a. Manufactured home units, bearing the seal of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, or commercial coach units may be used for office space only for used car sales lots and manufactured home sales offices in commercial zones upon approval of a conditional use permit.

1. The manufactured unit shall not be used as a residence;

2. The manufactured unit shall be skirted in accordance with section 23-16 of this code; skirting shall be kept in reasonable repair;

3. The manufactured unit shall be placed at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines;

4. Parking lots and travelways serving the unit shall be in accordance with provisions of Article VII of this chapter;

5. The permit shall be personal to the applicant, shall not run with the land, and shall not be transferred to a future buyer of the property or business without a conditional use permit approved by the planning and zoning commission.

(17) Replacement of nonconforming commercial uses in residential zones. Where replacement of a nonconforming commercial use is permitted in a residential zone, the following standards shall apply:

a. A restored commercial building shall meet all yard and setback requirements for the zone.

b. A restored commercial building shall not exceed the square footage of the original building footprint, except as provided herein for energy conservation.

c. A restored commercial building shall be consistent with the prevailing architectural character of the neighborhood as determined by the planning and zoning commission. For purposes of commercial replacement in a residential zone, a neighborhood shall be defined by all the residential structures within three hundred (300) feet of the restoration site, or an area to be determined by the commission.

d. Restored commercial buildings shall provide adequate parking as determined by the planning and zoning commission. Parking lots shall meet all landscaping requirements of parking lots.

e. Area lighting shall meet or exceed standards established by the National Electrical Code, shall be downlit, shielded from above, and shielded from the sides with house side shields. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4249, § 57, 10-25-99; Ord. No. 4322, § 3, 12-9-02; Ord. No. 4328, § 4, 3-24-03; Ord. No. 4344, § 3, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 4354, § 3, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 4393, § 8, 3-14-05; Ord. No. 4399, § 2, 7-11-2005; Ord. No. 4499, § 2, 1-28-08; Ord. No. 4531, § 16, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4573, § 1, 2-27-2012; Ord. No. 4630, § 1, 7-13-15; Ord. No. 4692, § 17, 10-30-17; Ord. No. 4742, § 2V, 8-19-19; Ord. No. 4747, § 1, 8-26-19)

Sec. 37-164. Reserved.
Editor’s Note – Ord. No. 4249, § 58, adopted Oct. 25, 1999, repealed § 37-164, relating to standards governing neighborhood commercial conditional uses, which derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2, adopted Aug. 15, 1994.

Sec. 37-165. Reserved.
Editor’s Note – Ord. No. 4283, § 5, adopted April 9, 2001, repealed § 37-165, relating to variances for existing businesses, which derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2, adopted Aug. 15, 1994.

ARTICLE X. NONCONFORMITIES
Sec. 37-166. Statement of intent.
(a) Within zoning districts established by this chapter and its amendments there exist structures and uses of land. and combinations of structures and uses of land, which were lawful before this chapter was adopted or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the provisions of this chapter or its amendments. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue pursuant to these regulations.

(b) Whenever this article refers to the effective date of adoption of this chapter, the reference shall be deemed to be the date of adoption of Ordinance No. 4328 [March 24, 2003], or any subsequent revision adopted by ordinance which renders a lot, use of land, structure, or any combination thereof nonconforming.

(c) The intent of this article is to encourage the transformation of nonconforming uses into conforming uses, while not causing blight associated with abandoned buildings. The intent of this article is to allow nonconforming uses to improve their properties so that they may add property value, address deficiencies of the property, maintain the economic vitality of the surrounding neighborhood, and contribute to the community as a whole. However, it is not the intent of this article to allow the unfettered expansion or proliferation of nonconforming uses. (Ord. No. 4328, § 6, 3-24-03)

Sec. 37-167. Discontinuance of a nonconforming use.
Where at the effective date of this chapter lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:

(1) No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, except as provided in section 37-170 of this chapter.

(2) If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reasons for a period of more than twelve (12) months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located.

(3) If any such nonconforming use of land involves the keeping of livestock, and is discontinued for a period of six (6) months, further use of the property shall conform to this chapter, except where a declaration of a water emergency by the water district or city council necessitates removal of livestock for pasturage, and due to a water shortage the use is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months, or for pasture rotation, breeding or competitive showing.

(4) No structure shall be erected in connection with, or accessory to, a nonconforming use of land. (Ord. No. 4328, § 6, 3-24-03; Ord. No. 4354, § 4, 3-29-04)

Sec. 37-168. Nonconforming structures.
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, the location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

(1) No such nonconforming structure may be altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, provided that:

a. Any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity;

b. A nonconforming structure may be enlarged, provided:

1. The addition or enlargement continues the profile of walls of the existing structure and does not increase the nonconformity;

2. The finished structure does not add another new nonconformity;

3. The finished structure does not extend into right-of-way; and

4. The structure remains otherwise lawful.

(2) Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than eighty (80) percent of its assessed value at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.

(3) Should the owner move such structure for any reasons for any distance, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zone in which it is located after it is moved. (Ord. No. 4328, § 6, 3-24-03)

Sec. 37-169. Replacement of nonconforming manufactured homes.
Nonconforming manufactured homes located on individual lots that are removed from the property shall be replaced by conforming units. In the F-2 and R-1 Zones, the Class B manufactured homes will not require a conditional use permit if replaced within six (6) months. (Ord. No. 4328, § 6, 3-24-03)

Sec. 37-170. Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and land in combination.
If a lawful use involving nonconforming individual structures with an assessed value of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) or more, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that would not be allowed in the zone under the provisions of this article, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

(1) An existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the zone in which it is located shall not be enlarged, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, though it may be repaired as defined by section 37-171 of this chapter, except that:

a. A structure containing a nonconforming use may be altered to decrease the nonconformity of the use;

b. A structure containing a nonconforming commercial use may be enlarged or altered provided the expansion or alteration is designed solely to achieve energy conservation, as determined by the building official, and the structure remains otherwise lawful.

(2) Where a nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination:

a. And the use is residential in nature, not located abutting a major or minor arterial street, and the structure is destroyed:

1. The structure may be rebuilt with approval of a conditional use permit; and

2. A building permit is approved for the reconstruction within one (1) year of the date of destruction.

b. And the use is commercial in nature, located abutting a major or minor arterial street, and the structure is destroyed:

1. The structure may be rebuilt with approval of a conditional use permit; and

2. A building permit is approved for the reconstruction within one (1) year of the date of destruction;

3. A time extension of the conditional use permit may be requested to the commission.

(3) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any portions of a building that were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building, except as allowed in section 37-168 of this chapter.

(4) Any lawful use of a building existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be continued, even though such use does not conform to the provisions hereof. A nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or of a more restrictive classification. A use shall be determined to be equally or more restrictive by the community development director and based on, but not limited to:

a. The number of off-street parking spaces required of the previous use and proposed new use, as provided in Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this chapter;

b. The amount of traffic generated by the previous use and the proposed new use;

c. The amount of on-site vehicle or equipment storage required of the previous use and proposed new use;

d. The hours of operations of the previous use and proposed new use;

e. Noise, dust, vibration, odor, and other elements potentially harmful to the value or enjoyment of surrounding properties;

f. The applicant of the proposed change of use shall contact all property owners and tenants within three hundred (300) feet of the property on which the change of use is planned. The notification shall provide details of the proposed use and inform those receiving notification of their opportunity to contact the community development department, in writing, within fifteen (15) days of notification with complaints or concerns about the proposed change of use. The applicant shall provide to the community development department written verification of the notification to all property owners and tenants. If no written objections are received from those persons entitled to receive notice within fifteen (15) days of such notice, zoning approval may be granted. If any written objection to the proposed development is received within fifteen (15) days of such notice from any person entitled to notice, a conditional use permit shall be required. The applicant shall apply for a conditional use permit as provided in Article IX of this chapter.

(5) Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. (Ord. No. 4328, § 6, 3-24-03; Ord. No. 4531, § 17, 7-13-09)

Sec. 37-171. Repairs and maintenance and completion of construction.
(1) On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done for ordinary repairs, or for repair or replacement on nonbearing walls. Fixtures, wiring, or plumbing shall be considered accessory to the structure, and repair, replacement, or additions of these shall not be considered an expansion of the nonconforming structure or use.

(2) If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe, as determined by the building official, due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reasons of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located; provided, that the city building inspector shall be authorized to direct temporary repairs to nonconforming uses when the same are required to protect the safety of the persons on or about the premises.

(3) To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully commenced prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction; provided, that work shall be carried on diligently. (Ord. No. 4328, § 6, 3-24-03; Ord. No. 4531, § 18, 7-13-09)

Sec. 37-172. Nonconforming lots.
If a lot has an area or dimension that does not meet the requirements of this chapter, and prior to the time this chapter was adopted, such lot was platted or otherwise created and accepted, then such lot may be put to a use permitted outright subject to the other requirements of the zone in which such lot is located, except that a residential use on a lot that is nonconforming relative to minimum lot area shall be limited to a single-family dwelling. (Ord. No. 4531, § 19, 7-13-09; Ord. No. 4688, § 1, 4-24-17)

ARTICLE XI. VARIANCES
Sec. 37-173. Authorization to grant or deny variance.
(a) The commission may authorize variances where it can be shown that the literal interpretation of this chapter would cause hardship. A variance may be considered for modification of the requirements for lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setbacks, parking spaces, height of buildings or other ordinance provisions affecting the size or shape of a structure or the placement of the structure upon lots, or the size of lots. A variance shall not be considered a right or special privilege, but may be granted only upon the showing of undue hardship because of characteristics of the site, and that the variance is not in conflict with the public interest.

A variance may not be approved when the conditions leading to the need for the variance are of the applicant’s making. Once granted, a variance is permanent and runs with the land.

(b) In granting a variance, the commission may attach conditions which it finds necessary to protect the interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood and otherwise to achieve the purpose of this chapter.

(c) No variance shall be granted to allow the use of property for purposes not authorized within the zone in which the proposed use would be located.

(d) Upon approval by the planning and zoning commission of the findings of fact, conclusions of law and decision, said decision shall be filed on record in the office of the Nez Perce County recorder.

(e) Authorization of a variance shall be void after twelve (12) months unless a building permit or subdivision plat pursuant thereto has been applied for or a decision of substantial progress towards completion of the project has been determined by the community development director. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4530, § 2, 4-27-09)

Sec. 37-174. Circumstances for granting a variance.
No variance shall be granted unless it can be shown that all of the following relevant criteria and standards are met:

(1) Conditions apply to the property that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity and which pose an undue hardship because of characteristics of the site as a result of lot size, or shape, topography, or other special features.

(2) The variance is not necessary as a result of actions of the applicant, will not grant the applicant a special privilege, and is necessary for the preservation of a property right possessed by owners of other property in the same zone and vicinity.

(3) The authorization of the variance will not be materially detrimental or injurious to other property or owner of property in the same zone and vicinity, or otherwise conflict with the public interest or with the objectives of adopted city plans or policies.

(4) The variance requested is the minimum variance which will alleviate the hardship. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4631, § 2, 7-13-15)

Sec. 37-175. Application for a variance.
A property owner may initiate a request for a variance by filing an application with the community development department, using forms prescribed in Article XIII. The application shall be submitted at least twenty (20) working days prior to the meeting at which it will be considered. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the condition to be varied and the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed development. The commission may request other drawings or information necessary to an understanding of the request. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-176. Public hearing on a variance.
Before the planning and zoning commission may act on a request for a variance, it shall hold a public hearing pursuant to section 37-184 of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-177. Administrative variances.
(a) The community development director may grant a variance to the requirements of this chapter where it can be shown that owing to special and unusual circumstances related to a specific lot, strict application of this chapter would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship. No variance shall be granted to allow the use of property for a purpose not authorized within the zone in which the proposed use would be located. In granting a variance, the director may attach conditions which are necessary to protect the best interest of the surrounding property or vicinity or otherwise achieve the purposes of this chapter.

(b) The following may be considered under the administrative variance process:

(1) Minimum lot area variance of ten (10) percent or less;

(2) Minimum frontage of ten (10) percent or less, except when such request would reduce the minimum lot frontage to less than twenty (20) feet;

(3) Minimum setback from a property line of twenty (20) percent or less except that no administrative variance shall be approved that will allow a structure to project into a clear vision triangle;

(4) Reduction in required off-street parking of ten (10) percent;

(5) Increase in lot coverage of five (5) percent;

(6) Reduction in required lot depth of ten (10) percent; and

(7) Dimensional or numerical elements of standards for multifamily development not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the numerical or dimensional value, including but not limited to standards for yards or parking spaces.

(c) Upon receipt of the variance application form and payment of the required fee, the director shall render a decision within five (5) working days, or may elect to defer the decision to the planning and zoning commission. Additional information may be requested by the director in arriving at a decision. If additional information is requested, the director shall have an additional five (5) working days to render this decision beginning when the additional information is given to the director. In rendering a decision, the director shall find that granting a variance shall result in more efficient use of the site, preserve natural features where appropriate, adequate provisions are made for light and privacy on adjoining properties, that the variance will be consistent with the overall objectives of the comprehensive plan and this chapter and that the variance will have a minimal adverse impact on the livability, value or development of abutting properties and the surrounding areas.

(d) Should the director elect to grant an administrative variance, the decision shall not become final until fifteen (15) days have elapsed. A notice of the proposed variance shall be mailed within two (2) working days of the decision to all property owners adjacent to the subject property and objections and comments solicited. In addition, the membership of the planning and zoning commission shall be notified. If no written objections from those persons entitled to receive notice are received within fifteen (15) days of such notice, the decision shall become final at the end of the 15-day period.

(e) If any written objection to the granting of such an administrative variance is received within fifteen (15) days of such notice from any person entitled to notice, a hearing shall be held before the planning and zoning commission pursuant to section 37-184 of this code. Decisions of the planning and zoning commission may be appealed by any person entitled to notice of the proceedings in accordance with section 37-185 of this code. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4379, § 1, 1-24-05; Ord. No. 4438, § 2, 4-10-06; Ord. No. 4499, § 2, 1-28-08)

ARTICLE XII. AMENDMENTS
Sec. 37-178. Authorization to initiate amendments.
An amendment to the text of this chapter or to the official zoning map may be initiated by the council, by the commission, or by the property owner. A property owner may initiate a request for an amendment by filing an application with the community development department using forms prescribed in Article XIII. The application shall be submitted at least twenty (20) working days prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which it will be considered. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-179. Public hearing and records of amendments.
The commission shall hold a public hearing on every requested change in zoning district boundaries in accordance with section 37-184 of this chapter. Its recommendations on each request zone change shall be transmitted to the city council. No zone change shall be accomplished other than by ordinance duly passed by the city council. The city clerk shall maintain records of amendments to this chapter in a form convenient for use by the public. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-180. Accordance with adopted comprehensive plan.
The commission shall evaluate a requested amendment to a zoning district to determine the nature and extent of the requested change. If it is an accord with the adopted comprehensive plan, the commission may recommend and the council may adopt or reject the requested change. The commission may request documentation of land use impacts, both existing and proposed, through studies, presentations, or other documents, and may require said documentation to be stamped and signed by professionals deemed qualified by the commission.

If the commission determines the requested change is not in accord with the adopted comprehensive plan, the commission may either deny the request or recommend to the council an appropriate amendment to the plan. The council may adopt or reject the amendment under the procedures provided in Idaho Code, Section 67-6509. After the plan is amended, the zoning map may be amended in conformity therewith. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4344, § 4, 11-17-03)

Sec. 37-180.1. Relevant criteria and standards when considering zone changes.4
The commission shall consider the following relevant criteria and standards when considering a request for a change in zoning:

(1) The proposed rezone (is/is not) in general conformance with the comprehensive plan.

(2) The subject land (is/is not) at least as well suited or is better suited for the proposed zoning district than the existing zoning district.

(3) The proposed rezone (does/does not) present foreseen, immitigable impacts of incompatible uses or development being located in the same vicinity.

(4) The effects of the proposed rezone (are/are not) anticipated to place undue burden upon delivery of services provided by any political subdivision within the planning jurisdiction, including school districts.

(5) The size, type, intensity and density of development expected to occur on the subject property as a result of this rezoning (is/is not) suitable for the area and (will/will not) unduly burden the neighborhood, public infrastructure or environmental resources. (Ord. No. 4631, § 3, 7-13-15)

ARTICLE XIII. ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE
Sec. 37-181. Composition of planning and zoning commission; appointments, term of members; filling of vacancies; removal of members, officers, committees; meetings; rules.
The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven (7) members. The term of office for members shall be four (4) years. All members shall be residents of the city; provided, however, one (1) member may be a resident of the area of city impact. All members shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by majority vote of the council. Those members currently serving on the commission shall have their terms adjusted by the council so that the terms shall be balanced over the succeeding calendar years. Vacancies occurring through expiration of terms or otherwise shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments, said appointments being for the unexpired portion of that term. A member whose term has expired may serve until reappointed or until a qualified replacement has been appointed.

Members may be removed for cause by a majority vote of the council. Members shall be selected without respect to political affiliation and may receive reimbursement for actual expenses as provided in section 2-185 of this code. Members shall be deemed to be officials within the meaning of sections 2-156 through 2-160 of this code.

The commission shall elect its own chairperson and create and fill other offices as it may determine necessary, and may establish and appoint from among its members such subcommittees as it may determine necessary to carry out its responsibilities.

At least one (1) regular meeting shall be held each month for not less than eleven (11) months in each year. A majority of the members of the commission shall be necessary to constitute a quorum at any meeting.

Written rules or bylaws consistent with Title 67, Chapter 65, Idaho Code, and other laws of this state for the transaction of business of the commission, shall be adopted with the approval of the council and a written record of meetings, hearings, resolutions, studies, findings, permits and actions taken shall be maintained. All meetings shall be open to the public pursuant to the Idaho Open Meetings Law, Title 74, Chapter 2, Idaho Code. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4502, § 1, 2-11-08; Ord. No. 4716, § 1, 6-11-18)

Sec. 37-182. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4716, adopted June 11, 2018, repealed § 37-182, pertaining to planning and zoning commission membership, derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2 and Ord. No. 4502, §2.

Sec. 37-183. Duties of the planning and zoning commission.
The planning and zoning commission shall have jurisdiction and authority as follows:

(1) To conduct a comprehensive planning process to prepare comprehensive plan as required by Idaho Code, Sections 67-6508 through 67-6510; to recommend its adoption by the council; to prepare implementing measures; and to review and update the comprehensive plan as necessary.

(2) To receive and act upon applications for actions authorized and specified herein.

(3) To hold public hearings on applications for variances, conditional use permits, changes of use of nonconforming uses, proposed zoning amendments and proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan.

(4) To submit to the council a report and recommendations on each zoning amendment and comprehensive plan amendment following public hearing and preliminary plats following review at a public meeting.

(5) To determine the classification of use not specifically mentioned in this chapter. Such determination shall be based upon a detailed description of the proposed use and such other information as may be required.

(6) To provide and maintain a continuing program of public information on planning and zoning matters, including reasons or grounds for actions taken.

(7) To hear appeals from rulings of the community development department.

(8) Review and comment as appropriate to the Nez Perce County planning and zoning commission and/or the Nez Perce County board of county commissioners on land use proposals within the area of city impact. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4622, § 1, 2-23-15)

Sec. 37-184. Rules for conduct of public hearing.
(a) Public hearing required. Upon the receipt of an application for a conditional use pursuant to section 37-161 of this code, a variance, pursuant to section 37-175 of this code, a change of use of nonconforming use pursuant to section 37-168 of this code, or planned development, pursuant to section 37-97 of this code, or an application for a zone change, comprehensive plan amendment, an amendment to the text of this chapter, a public hearing shall be scheduled.

(b) Notifications.

(1) Each notice of public hearing on an amendment to the text of this chapter shall contain the date, time, and place of the hearing, a summary of the proposed amendment, and any other information considered pertinent; and shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing.

(2) Each notice of public hearing on a conditional use, change of use of a nonconforming use or a variance request or on an amendment to change the zoning map or comprehensive plan shall include as a minimum the date, time, and place of the hearing and summary of the proposal. The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing and shall, in addition, be mailed to the owners of all properties within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundary of the property for which the application is made, except in variance cases notices shall be mailed only to owners of adjoining properties, including properties across streets, alleys and rights-of-way. All notices shall be mailed at least eight (8) calendar days prior to the hearing.

(3) When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners or residents, mailed notice may be omitted. In lieu thereof, public announcements of the hearing shall be made on local radio and television stations at least five (5), but not more than fifteen (15) days before the hearing.

(4) Failure of any person to receive the notice prescribed in this section shall not impair the validity of the hearing.

(5) The commission may recess a hearing to serve further notice upon other property owners or persons it determines may be interested in the proposal being considered.

(c) Conduct of hearings. A public hearing shall be held to determine whether the application is consistent with the policies and goals enumerated in this chapter.

(1) No person shall be permitted to testify at such a hearing until the person has been recognized and called upon by the chairman or the mayor.

(2) All proceedings shall be recorded electronically or stenographically and all persons speaking at such hearings shall speak before a microphone in such a manner as to ensure the accuracy of the recorded testimony and remarks. A person desiring to testify may also submit written testimony at any time prior to the conclusion of the public hearing. Written testimony may be entertained after the close of the public hearing, at the discretion of the chairman or mayor.

(3) At the commencement of the public hearing, the chairman may establish a time limit to be observed by all speakers.

(4) Each commission member or council member, when recognized by the mayor, shall be allowed to question the speaker, and the speaker shall be limited to answers to the questions asked. The question and answer period shall not be included in the speaker’s time limit that might be established by the chairman. The speaker shall not be interrupted by the planning and zoning commission or the city council until his time has been expended or until he has finished his statement.

(5) Any person not conforming to the above rules may be prohibited from speaking during the public hearing. Should such person refuse to comply with such prohibition, he may be removed from the room by order of the chairman or mayor.

(6) The decision of the planning and zoning commission or the city council shall be announced by findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision of the hearing body.

(7) The public hearing may be continued or recessed to a date certain, or indefinitely, upon motion by the city council or the planning and zoning commission.

(8) Cross-examination of persons testifying at the public hearing shall not be permitted. An applicant shall have an opportunity to rebut any testimony submitted.

(9) Any exhibit introduced by any person shall be retained by the planning and zoning commission or city council and made a part of the record therein.

(d) Contents of decisions. All decisions of the commission, made pursuant to the authority given by this chapter, shall include and specify the following:

(1) The ordinance provisions and standards used in evaluating the application;

(2) The reasons for approval or denial;

(3) The further actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a permit.

(e) Decision and appeal. Within five (5) working days after the commission has adopted findings of fact, conclusions of law and decision on the application, the community development department shall notify the applicant of the decision. The decision is final unless appealed by the applicant or any interested person within fifteen (15) days of the commission’s adoption of findings of fact, conclusions of law and decision. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4531, § 20, 7-13-09)

Sec. 37-185. Appeal from action or ruling of planning and zoning commission.
(a) An action or ruling by the commission pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the city council by the person who initiated the action before the commission or by any person entitled to notice by mail of the action under section 37-184 of this code within fifteen (15) days after the commission has adopted findings of fact, conclusions of law and its decision. Written notice of the appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within the fifteen (15) day period. If the appeal is not filed, and the fee required by section 37-188 of this code, is not deposited with the city clerk within the fifteen (15) day period, the decision of the commission shall be final.

(b) If an appeal is filed and the required fee is deposited within the required time, the commission shall make a written report of the case to the council. The council may, in its sole discretion and without hearing or notice, refuse to accept jurisdiction of such appeal; in which case, the decision of the commission shall be final, and any appeal fees shall be refunded, or it may provide that such appeal shall be heard at a public hearing before the council at such time and pursuant to such rules as the council may determine.

(c) If a hearing on such appeal is required by the council, publication of notice of hearing on appeal shall be made as required by section 37-184(b) of this code. At any time after such public hearing, the council may affirm, reverse or modify any decision of the commission, or it may order the case to be returned to the commission for further proceeding.

(d) An affected person aggrieved by a final decision concerning matters identified in Idaho Code, Section 67-6521, may, within twenty-eight (28) days after all remedies have been exhausted under this chapter, seek judicial review as provided by Chapter 52 of Title 67 of the Idaho Code. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4683, § 1, 1-9-17; Ord. No. 4687, § 1, 7-10-17)

Sec. 37-186. Repealed.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4623, § 1, adopted February 23, 2015, repealed § 37-186, pertaining to appeals from action or ruling of planning and zoning commission in the city impact area, which derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2, adopted August 15, 1994.

Sec. 37-187. Reinitiated hearings on zoning amendments, conditional use permits, and variance permits.
No person, except the city council or the planning and zoning commission shall reinitiate an application for a zone amendment, conditional use permit, or variance permit for any property for which a previous application has been submitted and denied within one (1) year after final determination of such application. This limitation shall not apply where a material change in circumstances has occurred since the date of denial. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-188. Forms of petitions, applications and appeals.
All petitions, applications and appeals provided in this chapter shall be made on forms prescribed by the city clerk and accompanied by the appropriate fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 4531, § 21, 7-13-09)

Sec. 37-189. Reserved.
Editor’s Note – Ord. No. 4531, § 22, adopted July 13, 2009, repealed § 37-189, relating to filing fees, which derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2, adopted August 15, 1994 as amended by Ord. No. 4414 § 1, adopted August 22, 2005, and Ord. No. 4506, § 1, adopted May 12, 2008.

Sec. 37-190. Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4530, § 3, adopted April 27, 2009, repealed § 37-190, pertaining to time limits of conditional use or variance permits, which derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2, adopted August 15, 1994.

Sec. 37-191. Zoning certificate required.
It shall be unlawful for an owner to use or to permit the use of any structure, building, land or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or enlarged, wholly or partly, until a zoning certificate, which may be a part of the building permit, shall have been issued by the community development department. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-192. Duties of the community development department.
(a) It shall be the duty of the community development department to enforce the provisions of this chapter and in addition thereto and in furtherance of said authority, shall:

(1) Issue building permits for construction, repair and alterations.

(2) Issue a stop work order when a structure is or is proposed to be located, constructed, maintained, repaired, altered or used in a manner not prescribed by this chapter, the violation of which order shall be an offense under this code.

(3) Conduct inspection of buildings and structures for:

a. Location on the property with respect to property lines.

b. Location on the property with respect to uses allowed and uses permitted.

c. Determination of compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter.

(4) Maintain permanent records of all inspections and determinations made involving the inspections of buildings, structures and the use of lands to ensure continuous compliance with the terms of this chapter.

(b) It shall be the duty of the community development department to assist in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and in addition thereto and in furtherance of said authority, he, or his authorized representative, shall:

(1) Order the abatement of violations of the zoning ordinance, the violation of which order shall be an offense under this code.

(2) Aid in the prosecution of such violations.

(3) Receive and examine applications for zone changes and maintain permanent records thereof.

(4) Maintain permanent and current records of applications for all reclassifications, variances and conditional use permits and of the hearings and actions thereon.

(5) Receive, file and transmit to the commission all applications, petitions and other communications upon which the commission is required hereby to act.

(c) An appeal from a ruling of the community development department may be made in writing to the commission by an affected person, within fifteen (15) days of the ruling. Notices of the appeal shall be sent to all adjacent property owners, giving the date and time the commission will hear the appeal. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

ARTICLE XIV. REMEDIES
Sec. 37-193. Penalty.
A willful violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a petty misdemeanor. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

Sec. 37-194. Alternative remedy.
In case a building or other structure is, or is proposed to be located, constructed, maintained, repaired, altered or used, or the land proposed to be used, is in violation of this chapter, the building or land in violation shall constitute a nuisance, and the city may, as an alternative to other remedies that are legally available for enforcing this chapter, institute an injunction, abatement, or other appropriate proceeding to prevent, enjoin, temporarily or permanently abate, or remove the unlawful location, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or use. (Ord. No. 4108, § 2, 8-15-94)

ARTICLE XV. ANIMAL RIGHTS, LIVESTOCK AND PASTURE STANDARDS
Sec. 37-195. Purpose and applicability.
The purpose of this article is to provide allowances, prohibitions, limitations and standards for the keeping and raising of livestock. It is the intent of this article to encourage the use and protection of lands in more rural areas of the city for animal husbandry purposes, maintain and enhance the city’s rural lifestyle, encourage household self-sufficiency, promote the benefits of animal husbandry, minimize potential adverse effects on adjoining property from the keeping and raising of livestock to neighboring residents and to educate youth as to the enjoyment and responsibilities of raising and caring for livestock. The allowances, prohibitions, limitations and standards set forth in this article shall not apply to youth raising or caring for livestock for purposes of participation in a related educational program, such as 4-H (Head, Heart, Hands and Health Club/Program). However, 4-H livestock shall not be kept in any manner so as to cause offense to neighboring residents regarding noise, odor, dust, drainage/run-off, etc. Complaints about such may be subject to the city of Lewiston requiring corrective action to be taken to abate any such offense, up to and including requiring the removal of the livestock from the subject property.

The city of Lewiston recognizes and supports the right to keep and raise livestock in keeping with the requirements established herein by right in the Agricultural Transitional Zone (F-2 Zone) and the Suburban Residential Zone (R-1 Zone), and with a conditional use permit in the Low Density Residential Zone (R-2A Zone); however, the keeping of poultry shall also be allowed by right, subject to the standards specified herein, on any single-family or duplex residential lot, except in the central business district, as defined in section 37-145 of this code. The city of Lewiston has determined that inconveniences or discomforts with the keeping of livestock shall not be considered a nuisance if operations are consistent with accepted customs and standards and the code sections set forth in this article. (Ord. No. 4354, § 5, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 4580, § 1, 8-13-12; Ord. No. 4645, § 1, 10-26-15)

Sec. 37-196. Definitions.
Any term used but undefined in this article shall be defined as per common definition of the English dictionary.

Animal means livestock, as defined herein.

Animal rights means the ability to keep a specific number and type of livestock or poultry on a piece of property because of it being allowed by the zoning, authorized by a conditional use permit, or as a historic, legally established and continuously maintained nonconforming use.

Cleaning means the removal of manure from stalls or pens, stockpiling of manure, composting of manure, tilling manure into fields or hauling the manure off site.

Corral means an outdoor stall.

Dry lot means an area of property upon which no forage is present for feeding. Dry lots shall be at least nine hundred (900) square feet with a minimum dimension of ten (10) feet. Dry lots shall not be partitioned into less than nine hundred (900) square foot areas. Dry lots are a place of temporary containment for convalescing animals, animals being worked, or animals given regular exercise on a different location of the property.

Livestock is a generic term and includes all cattle or animals of the bovine species; all horses, mules, burros and donkeys or animals of the equine species; all goats or animals of the caprine species; all swine or animals of the porcine species; all sheep or animals of the ovine species; all poultry; llamas and alpacas. Sucklings, or livestock which are born from animals already on a property and less than three (3) months old, shall not be counted toward the allowable number of livestock on any given property.

Livestock area means pasture, corrals, dry lots, feedlots and other property including buildings and structures, available to and used by the livestock.

Pasture means an area of property whereon forage for the type of livestock being grazed or otherwise confined is sustained over the entire area on a continual basis except for when the pasture is being rotated, plowed or replanted.

Poultry means a gallinaceous (gallus domesticus) bird of the phasianidae family, excluding those younger than twelve (12) weeks. Pigeons, quail, partridges, squab, pheasants, doves, grouse, including the male gender thereof, shall also qualify as poultry for purposes of this chapter. Female/hen chickens shall also qualify as poultry; however, male chickens/roosters and any peafowl, guineafowl, turkey or waterfowl shall be excluded from this definition.

Stall means a compartment for one (1) animal in a stable or barn. (Ord. No. 4354, § 5, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 4580, § 1, 8-13-12; Ord. No. 4581 § 2, 8-13-12; Ord. No. 4587, § 2, 8-27-12)

Sec. 37-197. Allowable number of animals.
Maximum allowable numbers of animals shall be as set forth below:

(1) Horse and cattle. One (1) head for the first one-half (1/2) acre of livestock area and one (1) head for each additional one-third (1/3) acre of livestock area (not including sucklings).

(2) Llamas. Two (2) for the first one-half (1/2) acre of livestock area and four (4) for each additional acre of livestock area.

(3) Sheep, goats, alpacas, ostriches and emus. Five (5) for the first one-half (1/2) acre of livestock area and ten (10) for each additional acre of livestock area. The keeping of uncastrated male goats is not permitted.

(4) Poultry. The maximum number of poultry on a lot in the F-2 Zone shall be limited to one (1) for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area. The maximum number of poultry on a lot in the R-1 Zone shall be limited to one (1) for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area to a maximum of twenty-five (25). The maximum number of poultry on a lot in any other zoning district that allows a single-family residential use or on which a nonconforming single-family dwelling exists, except the Central Commercial (C-5) Zone, shall be limited to one (1) for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area to a maximum of twelve (12). The keeping of poultry shall not be permitted in the central business district, as defined in section 37-145 of this code. The number of poultry younger than six (6) months on a property at any given time shall not count against the total number of poultry allowed and shall not exceed two (2) or one-half (1/2) the allowable number of poultry older than six (6) months, whichever is greater.

a. Poultry shall have their wings clipped and be contained on their owner’s property and be provided both indoor coops and outdoor run areas which consist of a minimum of three (3) square feet of floor area per bird for the coop and a minimum of nine (9) square feet of outdoor ground area per bird for the run. Required floor area for a coop shall include the ground level and any level above the ground located at least eighteen (18) inches above the ground level and for which there is a resting platform or perch provided and where such platform or perch has at least eighteen (18) inches of overhead clearance and is designed to allow a minimum of twelve (12) inches in width to accommodate the resting or roosting of a bird.

b. Coops and runs shall not displace or infringe upon any off-street parking or vehicle maneuvering area which may be required by this code for the primary use of the property.

c. Coops shall be constructed of rigid, sturdy materials and have walls on a minimum of three (3) sides. The use of tarps, nonrigid plastic sheeting, canvas, or similar materials shall not be permitted.

d. Coops shall be located to the side of or behind an on-site residence, not closer than three (3) feet to any property line and not closer than ten (10) feet to any existing, neighboring residence, including any attached garage and any adjoining deck or patio; any existing, neighboring gazebo, swimming pool or hot tub, unless the adjacent property owner gives written consent otherwise.

e. Runs shall be enclosed by a six (6) foot tall minimum fence.

f. Runs may be located anywhere relative to any on-site residence and may include any unpaved and uncovered part of the owner’s yard, but shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to any existing, neighboring residence, including any attached garage and any adjoining deck or patio; any existing, neighboring gazebo, swimming pool or hot tub, unless the adjacent property owner gives written consent otherwise.

g. Coops and runs shall be constructed and maintained so as to prevent the poultry from escape.

h. Ground surface of run areas shall be dirt, grass, straw, and/or other appropriate surface type conducive to the habits and health of poultry and shall be maintained to prevent intrusion of soil erosion and dust onto neighboring properties.

i. Coops and runs shall be constructed and maintained so as not to allow stormwater or other drainage onto neighboring property, including public rights-of-way and drainage ways.

j. The keeping of chickens shall require the resident owner of the property to sign, date, and submit to the community development department a form prepared by the community development department whereby the resident acknowledges having read the requirements for the keeping of poultry and stating that he/she will comply with said requirements. If the property owner is not a resident of the property, then both the property owner and the resident shall sign and date the form. The form shall be accompanied by a site plan that identifies, in addition to other typical site plan information, the locations of the proposed poultry coop and outdoor run area. The locations of the coop and the outdoor run area shall be shown to meet the distance/separation requirements listed in subsections (4)(d) and (f) of this section.

(5) The keeping of swine, geese or male chickens, i.e., roosters, is prohibited.

(6) The standards for the allowable numbers of livestock as specified above may be exceeded for a three-month period for a suckling when it is slow to mature to market weight and needs to be kept with its mother.

(7) The allowable number of livestock and the related standards contained herein shall also apply where the keeping of livestock is related to a commercial agricultural operation, unless otherwise authorized by conditional use permit.

(8) Where more than one (1) type of livestock is kept on a property and the different types of livestock have different required space or area requirements, the amount of area provided shall be equal to or greater than the minimum areas required by this article for the cumulative amount of areas for each type of livestock. Livestock shall be allowed to co-mingle; provided, that maintenance standards are complied with and that it does not result in any nuisance to neighbors. (Ord. No. 4354, § 5, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 4580, § 1, 8-13-12; Ord. No. 4645, § 2, 10-26-15)

Sec. 37-198. Maintenance standards.
(a) Drainage. Positive drainage shall be maintained in all livestock and manure storage areas to prevent introduction of moisture into areas with manure. Stormwater runoff from any livestock area shall not be allowed onto any neighboring property, including public rights-of-way and drainage ways.

(b) Fencing. Properties with animal rights are to be fenced to keep animals on their owner’s property. The type of animals confined shall determine the appropriate fence materials. Fencing shall be maintained by the owner.

(c) Forage.

(1) Forage shall be continually present on all areas of property considered to be pasture, unless the pasture is in the process of being replanted.

(2) The person owning the pasture shall be responsible for eliminating noxious weed growth.

(d) Feed storage. Storage of feed for poultry shall be such that the feed is protected from rot and does not attract rodents and other vermin for which the feed is not intended.

(e) Manure clean up.

(1) Stalls, coops, corrals, runs and structures which hold or shelter livestock shall be cleaned at least twice per week such that they provide a healthy living area for the livestock and do not cause offensive odors or insect nuisance to neighbors.

(2) Corrals shall be cleaned at least twice per week except when weather conditions have saturated the ground. Cleaning shall occur as soon as practical after the ground has dried.

(3) Dry lots shall be cleaned weekly except when weather conditions have saturated the ground. Cleaning shall occur as soon as practical after the ground has dried.

(4) Pastures shall be cleaned once per month, unless manure becomes offensive to a neighbor, in which case pastures shall be cleaned of manure with such frequency as to not be offensive to a neighbor.

(f) Manure disposal.

(1) Manure may be hauled off site to an approved facility.

(2) Manure may be composted on site provided the composting area is not located within thirty (30) feet of any property line and manure composting/storage guidelines are being complied with.

(3) Manure may be spread, tilled, and harrowed into pastures. The pasture area shall be a minimum of one-half (1/2) acre for each two (2) cows or horses being confined on the property. Manure may not be tilled into the soil within twenty-five (25) feet of a Category B drainage, one hundred (100) feet of a municipal well, or in areas known to have high water table.

(g) Manure storage.

(1) Stockpiled manure storage areas shall not exceed a footprint of five hundred (500) square feet from March through October and eight hundred (800) square feet from November through February and be no greater than six (6) feet high. Stockpiled manure shall be placed a minimum of thirty (30) feet from any property line.

(2) Stockpiled manure shall not be stored for a period of longer than forty-five (45) days during the months of March through October, and sixty (60) days from November through February, weather permitting.

(h) The materials cleaned from stalls, pasture areas, coops, runs, etc., shall be removed from the property, unless composted or re-used and located on site in such a manner as not to cause any nuisance to neighbors, in terms of odor, drainage, or insect attraction.

(i) Animals shall be kept in such a manner as to not constitute a nuisance to neighbors, in terms of noise, odor, animal trespass, attraction of insects, etc. (Ord. No. 4354, § 5, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 4580, § 1, 8-13-12; Ord. No. 4645, § 3, 10-26-15)

Sec. 37-199. Conditional use permits.
(a) The keeping of a type of livestock not explicitly governed herein may be permitted by conditional use permit, subject to keeping with the intents, purposes and maintenance standards set forth in this article.

(b) Approval of any conditional use permit application governed by this article shall be presumed to allow the keeping of any/all types of livestock permitted under this article, subject to the limitations and standards herein, unless otherwise specified as a condition of approval of the conditional use permit.

(c) Approval of any conditional use permit application governed by this article shall be presumed to run with the land and carry over from one (1) property owner to the next, unless otherwise specified as a condition of approval of the conditional use permit.

(d) Any change to the type of livestock or any increase in the number of livestock or any change to any other aspect of the keeping of livestock that is a condition of approval of a conditional use permit shall be subject to approval of a new conditional use permit, unless the original permit did not limit numbers and/or types of livestock allowed or any other aspect of the keeping of livestock. (Ord. No. 4354, § 5, 3-29-04; Ord. No. 4580, § 1, 8-13-12; Ord. No. 4682, § 1, 1-9-17)

Sec. 37-200. Grandfathered animal rights.
(a) Owners of property who have had and continue to have livestock in the R-1 Zone or F-2 Zone where such use does not comply with the regulations of this article but which did comply with the regulations prior to the 2012 modification to this article may continue such keeping of livestock, provided no changes are made which put the situation further out of compliance with the regulations or intents and purposes of this article.

(b) Owners of property having livestock or having types and/or numbers of livestock in the R-2A Zone which do not comply with the regulations of this article and which were not approved by conditional use permit prior to the 2012 modification to this article or explicitly documented by the community development department as grandfathered prior to the 2012 modification to this article shall, within thirty (30) days upon written notification by the community development department, apply for either grandfathered animal rights or a conditional use permit for the keeping of such livestock or bring the situation into compliance with the current provisions of this article. The approval of grandfathered animal rights or conditional use permit shall be necessary for the property owner to continue the keeping of such livestock.

(c) Grandfathered animal rights may be granted by the community development director, or designee, for properties for which the

owner demonstrates that the property has been consistently used for the keeping of livestock for a minimum of five (5) consecutive years from present. For owners of property where livestock have been kept for less than five (5) years but a minimum of six (6) months, the continuation of their keeping of livestock shall only be allowed by approval of a conditional use permit.

(d) Application for and granting of grandfathered animal rights must be specific and limited to a certain number and type of livestock. The granting of grandfathered animal rights shall run with the land and be transferable to future owners of the property, unless the keeping of livestock ceases for any period in excess of two (2) consecutive years.

(e) In order to determine that grandfathered animal rights exist, the community development director, or designee, shall first determine that the situation is consistent with the intents and purposes of this article. Applicants for grandfathered animal rights may make changes to the types of livestock, the numbers of livestock or the standards or conditions under which they keep their livestock in order to bring their situation into or toward compliance with the current provisions of this article in order for the community development director or designee to make the finding that the situation is consistent with the intents and purposes of this article and to grant grandfathered animal rights. No change shall be made to a grandfathered animal rights situation whereby such change causes or increases a nuisance to a neighbor. If the finding is made that the situation pertaining to a grandfathered animal rights request is not consistent with the intents and purposes of this article, animal rights shall only be allowed if approved by conditional use permit.

Following any determination of grandfathered animal rights the community development director or designee shall cause owners of properties directly abutting the subject property to be notified in writing of the determination and that they may appeal such determination in writing subject to the applicable fee, adopted by resolution of the city council for appeals, within fifteen (15) days of the date on the notice. Receipt by the community development director, or designee, of any appeal shall require the person(s) requesting the grandfathered animal rights to file a conditional use permit application for animal rights. Approval of the conditional use permit application, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article IX of this chapter, shall then be required in order for animal rights to be allowed.

(f) For properties with grandfathered animal rights, any change to the allowable type of livestock, any increase in the number of livestock or any change to any other aspect of the keeping of livestock which might cause a nuisance to neighbors, such as decreasing the livestock area or poultry area, or relocating the livestock on the property closer to a neighboring home, shall be subject to approval of a change to the grandfathered animal rights per the grandfathered animal rights approval process specified above or be approved by conditional use permit.

(g) Grandfathered animal rights shall automatically become null and void if not used for any period exceeding two (2) consecutive years. (Ord. No. 4580, § 2, 8-13-12)

ARTICLE XVI. INOPERABLE VEHICLE STORAGE
Sec. 37-205. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to (1) enhance the aesthetics of the community, (2) provide a means to identify the various types of vehicles and vehicle parts that may be stored on residential property within the city of Lewiston, (3) provide reasonable options for storage of such items to minimize their exposure to the public and their impact on surrounding properties, and (4) provide for enforcement remedies in the event of noncompliance. (Ord. No. 4423, § 1, 11-21-05)

Sec. 37-206. Definitions.
For purposes of this article only, the following definitions are established:

(a) Methods of storage.

(1) Carport, permanent means a permanent structure attached to the principal structure on a property for which the intended use is motor vehicle parking or storage.

(2) Driveway means a paved or graveled area extending from the right-of-way onto developed property.

(3) Enclosed building means a permanent structure that has a footprint of at least one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet, with four (4) or more exterior walls, a door(s) and a roof.

(4) Screened area means an area on the property screened from view from any adjacent road or property by dense hedges, berms, retaining walls, rock walls, solid wood board fences, chain link fences with perma-hedge or slats, car covers, buildings, changes in topography or combinations thereof that can be used to fully obscure a motor vehicle and/or vehicle related components. Screening may not be accomplished by using corrugated metal, pallets, salvaged materials, vehicles or junk.

(5) Vehicle covers means any form-fitting cover made specifically for the purpose of covering a motor vehicle.

(6) Vehicle storage structure means any permanent or portable non-permanent vehicle storage structure used for storage of motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. It must have at least three (3) sides and either be freestanding or attached to another structure.

(b) Yards.

(1) Front yard means all of the area between the principal structure and the front lot line, with the sides of the area being formed by extending a perpendicular line from the front lot line to the widest points of the principal structure.

(2) Front, side yard means all of the area on either side of the front yard boundaries back from the front property line to the closest side yard boundary nearest the front property line.

(3) Rear yard means all of the area between the rear lot line and the back of the principal structure and formed by extending a line from the back of the principal structure to each side lot line.

(4) Side yard means all that area extending from the front and rear corners of the principal structure to the side property lines.

Yards are further described on Exhibit One.

Exhibit One

(Ord. No. 4423, § 1, 11-21-05)

Sec. 37-207. Standards.
(a) Within the jurisdiction of the city of Lewiston, inoperable vehicles and vehicle components may be placed, parked, or otherwise stored using the following methods or combinations thereof:

(1) Enclosed building;

(2) Permanent carport;

(3) Screened area;

(4) Vehicle cover;

(5) Temporary and/or permanent vehicle storage structure.

(b) The manner in which the inoperable vehicle, junk vehicles or vehicle parts are parked or stored, their location on the property, and duration of the storage shall comply with Table One.

Table One

Method of Storage

Vehicle Cover

Screened Area (excluding vehicle covers)

Temporary Vehicle Storage Structure

Permanent Carport

Enclosed Building

Location of Stored Items

D

F

SF

S

R

D

F

SF

S

R

D

F

SF

S

R

D

F

SF

S

R

D

F

SF

S

R

Types

Junk Vehicles

N

N

N

N

N

30

30

30

30

30

30

30

30

30

30

30

30

30

30

30

P

P

P

P

P

Vehicle Parts

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

P

P

P

N

N

*P

*P

*P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

Inoperable Vehicles

P1

90

90

P

P

N

N

P

P

P

N

N

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P = Allowed.

N = Not allowed.

*P = Must have three (3) sides completely covered with uncovered or open side facing the rear property line.

P1 = Only one vehicle allowed.

Any numbers refer to the maximum days allowed.

Locations of stored items: as defined in this article, are applicable for this article only.

D = Driveway

F = Front yard area

SF = Side front yard area

S = Side yard area

R = Rear yard area

(c) In no event shall any inoperable vehicle or any vehicle related components as defined herein be stored on any lot on which there is no principal structure. (Ord. No. 4423, § 1, 11-21-05)

Sec. 37-208. Enforcement.
(a) Notice to remove. The property maintenance officer of the city of Lewiston is hereby authorized and empowered to serve notice upon the vehicle owner and property owner, person in control or contract purchaser of any private property located within the city limits of Lewiston, Idaho, describing the violation(s) of this chapter and directing and requiring said owner(s), person in control or contract purchaser to remove within fifteen (15) days unless otherwise authorized by community development, any inoperable vehicle, junk vehicle or vehicle parts from said property or from any sidewalks, alleys and parking abutting such private property if such sidewalks, alleys or parking exist. Said notice shall be accomplished by posting said notice on the vehicle or the real property whereon the vehicle(s) or parts are to be removed and by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to said owner at his/her last address of record.

(b) The property owner, or in the case of a tenant in control of the property through a lease or rental agreement, is required upon request of the property maintenance officer to identify the type(s) of motor vehicle(s) stored on the property using the definitions as set out in section 37-206 of this code.

(c) Action upon noncompliance. Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, after being notified as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, to properly dispose of and remove all items, enclose all such items within a building, or otherwise bring the storage of such items into compliance with the standards enumerated in section 37-207 within the time period stated in the notice of violation, then the property maintenance officer hereby is authorized and empowered to cause such inoperable vehicles, junk vehicles or vehicle parts to be removed and/or sold or otherwise disposed of.

(d) The property maintenance office shall provide the owner with the opportunity for a pre-seizure hearing to determine the validity of the enforcement action.

(e) A notice of the pre-seizure hearing shall be sent by certified mail to the registered and legal owners within seventy-two (72) hours, excluding weekends and holidays and shall include the following information:

(1) The name, address and telephone number of the agency providing the notice;

(2) The location and description of the vehicle which shall include, if available, the name or make, identification number, the license plate number, and the mileage;

(3) The authority and purpose for removal of the vehicle; and

(4) In order to receive a pre-seizure hearing, the owners, or their agents, must request the hearing within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the notice. Any such hearing shall be conducted within seventy-two (72) hours of the request, excluding weekends and holidays. The hearing officer shall be the city manager or designee.

(5) Failure of the registered or legal owner to request or attend a pre-seizure hearing shall be construed as intent to abandon the vehicle.

(f) Notification to owner of sale shall be provided pursuant to Idaho Statutes 49-1810.

(g) Charges for removal, sale or disposal. The city’s cost shall be satisfied upon sale of the vehicle. Any funds generated by the sale that exceed the city’s costs shall be returned to the last owner of record, if known. (Ord. No. 4423, § 1, 11-21-05)

ARTICLE XVII. WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES REGULATIONS
Sec. 37-215. Purpose.
The provisions of this article shall be known as the wireless communication facilities regulations. It is the purpose of these provisions to delineate restrictions, development standards and siting criteria, and establish removal procedures in order to protect the city from the uncontrolled siting of wireless communication facilities in locations that have significant adverse effects and cause irreparable harm. It is further the purpose of these provisions:

(1) To protect the community’s visual quality and safety while facilitating the reasonable and balanced provision of wireless communication services. More specifically, it is the city’s goal to minimize the visual impact of wireless communication facilities on the community, particularly in and near residential zones, the central business district, the Normal Hill heritage overlay zone, and historic districts;

(2) To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare, preserve the aesthetic character of the Lewiston community, and to reasonably regulate the development and operation of wireless communication facilities within the city to the extent permitted under state and federal law;

(3) To minimize the impact of wireless communication facilities by establishing standards for siting design and screening;

(4) To preserve the opportunity for continued and growing service from the wireless industry;

(5) To accommodate the growing need and demand for wireless communication services;

(6) To establish clear guidelines and standards and an orderly process for review intended to facilitate the deployment of wireless transmission equipment, to provide advanced communication services to the city, its residents, businesses and community at large;

(7) To minimize the number of new towers and encourage the collocation of antenna arrays of more than one (1) wireless communication service provider on a single tower;

(8) To ensure city zoning regulations are applied consistently with federal and state telecommunications laws, rules, regulations and controlling court decisions; and

(9) To provide regulations that are specifically not intended to, and shall not be interpreted or applied to: (a) prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of wireless services, (b) unreasonably discriminate among functionally equivalent service providers, or (c) regulate wireless communication facilities and wireless transmission equipment on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such emissions comply with the standards established by the Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-216. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:

Antenna is a WCF and means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that sends or receives digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies or wireless communication signals.

Antenna array is a WCF and means a single or group of antenna elements, not including small cells, and associated mounting hardware, transmission lines, or other appurtenances that share a common attachment device for the sole purpose of transmitting or receiving wireless communication signals.

Applicant means any person engaged in the business of providing wireless communication services or the wireless communication infrastructure required for wireless communication services and who submits an application.

Application means the process by which an applicant submits a written request on a form provided by the city and indicates a desire to be granted a permit pursuant to this article. A complete application means all written documentation, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the city concerning the construction of wireless communication facilities; the wireless services proposed to be provided; and any other matter pertaining to a proposed system or service, including, if applicable and without limitation, information related to a request for a conditional use permit or an exception to a standard.

Base station is a WCF and means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables city-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in this article or any equipment associated with a tower.

(1) The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with wireless communication services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services, such as microwave backhaul.

(2) The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small cell networks).

(3) The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the city under this article, supports or houses equipment described in this section that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support.

(4) The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or the city under this article, does not support or house equipment described in this section.

Breakpoint design technology means the ability of a tower to break at a specified point so that the entire tower does not collapse.

Central business district means that area described as the central business district in section 37-145 of this code.

City means city of Lewiston, Idaho.

Collocation means the mounting or installation of an antenna on an existing tower, building, or structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.

Commercial zone means the following zoning districts within the city of Lewiston: the local commercial (C-1) zone; the tourist commercial (C-2) zone; the community commercial (C-3) zone; the general commercial (C-4) zone; the central commercial (C-5) zone, except that portion of the C-5 zone located in the central business district; the regional commercial (C-6) zone; the light industrial (M-1) zone; the heavy industrial (M-2) zone; the planned unit development (PD) zone, where commercial uses are allowed; the port (P) zone; and the airport (A) zone.

Community development director means the director of the community development department of the city of Lewiston and his/her designee(s).

Distributed antenna system or DAS is a WCF and means a network consisting of transceiver equipment at a central hub site to support multiple antenna locations throughout the desired coverage area.

Eligible facilities request means any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving:

(1) Collocation of new transmission equipment;

(2) Removal of transmission equipment; or

(3) Replacement of transmission equipment.

Eligible support structure is a WCF and means any tower or base station as defined in this section; provided, that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the city under this article.

Existing means a tower or base station that has been reviewed and approved under an applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process; provided, that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition.

FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.

FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.

Historic district(s) means that historic district(s) described in Chapter 19.5 of this code.

Macro cell is a WCF and means a wireless communication facility that provides broad coverage (typically one (1) mile or greater) served by a high power cell site (tower, antenna or mast). Generally, macro cell antennas are mounted on ground-based towers, rooftops and other existing structures, at a height that provides a clear view over the surrounding buildings and terrain. Macro cells typically cover large geographic areas with relatively high capacity and are capable of hosting multiple wireless service providers.

Mixed use zone means the following zoning districts within the city of Lewiston: the Bryden Avenue special planning area A (BASPAA) zone; the North Lewiston mixed use development (MXD-NL) zone; the Normal Hill special planning area mixed use (NHMU) zone; and the planned unit development (PD) zone, where commercial and residential uses are allowed.

Normal Hill heritage overlay zone or NHHO means the NHHO zone described in Chapter 37, Article III of this code.

Operator means any person who provides service over a wireless communication system and directly or through one (1) or more persons owns a controlling interest in such system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a system.

Person includes any individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not the city.

Protected areas mean all real property located in residential zones, within two hundred (200) feet of a residential zone, the central business district, the Normal Hill heritage overlay zone, and all historic districts.

Provider means an operator, wireless infrastructure provider, or wireless services provider.

Residential zone means the following zoning districts within the city of Lewiston: the agricultural transitional (F-2) zone; the suburban residential (R-1) zone; the low density residential (R-2) zone; the low density residential (R-2A) zone; the medium density residential (R-3) zone; the higher density residential (R-4) zone; the Bryden Avenue special planning area B (BASPAB) zone; the Normal Hill north (NHN) zone; the Normal Hill south (NHS) zone; and the planned unit development (PUD) zone, where residential uses are allowed.

RF means radio frequency emissions at such levels as are determined by the FCC.

Rights-of-way means the same as defined or referenced in Chapter 31 of this code.

Site means, in relation to a tower that is not in the public right-of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site. In relation to a support structure that is not in the public right-of-way other than a tower, site means an area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.

Small cells and small wireless facilities are WCFs and mean compact, low power wireless equipment that contain their own transceiver equipment and function like cells in a wireless network, but provide a smaller coverage area than macro cells, or as they may be otherwise defined by the FCC.

Stealth design means a design that minimizes the visual impact of wireless communication facilities by camouflaging, disguising, screening or blending into the surrounding environment. Examples of stealth design include, but are not limited to, WCFs disguised as trees (monopines), flagpoles, utility and light poles, bell towers, clock towers, ball field lights, and architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas.

Substantial change means a modification that substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the following criteria:

(1) For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than ten (10) percent or by the height of one (1) additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater. Changes in height shall be measured from the original support structure in cases where deployments are or shall be separated horizontally, such as on building rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height shall be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act (47 U.S.C. § 1455(a));

(2) For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, the modification involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than twenty (20) feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater;

(3) For any eligible support structure, it involves: (a) installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four (4) cabinets; (b) new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no preexisting ground cabinets associated with the structure; or (c) installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten (10) percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure;

(4) The modification entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;

(5) The modification would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or

(6) The modification does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment; provided, however, that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is noncompliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in subsections (1) through (5) of this definition.

Tower is a WCF and means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antenna arrays, antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communication services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services, such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site.

Tower height means the vertical distance measured from the base of the tower structure at grade to the highest point of the structure, including the antenna; or, where the tower is mounted on a rooftop, the vertical distance at grade from the base of the building to the highest point of the tower structure, including the antenna. A lightning rod, not to exceed ten (10) feet in height, shall not be included within tower height.

Transmission equipment is a WCF and means equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supplies. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communication services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services, such as microwave backhaul.

Utility support structure means water tanks or water towers and utility poles or utility towers supporting electrical, telephone, cable, or other similar facilities.

Wireless communication facilities or WCF means equipment for the transmission or reception of: (1) radio frequency signals or other wireless communications; or (2) other signals for communications purposes. Such equipment may consist of, for example, antennas, antenna arrays, base stations, distributed antenna systems, macro cells, small cells, towers, and transmission equipment.

Wireless infrastructure provider means a person, other than a wireless services provider, that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities’ utility poles, or wireless support structures.

Wireless services provider means a person that provides wireless services. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-217. Applicability.
(a) The regulations set forth in this article shall apply to all WCFs located or proposed to be located within the city, except in public rights-of-way. Wireless communication facilities regulations that apply to public rights-of-way within the city of Lewiston are addressed in Chapter 31, Article VI, of this code.

(b) Exempt facilities. The following are exempt from this article:

(1) FCC-licensed amateur (ham) radio facilities;

(2) Satellite earth stations, dishes and/or antennas used for private television reception not exceeding one (1) meter in diameter;

(3) A government-owned WCF installed upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the federal, state, or local government, or a written determination of public necessity by the city; except that such facility must comply with all federal and state requirements. The WCF shall be exempt from the provisions of this article for up to one (1) month after the duration of the state of emergency;

(4) A temporary WCF installed for providing coverage of a special event, such as news coverage or a sporting event. At least five (5) business days’ written notice shall be given to the community development department prior to installation of such temporary WCF. Such temporary WCFs shall only be allowed two (2) weeks before and one (1) week after the special event; and

(5) Other temporary WCFs installed for a period of up to ninety (90) days. At least five (5) business days’ written notice shall be given to the community development department prior to the installation of such temporary WCF. Additionally, such temporary WCF shall comply with applicable setbacks and height requirements in residential zones, historic district(s), and the Normal Hill heritage overlay zone. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-218. General requirements.
(a) All WCFs shall comply with the following regulations:

(1) Color. All WCFs shall be placed and colored to blend into their surroundings. The use of grays, blues, greens, dark bronze, browns or other site specific colors may be appropriate; however, each case should be evaluated individually.

(2) Lighting. Security lighting for the equipment shelters or cabinets and other on the ground ancillary equipment is permitted, as long as it is appropriately down shielded to keep light within the boundaries of the site.

(3) State or federal requirements. Towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas.

(4) Permits. All WCFs shall be required to obtain permits in accordance with Chapter 10 of this code.

(5) Certificate of appropriateness. All WCFs located in historic district(s) or the Normal Hill heritage overlay zone shall be required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission so that the WCF’s stealth design blends into the historic district(s) or into the Normal Hill heritage overlay zone in accordance with code requirements for new construction. All WCFs that are proposed to be located in a historic district(s) or the Normal Hill heritage overlay zone shall be subject to the additional regulations governing those areas, including, but not limited to, securing a certificate of appropriateness when required. The processes for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness and conditional use permit shall proceed simultaneously.

(6) Notice. When seeking an administrative permit or approval pursuant to this article, except when making an eligible facilities request, the applicant shall notify all surrounding property owners located within three hundred (300) feet of the legal boundary of the real property where the WCF is proposed to be located. The applicant shall also notify the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Regional Airport if the WCF is proposed to be located within a three (3) mile radius of the center of the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Regional Airport. The notices shall be provided not more than five (5) business days after the filing of an application and shall include, at a minimum: (a) a description, site plan, elevation drawing, and photo simulation of the proposed WCF; (b) an advisement that comments regarding the proposed WCF may be submitted to the community development department within fourteen (14) days; and (c) contact information for the community development department, including the physical address, mailing address, and phone number. The applicant shall, within five (5) business days of filing an application, provide a copy of such notices to the community development department, and a copy of such notices shall be forwarded to the building code official.

(7) Signs. A WCF shall not bear any signage or advertisement other than signage required by law or expressly required by the city.

(8) Visual impact. All WCFs, except for those located in the commercial and mixed use zones, shall be sited and designed to minimize adverse visual impacts on surrounding properties and the traveling public to the greatest extent reasonably possible, consistent with the proper functioning of the WCF. Such WCFs and equipment enclosures shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site. Such WCFs shall also be designed to either resemble the surrounding landscape and other natural features where located in proximity to natural surroundings, or be compatible with the built environment, through matching and complementary existing structures and specific design considerations, such as architectural designs, height, scale, color, and texture, or be consistent with other uses and improvements permitted in the relevant zone.

(9) Use of stealth design. Stealth design is required as provided in Table 1 of section 37-222 of this code, and concealment techniques must be appropriate given the proposed location, design, visual environment, and nearby uses, structures, and natural features. Stealth design shall be designed and constructed to substantially conform to surrounding building designs or natural settings, so as to be visually unobtrusive.

(10) Installation on city property. Installation of any WCF on city-owned property requires a duly executed written agreement with the city prior to installation.

(11) Utility support structure or pole-mounted equipment. All transmission equipment mounted on a utility support structure or pole shall be mounted as close as possible to the structure or pole so as to reduce the overall visual profile to the maximum extent feasible in accordance with safety standards.

(12) Setbacks and fencing.

a. If any setback prescribed within this chapter requires a greater distance than required in this article, the greater distance shall apply unless the WCF uses breakpoint design technology, as provided for in section 37-222 of this code.

b. A sight-obscuring fence no less than six (6) feet in height from the finished grade shall be constructed around each tower and around related support or guy anchors. Access shall only be through a locked gate.

(13) Collocation encouraged. A written statement shall be provided demonstrating the applicant’s willingness to allow transmission equipment owned by others to collocate with the proposed wireless communication facility whenever technically and economically feasible and aesthetically desirable.

(14) Accessory uses.

a. Accessory uses shall be limited to such structures and equipment that are necessary for transmission or reception functions, and shall not include broadcast studios, offices, vehicles or equipment storage, or other uses not essential to the transmission or reception functions.

b. All accessory buildings shall be constructed of building materials equal to or better than those of the primary building on the site, built to blend into the surrounding architectural style, and subject to applicable permits.

c. No equipment shall be stored or vehicle parked on the site of the tower, unless used in direct support of the antennas or the tower that is being repaired.

d. In protected areas, all accessory equipment located at the base of a WCF shall be located or placed (at the applicant’s choice) in an existing building, underground, or in an equipment shelter or cabinet that is: (1) designed to blend in with existing surroundings, using architecturally compatible construction and colors; and (2) located so as to be as unobtrusive as possible consistent with the proper functioning of the WCF.

(15) Compliance report. A written report shall be prepared, signed and sealed by an Idaho-licensed professional engineer or another person with demonstrated expertise in the field of RF engineering. Such report shall assess whether the proposed WCF (whether it be new or replacement equipment) demonstrates compliance with the RF emissions limits established by the FCC. Such report shall be submitted with a permit application.

(b) Site design flexibility. Individual WCF sites vary in the location of adjacent buildings, existing trees, topography, and other local variables. By mandating certain design standards, there may result a project that could have been less intrusive if the location of the various elements of the project could have been placed in more appropriate locations within a given site. Therefore, the WCF and supporting equipment may be installed so as to best camouflage, disguise or conceal them, to make the WCF more closely compatible with and blend into the setting or host structure, upon approval from the community development director or the planning and zoning commission, as applicable. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-219. Building-mounted WCFs.
With the exception of commercial and mixed use zones:

(1) All transmission equipment shall be concealed within existing architectural features to the maximum extent feasible. Any new architectural features proposed to conceal the transmission equipment shall be designed to mimic the existing underlying structure, shall be proportional to the existing underlying structure or conform to the underlying use, and shall use materials in similar quality, finish, color, and texture as the existing underlying structure.

(2) All roof-mounted transmission equipment shall be set back from all roof edges to the maximum extent feasible consistent with the need for “line-of-sight” transmission and reception of signals.

(3) Antenna arrays and supporting transmission equipment shall be installed so as to camouflage, disguise, or conceal them to make them closely compatible with and blend into the setting or host structure.

Towers located on roofs shall be subject to the provisions of section 37-222 of this code rather than this section. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-220. Antenna arrays.
(a) Unless a conditional use permit is obtained, antenna arrays shall not be permitted: (1) in residential zones, (2) on single-family houses and duplexes, (3) on signs, (4) in historic districts, or (5) in the Normal Hill heritage overlay zone. The notice and procedural provisions of Article IX of this chapter (“Conditional Uses”) and the factors set forth in section 37-222(h) of this code (substituting “antenna array” for “tower”) shall apply to conditional use permits sought for the purpose of locating antenna arrays in one (1) of the preceding zones.

(b) Subject to subsection (a) of this section, antenna arrays are permitted if located on an existing structure such that they do not extend more than fifteen (15) feet above said structure. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-221. Distributed antenna systems and small cells.
(a) Distributed antenna systems and small cells are allowed in all zones, provided the applicant complies with all federal laws and state laws and requirements and structural industry standards.

(b) Distributed antenna systems and small cells are subject to approval via permits and administrative review unless their installation requires the construction of a pole that exceeds the maximum height limitation of the affected zoning district or building. If the height limitation is exceeded, an exception pursuant to section 37-223 of this code is required. An exception shall not be required for replacement utility support structures, so long as the height of a replacement structure, including antennas, is no greater than fifteen (15) feet taller than the existing utility support structure. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-222. Towers.
(a) Preferred macro cell tower locations. The following siting priorities, for wireless infrastructure providers, ordered from most-preferred (1) to least-preferred (7), are as follows and require an alternative sites analysis, as set forth in subsection (e) of this section:

(1) City-owned property and facilities, except those in protected areas, and not including rights-of-way;

(2) Commercial zones, except the central business district;

(3) Mixed-use zones;

(4) Rights-of-way in nonresidential zones;

(5) City-owned property and facilities in protected areas, but not including rights-of-way;

(6) Other parcels of land in protected areas, but not including rights-of-way;

(7) Rights-of-way in protected areas.

(b) Towers in protected areas. Towers in protected areas are permitted only upon the issuance of a conditional use permit, pursuant to the requirements set forth in subsection (h) of this section.

(c) Height restrictions and stealth design for towers. Towers shall be subject to the height restrictions and stealth design requirements set forth below in Table 1:

Table 1

Tower Height Restrictions

Zone

Maximum Tower Height

Stealth Design[1]

Residential Zones

35 feet

Required

Central Business District

45 feet

Required

Normal Hill Heritage Overlay

35 feet

Required

Historic District(s)

45 feet

Required

Commercial Zones

120 feet[2]

Optional

Mixed Use Zones

90 feet[2]

Optional

[1] Stealth design is subject to approval by the community development director, the planning and zoning commission, or historic preservation commission, as appropriate, based upon the general requirements in section 37-218 of this code.

[2] An additional thirty (30) feet in height is allowed if applicant uses stealth design.

(d) Setback requirements.

(1) A tower shall be set back from property lines as required by the zone in which the tower is located or a minimum of one (1) foot for every foot of tower height, whichever produces the greater setback, unless the tower is constructed with breakpoint design technology. If the tower has been constructed using breakpoint design technology, the minimum setback distance shall be equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the distance from the top of the tower to the breakpoint level of the tower, or the applicable zone’s minimum side setback requirements, whichever is greater. For example, on a one hundred (100) foot tall tower with a breakpoint design at eighty (80) feet, the minimum setback requirement would either be: (a) twenty-two (22) feet (one hundred ten (110) percent of twenty (20) feet, the distance from the top of the tower to the breakpoint); or (b) the minimum side setback requirements for that zone, whichever is greater. If an applicant proposes to use breakpoint design technology to reduce the required setback, the issuance of the building permit for the tower shall be conditioned, in part, upon approval of the tower design, including the breakpoint design, by a structural engineer licensed in Idaho.

(2) All equipment shelters, cabinets, or other on the ground ancillary equipment shall meet the setback requirement of the zone in which it is located.

(e) Alternative sites.

(1) Analysis.

a. For proposed towers, the applicant must address the city’s preferred tower locations with a detailed explanation justifying why a site of higher priority was not selected. The city’s tower location preferences must be addressed in a clear and complete written alternative sites analysis that shows at least three (3) higher ranked, alternative sites considered that are in the geographic range of the service coverage objectives of the applicant, together with a factually detailed and meaningful comparative analysis between each alternative site and the proposed site that explains the substantive reasons why the applicant rejected each alternative site.

b. A complete alternative sites analysis provided under this subsection may include less than three (3) alternative sites so long as the applicant provides a factually detailed written rationale for why it could not identify at least three (3) potentially available, higher ranked, alternative sites.

c. For purposes of disqualifying potential collocations or alternative sites for the failure to meet the applicant’s service coverage or capacity objectives, the applicant shall provide: (1) a description of its objective, whether it be to address a deficiency in coverage, capacity, or frequency; (2) detailed technical maps or other exhibits with clear and concise RF data to illustrate that the objective is not met using the alternative (whether it be collocation or a more preferred location); and (3) a description of why the alternative (collocation or a more preferred location) does not meet the objective.

d. An applicant must apply for and be granted a conditional use permit in order to locate a tower at an alternative site. The notice and procedural provisions of Article IX of this chapter (“Conditional Uses”) and the factors set forth in subsection (h) of this section shall apply to conditional use permits sought for the purpose of locating a tower at an alternative site.

(2) Documentation. The following materials shall be submitted with an alternative sites analysis:

a. A copy of the applicant’s FCC license or registration.

b. A color visual analysis that includes to-scale visual simulations that show unobstructed before-and-after construction daytime and clear-weather views from at least four (4) angles, together with a map that shows the location of each view, including all equipment and ground wires.

c. A written analysis that explains how the proposed design complies with the applicable design standards under this article to the maximum extent feasible. A complete design justification must identify all applicable design standards under this article and provide a factually detailed reason why the proposed design either complies or cannot feasibly comply.

d. A noise study for the proposed tower and all associated equipment.

e. A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type, height, and width of the proposed tower; on-site improvements; land uses and zoning; adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to the county); separation distances from a tower to property lines; adjacent roadways; buildings on adjoining properties; photo simulations; a depiction of all proposed transmission equipment; proposed means of access; setbacks from property lines; elevation drawings or renderings of the proposed tower; identification and dimensions of property lines and lease lines; and any other structures, topography, parking, utility runs, or other information deemed by the community development department to be necessary to assess compliance with this article.

f. Legal description of the entire lot and/or leased site (if applicable) on which the tower is proposed to be located.

g. The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit and the nearest residentially zoned property.

h. The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to this article shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.

i. A landscape plan showing locations and types of trees and shrubs.

j. Location, type, height, and color of fencing and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination.

k. A description of compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws.

l. Identification of cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in the municipality.

m. A written statement of purpose, which shall minimally include: (1) a description of the technical objective to be achieved; (2) a to-scale map that identifies the proposed site location and the targeted service area to be benefited by the proposed project; and (3) full-color signal propagation maps with objective units of signal strength measurement that show the applicant’s current service coverage levels from all adjacent sites without the proposed site, predicted service coverage levels from all adjacent sites with the proposed site, and predicted service coverage levels from the proposed site without all adjacent sites. These materials shall be reviewed, signed, and sealed by an Idaho-licensed professional engineer.

(f) Separation requirements. No macro cell tower may be constructed within one-half (1/2) mile of an existing macro cell tower unless an exception is obtained pursuant to section 37-223 of this code or through a conditional use permit waiving or modifying this separation standard pursuant to Article IX of this chapter (“Conditional Uses”) and the applicant can demonstrate that: (1) the existing macro cell tower is not available or feasible for collocation of an additional wireless communication facility; (2) the location of the existing macro cell tower does not satisfy the operational requirements of the applicant; or (3) another departure from this standard is needed. Factors to be considered in determining whether an applicant has made this demonstration include those listed in subsection (h) of this section.

(g) Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant, at the time of its application for a macro cell, shall provide to the community development department an inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the city or within one (1) mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower or antenna. The community development department may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or conditional use permits under this article or other organizations seeking to locate macro cells within the jurisdiction of the city; provided, however, that the community development department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.

(h) Conditional use permit for towers. In applying for a conditional use permit for a tower, the notice and procedural provisions of Article IX of this chapter (“Conditional Uses”) shall apply. Additionally, an applicant shall notify the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Regional Airport if a tower is proposed to be located within a three (3) mile radius of the center of the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Regional Airport. Further, the applicant shall address and the planning and zoning commission shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use permit for a tower, in lieu of the factors set forth in Article IX of this chapter. The planning and zoning commission may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one (1) or more of these factors if the commission concludes that the purposes of this article are, nevertheless, served thereby.

(1) Whether the proposed tower meets the other applicable provisions of this article.

(2) Surrounding topography, trees, buildings and antennas that would impair RF signals.

(3) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential zone boundaries and whether the tower impairs the view shed.

(4) Proximity of the tower to structures in historic district(s) or in the Normal Hill heritage overlay zone so as to impair visual aesthetics.

(5) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties and compatibility with those uses.

(6) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.

(7) Whether existing structures or towers are available in accordance with this section and located within the geographic area that meets the applicant’s service coverage and structural requirements.

(8) Whether existing towers or structures have sufficient structural strength to support applicant’s proposed antenna and related equipment.

(9) Whether the applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors not enumerated herein that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.

(10) Whether the WCF will be within the RF emission limits allowed by the FCC. The applicant shall provide documentation from an expert regarding this requirement. The FCC shall determine whether the applicant’s proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with antennas on existing towers or structures, or whether antennas on existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant’s proposed antenna.

(11) Whether the tower will comply with FAA requirements, rules, regulations, and orders. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-223. Exceptions to standards.
(a) Applicability. No WCF shall be developed or modified contrary to any applicable development standard set forth in this article unless an exception has been granted pursuant to this section or through a conditional use permit waiving or modifying a development standard pursuant to Article IX of this chapter (“Conditional Uses”).

(b) Procedure type. An exception to an applicable WCF development standard shall require approval by the planning and zoning commission in lieu of Article XI of this chapter (“Variances”); provided, however, the notice and procedural requirements in Article XI of this chapter (“Variances”) shall apply to exceptions sought pursuant to this section.

(c) Submittal requirements. An application for an exception to an applicable WCF development standard shall include the following:

(1) Payment of the required fee, as adopted by resolution of the city council.

(2) A description of the requested exception.

(3) A written statement demonstrating how the exception would not contradict or conflict with the purposes of this article.

(4) A site plan that includes:

a. Description of the proposed WCF’s design and dimensions, as it would appear with and without the exception.

b. Elevations showing all components of the WCF, as it would appear with and without the exception.

c. Color simulations of the WCF after construction demonstrating compatibility with the vicinity, as it would appear with and without the exception.

(5) An explanation that demonstrates the following:

a. The WCF development standard materially limits or inhibits the ability of the provider to compete in a fair and balanced legal and regulatory environment;

b. The problem can only be resolved by an exception to one (1) or more of the standards in this article;

c. The exception is narrowly tailored such that the WCF conforms to this article’s standards to the greatest extent possible; and

d. The impact on development standards such as height, setbacks and landscape requirements. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-224. Independent RF technical and other review.
(a) Although the city intends for city staff to review applications to the extent feasible, the city may retain the services of an independent RF expert and other consultants of its choice to provide technical and other evaluations of permit applications for WCFs. The third party expert shall have recognized training or qualifications in their fields of radio frequency engineering or wireless communication facilities regulations.

(b) The expert’s review may include, but is not limited to: (1) the accuracy and completeness of the items submitted with the application; (2) the applicability of analysis and techniques and methodologies proposed by the applicant; (3) the validity of conclusions reached by the applicant; (4) whether the proposed WCF complies with the applicable approval criteria set forth in this article; and (5) an evaluation of the functionality of the equipment after addition or replacement.

(c) The applicant shall pay the cost for any independent consultant fees through a deposit, estimated by the city, within ten (10) days of the city’s request. When the city requests such payment, the application shall be deemed incomplete for purposes of application processing timelines until the deposit is received. In the event that such costs and fees do not exceed the deposit amount, the city shall refund any unused portion within thirty (30) days after the final permit is released or, if no final permit is released, within thirty (30) days after the city receives a written request from the applicant. If the costs and fees exceed the deposit amount, then the applicant shall pay the difference to the city before the permit is issued. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-225. Final inspection.
A certificate of completion shall only be granted upon satisfactory evidence that the WCF was installed in substantial compliance with the approved plans and photo simulations. If it is found that the WCF installation does not substantially comply with the approved plans and photo simulations, the applicant shall make any and all such changes required to bring the WCF installation into compliance promptly and in any event prior to putting the WCF in operation. If the WCF is not brought into substantial compliance within thirty (30) days of notice of noncompliance by the city, the applicant shall remove the noncompliant components. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-226. Compliance.
(a) All WCFs shall comply with all standards and regulations of the FCC and FAA and any state or other federal government agency with the authority to regulate wireless communication facilities.

(b) The site and WCFs, including all landscaping, fencing and related transmission equipment, shall be maintained at all times in a neat and clean manner and in accordance with all approved plans.

(c) All graffiti on WCFs shall be removed at the sole expense of the permittee after notification by the city to the owner/operator of the WCF.

(d) If any FCC or FAA, state, or other governmental license or any other governmental approval to provide communication services is revoked as to any site permitted or authorized by the city, the permittee shall inform the city of the revocation within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of such revocation and cease using the site. The owner of the WCF shall also be subject to the removal provisions of section 37-227 of this code. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-227. Removal of abandoned towers and antennas.
(a) Any WCF that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such WCF shall so notify the city in writing and remove the same within ninety (90) days of giving notice to the city of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned WCF within said ninety (90) days shall be grounds to remove the WCF at the owner’s expense, including all costs and attorneys’ fees.

(b) Additionally, the city may contact the owner of the WCF to make a determination as to whether such WCF is abandoned. If the owner of such WCF does not respond within ninety (90) days, the city may remove the WCF (including its foundation) at the owner’s expense, including all costs and attorneys’ fees associated with such removal. Such notice by the city shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested; or posted on or near the WCF for fifteen (15) days; or both. Irrespective of any agreement between them to the contrary, the owner of such abandoned WCF and the owner of a building or land upon which the WCF is located shall be jointly and severally responsible for the removal of abandoned WCF.

(c) If there are two (2) or more users of a WCF, then this section shall not become effective until all users cease using the WCF. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-228. Indemnification.
Each permit issued for a WCF located on city property shall be deemed to have as a condition of the permit a requirement that the applicant defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents, employees, volunteers, and contractors from any and all liability, damages, or charges (including attorneys’ fees and expenses) arising out of claims, suits, demands, or causes of action as a result of the permit process, a granted permit, construction, location, performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of the WCF. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-229. Eligible facilities modification request.
(a) Purpose. This section implements Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act (47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a)), as it may be amended from time to time and as interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order No. 14-153 and Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018, which requires a state or local government to approve any eligible facilities request for a modification of an existing tower or base station that does not result in a substantial change to the physical dimensions of such tower or base station. Eligible facilities requests shall be governed solely by the provisions in this section and federal law.

(b) Application review.

(1) Application. The community development department shall prepare and make publicly available an application form, which form shall be used by the applicant. No information may be required from an applicant for any documentation intended to illustrate the need for any such wireless facilities or to justify the business decision to modify such wireless facilities.

(2) Review. Upon submission of an application for an eligible facilities request pursuant to this section, the community development department shall, within sixty (60) days (subject to the tolling provisions set forth below), review such application, make its final decision to approve or deny the application, and advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.

(3) Tolling of the time frame for review. The sixty (60) day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement between the community development department and the applicant, or in cases where the community development department determines that the application is incomplete.

a. To toll the time frame for incompleteness, the community development department must provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application.

b. The time frame for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the community development department’s notice of incompleteness.

c. Following a supplemental submission, the community development department shall have ten (10) days to notify the applicant if the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The time frame is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.

(4) Failure to act. In the event the community development department fails to approve or deny a complete application under this section within the time frame for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted provided the applicant notifies the community development department in writing after the review period has expired.

(c) Change in federal law. If federal law changes regarding an application for an eligible facilities request, then this section shall be deemed amended to comply with federal law without further action by the city. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-230. Small wireless facilities –Collocation on existing structures.
(a) Purpose. This section implements a shot clock that is contained in the FCC’s Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018, regarding the collocation of small wireless facilities on existing structures.

(b) Application review.

(1) Application. The community development department shall prepare and make publicly available an application form, which form shall be used by the applicant.

(2) Review. Upon submission of an application for collocation of small wireless facilities on an existing structure pursuant to this section, the community development department shall, within sixty (60) days (subject to resetting of the shot clock and the tolling provisions set forth below), review such application, make its final decision to approve or deny the application, and advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.

(3) Tolling of the time frame for review. The sixty (60) day review period begins to run when the application is filed. The community development department shall notify the applicant in writing within ten (10) days as to whether the application is incomplete. Upon resubmission by the applicant, a new sixty (60) day shot clock shall commence, and the community development department shall have ten (10) days to notify the applicant again of an incomplete application. The shot clock may be tolled only by mutual agreement between the community development department and the applicant, or in cases where the community development department determines upon a resubmission that the application is incomplete.

a. The time frame is tolled in the case of subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.

(4) Failure to act. In the event the community development department fails to approve or deny a complete application under this section within the time frame for review (accounting for resetting the shot clock once or any tolling), the applicant may pursue judicial relief.

(c) Change in federal law. If federal law changes regarding an application for the collocation of small wireless facilities on an existing structure, then this section shall be deemed amended to comply with federal law without further action by the city. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-231. Small wireless facilities – New construction (new builds).
(a) Purpose. This section implements a shot clock that is contained in the FCC’s Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018, regarding the construction of small wireless facilities on a new structure.

(b) Application review.

(1) Application. The community development department shall prepare and make publicly available an application form, which form shall be used by the applicant.

(2) Review. Upon submission of an application for the construction of small wireless facilities on a new structure pursuant to this section, the community development department shall, within ninety (90) days (subject to resetting of the shot clock and the tolling provisions set forth below), review such application, make its final decision to approve or deny the application, and advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.

(3) Tolling of the time frame for review. The ninety (90) day review period begins to run when the application is filed. The community development department shall notify the applicant in writing within ten (10) days as to whether the application is incomplete. Upon resubmission by the applicant, a new ninety (90) day shot clock shall commence, and the community development department shall have ten (10) days to notify the applicant again of an incomplete application. The shot clock may be tolled only by mutual agreement between the community development department and the applicant, or in cases where the community development department determines upon a resubmission that the application is incomplete.

a. The time frame is tolled in the case of subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.

(4) Failure to act. In the event the community development department fails to approve or deny a complete application under this section within the time frame for review (accounting for resetting the shot clock once or any tolling), the applicant may pursue judicial relief.

(c) Change in federal law. If federal law changes regarding an application for the construction of small wireless facilities on a new structure, then this section shall be deemed amended to comply with federal law without further action by the city. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-232. Collocation applications for other than small wireless facilities.
(a) Purpose. This section implements, in part, 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7) of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as it may be amended from time to time and as interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order No. 14-153 and Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018. Except when a shorter time frame is otherwise required under this article, the following time frames apply to applications for collocation for other than small wireless facilities.

(b) Application review.

(1) Application. The community development department shall prepare and make publicly available an application form, which shall be used by the applicant.

(2) Review. Upon receipt of an application for a collocation request pursuant to this section, the community development department shall, within ninety (90) days (subject to the tolling provisions set forth below), review such application, make its final decision to approve or deny the application, and advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.

(3) Tolling of the time frame for review. The ninety (90) day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement between the community development department and the applicant, or in cases where the community development department determines that the application is incomplete.

a. To toll the time frame for incompleteness, the community development department must provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application.

b. The time frame for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the community development department’s notice of incompleteness.

c. Following a supplemental submission, the community development department shall notify the applicant within ten (10) days if the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The time frame is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.

(4) Failure to act. In the event the community development department fails to approve or deny a complete application under this section within the time frame for review (accounting for any tolling), the applicant may pursue judicial relief.

(c) Change in federal law. If federal law changes regarding applications for collocation for other than small wireless facilities, this section shall be deemed amended to comply with federal law without further action by the city. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-233. New site or tower applications.
(a) Purpose. This section also implements, in part, 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7) of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as it may be amended from time to time and as interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order No. 14-153 and Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order released September 27, 2018.

(b) Application review.

(1) Application. The community development department shall prepare and make publicly available an application form, which shall be used by the applicant.

(2) Review. Upon receipt of an application for a request for a new site or tower pursuant to this section, the planning and zoning commission shall, within one hundred fifty (150) days (subject to the tolling provisions set forth below), review such application, make its final decision to approve or deny the application, and advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.

(3) Tolling of the time frame for review. The one hundred fifty (150) day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement between the community development department and the applicant, or in cases where the community development department determines that the application is incomplete.

a. To toll the time frame for incompleteness, the community development department must provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application.

b. The time frame for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the community development department’s notice of incompleteness.

c. Following a supplemental submission, the community development department shall notify the applicant within ten (10) days if the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The time frame is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.

(4) Failure to act. In the event the planning and zoning commission fails to approve or deny a complete application under this section within the time frame for review (accounting for any tolling), the applicant may pursue judicial relief.

(c) Change in federal law. If federal law changes regarding applications for a new site or tower, this section shall be deemed amended to comply with federal law without further action by the city. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-234. Application fees.
In connection with the filing of an application, the applicant shall pay all applicable application fees, as set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-235. Laws, rules, and regulations.
This article shall be subject to all applicable laws, rules, and regulations. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

Sec. 37-236. Severability.
The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. No. 4742, § 1, 8-19-19)

1
Cross references – Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 10; electricity, Ch. 14; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 15; garbage, rubbish and weeds, Ch. 17; gas and oil-burning equipment, Ch. 18; health and sanitation, Ch. 19; industrial development, Ch. 19.75; mobile homes and tourist facilities, Ch. 23; parks and recreation, Ch. 26; plumbing, Ch. 27; signs, Ch. 30; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 31; subdivisions, Ch. 32; swimming pools, Ch. 33; traffic, Ch. 35; water and sewers, Ch. 36.

State law reference – Power to zone, Idaho Code, §§ 67-6501 – 67-6529.


2
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4249, § 33, adopted Oct. 25, 1999, added a new section § 37-69.1. This section has been editorially renumbered to avoid duplication.


3
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4270, § 1, adopted Oct. 30, 2000, repealed §§ 37-94 – 37-97, relating to the PD Zone, which derived from Ord. No. 4108, § 2, adopted Aug. 15, 1994, as amended by Ord. No. 4249, § 50, adopted Oct. 25, 1999.


4
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 4631 § 3, adopted July 13, 2015, added a new section § 37-181. This section has been editorially renumbered to avoid duplication.


Chapter 38
DISCRIMINATION
Art. I.    General Provisions, §§ 38-1 – 38-3

Art. II.    Prohibited Discriminatory Acts, §§ 38-4 – 38-6

Art. III.    Mediation, § 38-7

ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 38-1. Purpose and intent.
It is the finding and the intent of the city of Lewiston that no person shall be denied his or her civil rights or be discriminated against based upon his or her actual or perceived race, color, national origin, ancestry, religion, creed, sex, age, marital or familial status, physical or mental disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression. The Lewiston city council declares that such discrimination prohibitions are necessary and desirable for the following reasons:

(1) It is the intent of this chapter that all persons be treated fairly and equally, and it is the express intent of this chapter to guarantee fair and equal treatment under the law to all people in the city of Lewiston. The denial of fair and equal treatment under the law due to familial status, sexual orientation and/or gender identity/expression is detrimental to the well-being, safety, and welfare of the city’s citizens, and damages a city’s economic well-being.

(2) This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city of Lewiston for the protection of the public welfare, prosperity, health and peace of the city of Lewiston, its residents and the community.

(3) In order to ensure that all persons, regardless of familial status, sexual orientation and/or gender identity/expression enjoy the full benefits of citizenship and are afforded equal opportunities for employment, housing, commercial property and the use of public accommodations, the city of Lewiston has determined that discrimination on the basis of familial status, sexual orientation and gender identity/expression must be addressed, and appropriate legislation enacted.

(4) It is hereby declared to be public policy of the city of Lewiston that discriminatory practices are detrimental because they impede the social and economic progress of a city by preventing all of the city’s citizens from contributing to the cultural, spiritual, social, and commercial life of the community. The contributions of all citizens of the city of Lewiston are essential to the city’s growth, vitality, and prosperity.

(5) It is hereby declared that every individual in the city of Lewiston has the right to seek work and earn wages through gainful employment, has the right to seek housing, and has the right to enjoy public accommodation and hospitality.

(6) The prohibitions against discriminatory acts as provided for in this chapter are intended to supplement state and federal civil rights laws prohibiting discrimination in the areas of employment, public accommodations, and housing. For complaints alleging discrimination on a basis proscribed under state or federal law (e.g., race, color, religious creed, ancestry, age, gender, national origin, and/or disability), the complainant is advised of his or her right to file a report alleging a violation of Idaho Code, Section 18-7301 et seq., and/or his or her right to file a complaint with the Idaho Commission on Human Rights and/or the Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission pursuant to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 as amended, the Fair Housing Act of 1968 as amended, or the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 as amended. (Ord. No. 4614, § 1, 10-27-14)

Sec. 38-2. Definitions.
(a) Deny includes any act which, directly or indirectly, by any person or his or her agent or employee, results or is intended or calculated to result in whole or in part in any discrimination, distinction, restriction, or unequal treatment or representation. It also includes, but is not limited to, the requiring of a person to pay a larger sum than the uniform rates charged other persons, or the refusing or withholding from persons the admission, patronage, custom, presence, frequenting, dwelling, staying or lodging in any place of public resort, accommodation, assemblage, or amusement except for conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all persons, regardless of familial status, sexual orientation and/or gender identity/expression.

(b) Discrimination is any direct or indirect exclusion, distinction, segregation, limitation, refusal, denial or other differentiation in the treatment of a person because of a person’s actual or perceived familial status, sexual orientation and/or gender identity/expression or because of a person’s association with any such person. Discrimination shall not be interpreted to require or to grant or accord any preferential treatment to any person because of that person’s sexual orientation or gender identity/expression.

(c) Full enjoyment of shall be construed to include, but not be limited to, the right to use, rent or purchase real property, any service, commodity or article of personal property offered or sold by any person or establishment to the public, and the admission of any person to accommodations, advantages, facilities or privileges of any place of public resort, accommodation, assemblage or amusement, without acts directly or indirectly causing persons of any particular familial status, sexual orientation and/or gender identity/expression to be treated as not welcome, accepted, desired or solicited.

(d) Gender identity/expression means a gender-related identity, appearance, expression or behavior of an individual regardless of a person’s assigned sex at birth.

(e) Housing accommodation is a building or portion of a building, whether constructed or to be constructed, that is or will be used as the home, domicile, residence, or sleeping quarters of its occupants.

(f) Person shall mean any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership or other organization, association or group of persons however arranged.

(g) Place of public resort, accommodation, assemblage or amusement includes, but is not limited to, any public place, licensed or unlicensed, kept for gain, hire or reward, or where charges are made for admission, service, occupancy or use of any property or facilities, whether conducted for the entertainment, housing or lodging of transient guests, or for the benefit, use or accommodation of those seeking health, recreation or rest, or for the sale of goods and merchandise, or for the rendering of personal services, or for the public conveyance or transportation on land or water, including the stations and terminals thereof and the garaging of vehicles, or where food or beverages of any kind are sold for consumption on the premises, or where the public gathers, congregates, or assembles for amusement, recreation or public purposes, or public halls, public elevators and public washrooms of buildings and structures occupied by two (2) or more tenants, or by the owner and one (1) or more tenants, or any public library or any educational institution wholly or partially supported by public funds, or schools of special instruction, or nursery schools, or day care centers or children’s camps; nothing herein contained shall be construed to include, or apply to, any institute, bona fide club, or place of accommodation, which is by its nature distinctly private; provided, that where public use is permitted that use shall be covered by this section.

(h) Sexual orientation is actual or perceived homosexuality, heterosexuality and/or bisexuality.

(i) Familial status means one (1) or more persons under age eighteen (18) who reside with a parent, legal guardian, or designee of the parent or legal guardian with the parent’s or legal guardian’s written consent. Familial status also applies to persons who are pregnant and to persons who are in the process of gaining legal custody of an individual under the age of eighteen (18). (Ord. No. 4614, § 1, 10-27-14)

Sec. 38-3. Severability.
If any section, phrase, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining sections, phrases, clauses, sentences, or paragraphs of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4614, § 1, 10-27-14)

ARTICLE II. PROHIBITED DISCRIMINATORY ACTS
Sec. 38-4. Prohibited discriminatory acts.
The following acts are prohibited and shall constitute a misdemeanor:

(1) To unlawfully deny or discriminate against any other person because of familial status, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression the right to seek work: (a) by failing or refusing to hire when otherwise qualified, (b) by discharging, (c) by barring from employment, (d) by otherwise discriminating against such person in compensation or in other terms or conditions of employment, or (e) otherwise unlawfully discriminating against an individual with respect to employment.

(2) To unlawfully deny or discriminate against any person because of familial status, sexual orientation and/or gender identity/expression the full enjoyment of any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities or privileges of any place of public resort, accommodation, assemblage, or amusement.

(3) To unlawfully deny or discriminate against any person because of familial status, sexual orientation and/or gender identity/expression in the sale, purchase, lease or rental of any commercial property, housing accommodation, or to otherwise discriminate in the terms and conditions, maintenance, improvement or repair of any housing accommodation.

(4) Retaliation prohibited. No person shall coerce, threaten, discharge, expel, blacklist, or otherwise retaliate against another person for opposing any practices prohibited by this chapter, making a complaint, or assisting in the investigation or proceeding regarding an alleged violation of this chapter; nor shall any person require, request to conspire with, assist, coerce, aid or abet another person to retaliate against a person for making a complaint or assisting in an investigation or proceeding pursuant to the terms of this chapter. (Ord. No. 4614, § 1, 10-27-14)

Sec. 38-5. Exceptions.
(a) Nothing in this chapter is intended to alter or abridge other rights, protections, or privileges secured under state and federal law. Moreover, this chapter shall be construed and applied in a manner consistent with First Amendment jurisprudence regarding the freedom of speech, association, and exercise of religion.

(b) This chapter shall not apply:

(1) To the rental of a housing accommodation for not more than two (2) families living independently of each other, if the lessor is an individual and said individual resides in one (1) of the housing accommodations;

(2) To the rental of a room or rooms in a single-family residential housing accommodation by an individual if said individual resides in said single-family residential housing;

(3) To private clubs or other establishments not in fact open to the public; or

(4) To the religious activities of any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or other house of worship or other place used primarily for religious activities and ordained priests or ministers of any denomination engaged in such activities. (Ord. No. 4614, § 1, 10-27-14)

Sec. 38-6. Penalties.
(a) A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and may be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by incarceration in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or both.

(b) The prosecutor may reduce the violation to an infraction, payable by a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine, if the defendant engages in corrective actions, which may include, but are not limited to, the following: appropriate remedial training for the defendant and/or the defendant’s employees; the defendant’s agreement to adopt and pursue a policy of nondiscrimination in its practices; and the defendant’s agreement not to engage in discriminatory practices in the future.

(c) Any person who falsely reports a violation of this chapter may be charged with the crime of: providing false information to law enforcement, government agencies or specified professionals, Idaho Code, Section 18-5413.

(d) A complaint filed under the provisions of this chapter shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days of the alleged discriminatory conduct. (Ord. No. 4614, § 1, 10-27-14)

ARTICLE III. MEDIATION
Sec. 38-7. Mediation.
If, upon the completion of an investigation of a complaint made pursuant to the terms of this chapter, the city attorney finds that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the city attorney shall notify the complainant and the defendant of their right to engage in mediation and attempt to resolve the dispute prior to the filing of a criminal complaint. The mediator shall be appointed by the city attorney and the costs of the mediation services shall be borne equally by the complainant and the defendant.

The city attorney shall not otherwise participate in the mediation. The mediation will be conducted pursuant to the Idaho Rules of Criminal Procedure. In the event the parties successfully mediate the dispute then no charges will be brought by the city attorney stemming from the common core of aggregate facts presented by the complainant. (Ord. No. 4614, § 1, 10-27-14)

Chapter 39
CITY OF LEWISTON AREA OF CITY IMPACT1
Sec. 39-1. Area of City Impact Map.
The city of Lewiston Area of City Impact is that area jointly adopted by the Lewiston city council and the Nez Perce board of county commissioners, as required by Idaho Code, Section 67-6526, and as illustrated in the city of Lewiston Area of City Impact Boundary Map, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and incorporated herein as Exhibit A. (Ord. No. 4662, § 2, 10-10-16; Ord. No. 4751, § 1, 6-24-19)

Sec. 39-2. Application of plans and ordinances to the Area of City Impact.
The plans and ordinances applicable to the city of Lewiston Area of City Impact shall be as set forth in Nez Perce County Ordinance No. 92a (Subdivisions) and Nez Perce County Ordinance No. 96 (Zoning), as amended from time to time. (Ord. No. 4664, § 1, 10-10-16)

1
Editor’s note – Ordinance No. 4662, adopted Oct. 10, 2016, repealed and replaced Ch. 39 in its entirety. The deleted sections contained provisions relating to the Area of City Impact. These sections derived from Ord. No. 4626, adopted Feb. 23, 2015, and Ord. No. 4643, adopted October 26, 2015.


Chapter 40
INCENTIVE PROGRAMS
Art. I    Economic and Community Development Incentive Program, §§ 40-1 – 40-20

Art. II    Developer Incentive Program, §§ 40-21 – 40-40

ARTICLE I. ECONOMIC AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE PROGRAM
Sec. 40-1. Purpose.
(a) The city of Lewiston is committed to the promotion of quality development in all parts of the city and to improving the quality of life for its citizens. In order to help meet these goals, the city of Lewiston will consider providing incentives for the retention and/or expansion of existing businesses located within the city of Lewiston and to encourage the establishment of new businesses within the city of Lewiston. Such incentives will be provided in accordance with the procedures and criteria outlined in this article. However, nothing in this article shall imply or suggest that the city of Lewiston is under any obligation to provide any incentive to any applicant; and all such decisions and actions shall be at the sole discretion of the Lewiston city council. All applicants for economic development incentives will be considered on an individual basis.

(b) It is the intent of the city of Lewiston to offer economic development incentives on an individual basis so that the total package of incentives, if any, may be designed specifically for each business that is proposed. This approach will allow the city of Lewiston the flexibility necessary to satisfy the unique needs and concerns of each applicant and the needs and concerns of the city of Lewiston and its citizens. (Ord. No. 4673, § 1, 1-23-17; Ord. No. 4690, § 3, 6-26-17)

Sec. 40-2. Eligibility requirements.
An applicant and/or the applicant’s proposed business must meet the following minimum requirements in order to be considered for the economic and community development incentive program:

(1) The applicant must identify and commit to a project that will benefit the public. Such project may include, but is not limited to: (a) new or improved public utility infrastructure, such as water, sewer, gas, or electricity; (b) new or improved roads, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, parking lots, parks, or open spaces; (c) rehabilitation of a historical building (built prior to 1940); (d) removal of blighted areas or slum clearance; (e) protection and conservation of public health; and (f) elimination of crime.

(2) Within twelve (12) months of issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the proposed business must create at least fifteen (15) new full-time equivalent positions within the city of Lewiston. For the purposes of this article, a full-time employee means an employee who is expected, in the normal course of employment, to provide at least two thousand eighty (2,080) compensated hours during a consecutive 12-month period. For purpose of this article, a full-time equivalent position means any combination of seasonal or part-time employees whose compensated hours during a consecutive 12-month period equal two thousand eighty (2,080) hours.

(3) Within twelve (12) months of issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the average wage paid to full-time employees of the proposed business shall be at least twice the Idaho minimum wage, or fifty (50) percent of the median family income published by Housing and Urban Development for Nez Perce County, whichever is greater. The calculation methodology shall use the U.S. Census Bureau American Community Survey median family income estimates, with an inflation factor based on the Congressional Budget Office forecast of the National Consumer Price Index.

(4) The applicant shall provide medical, dental, and vacation benefits to full-time employees of the proposed business.

(5) If the applicant proposes to establish a new business in a building to be constructed by the applicant in the city of Lewiston, then the applicant shall provide new capital investment equal to or in excess of one million five hundred thousand dollars ($1,500,000.00). If the applicant proposes to expand an existing business in the city of Lewiston or establish a business in a building located in the city of Lewiston that has been vacant for at least one (1) year, then the applicant shall provide new capital investment equal to or in excess of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). For purposes of this article, new capital investment means property improvements that will enhance the assessed valuation of the land and building(s) on the property. (Ord. No. 4673, § 1, 1-23-17; Ord. No. 4690, §§ 4, 5, 6-26-17; Ord. No. 4715, § 1, 3-26-18)

Sec. 40-3. Available incentives.
(a) The city of Lewiston offers the following incentive options for qualifying applicants:

(1) Expedited permitting process. The city of Lewiston may expedite the permitting process required for a business location or expansion, as allowed by law.

(2) Waiver of fees. The city of Lewiston may waive all or a portion of the following fees associated with the establishment or expansion of a business: (a) business license fees, (b) land use application and plan review fees, and (c) building permit fees. However, if the city of Lewiston uses the services of an outside consultant to review an application, construction documents, or for any other purpose necessary to facilitate the issuance of a permit, then such consultant fees shall not be waived.

(b) The incentive(s) offered to each applicant will depend upon the needs of and the benefits created by the proposed business.

(c) Any waiver of fees shall not exceed the amount of estimated city taxes to be levied on the capital improvements of the proposed business within seven (7) calendar years after receipt of the certificate of occupancy.

(d) Any waiver of fees shall not exceed five (5) percent of the estimated assessed valuation of the land and buildings of the proposed business at the time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. (Ord. No. 4673, § 1, 1-23-17)

Sec. 40-4. Application procedure.
(a) A written application for the economic and community development incentive program shall be submitted to the community development department.

(b) An application for the economic and community development incentive program shall be initiated before an applicant applies for permits for construction of the proposed business.

(c) An application for the economic and community development incentive program shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:

(1) The applicant’s name, name of business entity, principal place of business, physical mailing address, telephone number, fax number, email address, website address, and contact information of an officer or employee of the applicant who is responsible for completing the application;

(2) A legal description of the property where the proposed business will be located, along with a subdivision plat or record of survey showing the precise location of the proposed business;

(3) A description of the proposed improvements or expansion, including, but not limited to: (a) the proposed business’s estimated total cost of construction; (b) the type of business operation proposed, the number and types of jobs that will be created, and the anticipated wage or salary of each job position; (c) a description of benefits that will be available to employees; (d) the expected source of labor to fill such jobs; (e) the projected date of the commencement of construction of the proposed business; (f) the projected date of commencement of business operations; and (g) the expected duration of the proposed business at the subject location, based on history of company operations;

(4) A description of the type of incentive(s) requested;

(5) A description of how the proposed new business, business expansion, or property improvements will be financed;

(6) A business plan for the proposed business; and

(7) Such other information as required or requested by the city of Lewiston. (Ord. No. 4673, § 1, 1-23-17; Ord. No. 4715, § 2, 3-26-18)

Sec. 40-5. Evaluation.
(a) City of Lewiston staff shall evaluate an application for the economic and community development incentive program, taking into consideration the following factors:

(1) Revenue benefit to the city of Lewiston;

(2) Number and quality of jobs created;

(3) Strength of public benefit to the city of Lewiston, including benefits to existing businesses in the city of Lewiston by virtue of the proposed business being within the supply chain, or building on an existing economic cluster, such as ammunitions, paper products, boat builders, viticulture, value-added agriculture, or information technology;

(4) Ability of the proposed business to spur additional economic development in the city of Lewiston;

(5) Impact of the proposed business on existing businesses within the city of Lewiston; and

(6) The applicant’s willingness to construct public facilities and infrastructure, including, but not limited to, parks, pathways, public parking, public open space, and public recreation facilities, either on or off site.

(b) After evaluating an application and within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application, city of Lewiston staff shall provide a written recommendation to the Lewiston city council.

(c) The Lewiston city council may adopt or reject, in whole or in part, the recommendation of city of Lewiston staff or otherwise approve or deny an application for the economic and community development incentive program based upon its review of the application and the criteria set forth in this section. (Ord. No. 4673, § 1, 1-23-17; Ord. No. 4715, § 3, 3-26-18)

Sec. 40-6. Incentive agreement.
(a) If the Lewiston city council approves an application for the economic and community development incentive program, then the applicant shall enter into an incentive agreement with the city of Lewiston, enumerating the type of incentive(s) granted and the conditions applicable to such incentive(s).

(b) All incentive agreements shall be in writing and, at a minimum, include:

(1) A description of the incentive(s) to be provided and the extent thereof;

(2) The commencement date of the incentive(s) and the duration of the incentive(s);

(3) A legal description of the property where the business will be located;

(4) Detailed information regarding the type, number, location, and cost of planned improvements;

(5) A provision requiring the applicant to certify, in writing, that the applicant’s business is in compliance with the incentive agreement;

(6) A provision requiring the applicant to provide documentation substantiating the level of value provided by the applicant’s business to the city of Lewiston, including, but not limited to, annual financial reports, state and/or federal employment reports, and Nez Perce County tax appraisal statements;

(7) A method for the city of Lewiston to recover all waived fees and costs that are lost as a result of the incentive agreement if the applicant fails to perform its obligations under the incentive agreement, which method may include a provision in the incentive agreement that gives the city of Lewiston authority to record a lien on the property;

(8) A provision requiring the applicant to keep accurate financial records sufficient to demonstrate applicant’s performance of the terms and conditions of the incentive agreement;

(9) A provision allowing the city of Lewiston to inspect the applicant’s financial records upon reasonable advance notice during normal business hours, and requiring the applicant to provide copies of such records at the applicant’s expense, upon written request by the city of Lewiston;

(10) A provision requiring the applicant to repay all incentives in the event the application contains any misstatement or misrepresentation of material fact, together with interest at a rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the date each fee would have otherwise become due, together with a penalty in the amount of five (5) percent of the total amount of the fees waived;

(11) A provision requiring the applicant to pay the city’s reasonable attorney fees and costs in the event legal action is required to enforce the incentive agreement;

(12) A provision stating that the incentive agreement is nontransferable and requiring the applicant to promptly disclose to the city of Lewiston, in writing, any transfer of ownership of the applicant’s business, any sale or transfer of shares in the applicant’s business that results in a change of control of the business, or any bulk sale of more than seventy-five (75) percent of the assets of the business; and

(13) Such other provisions as the Lewiston city council deems appropriate.

(c) An incentive agreement may be amended only upon a writing duly executed by the Lewiston city council and the applicant. In no case, however, shall the nature or purpose of the proposed business be changed from what was generally described in the original scope of work or budget. (Ord. No. 4673, § 1, 1-23-17; Ord. No. 4715, § 4, 3-26-18)

Sec. 40-7. Discontinuance of incentives.
Changing economic conditions and availability of funds may cause the Lewiston city council to modify, amend, or discontinue the economic and community development incentive program at any time. In the event that the Lewiston city council discontinues the economic and community development incentive program, the city of Lewiston shall honor any incentive agreement to which it committed before the discontinuance of the economic and community development incentive program. (Ord. No. 4673, § 1, 1-23-17)

Secs. 40-8 – 40-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. DEVELOPER INCENTIVE PROGRAM
Sec. 40-21. Purpose.
(a) The city of Lewiston recognizes the benefits of and is committed to the promotion of quality development and redevelopment in all parts of the city and to improving the quality of life for its citizens. In order to help meet these goals, the city of Lewiston will consider providing incentives for the development and redevelopment of blighted areas, undeveloped areas, underdeveloped areas, and areas that are developed, but not to current city standards. Such incentives will be provided in accordance with the procedures and criteria outlined in this article. However, nothing in this article shall imply or suggest that the city of Lewiston is under any obligation to provide any incentive to any applicant; and all such decisions and actions shall be at the sole discretion of the Lewiston city council. All applications for developer incentives will be considered on a case-by-case basis.

(b) It is the intent of the city of Lewiston to offer developer incentives on a case-by-case basis so that the total package of incentives, if any, may be designed specifically for each development that is proposed. This approach will allow the city of Lewiston the flexibility necessary to satisfy the unique needs and concerns of each applicant and the needs and concerns of the city of Lewiston and its citizens. (Ord. No. 4690, § 6, 6-26-17)

Sec. 40-22. Definitions.
(a) Blighted area means any area in which there is a predominance of buildings or improvements, whether residential or nonresidential, which by reason of dilapidation; deterioration; age; obsolescence; inadequate provision for ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces; high density of population and overcrowding; the existence of conditions that endanger life or property by fire or other causes; or any combination of such factors is conducive to ill health, crime, site contamination, declining property values, or otherwise detrimental to public health, safety, morals, or welfare. Blighted area includes a brownfield site.

(b) Brownfield site means a tract of land that has been developed for commercial or industrial purposes and is polluted.

(c) Developer means an individual or business entity that: (1) purchases land and/or a building(s), (2) develops such land and/or building(s) by constructing a new building(s) or renovating an existing building(s), and (3) leases or sells such land and building(s) once development of such is complete.

(d) Undeveloped land means a tract of land that has not previously been developed, other than for agricultural purposes and/or with one (1) homestead. (Ord. No. 4690, § 6, 6-26-17)

Sec. 40-23. Eligibility requirements.
An applicant must meet the following minimum requirements in order to be considered for the developer incentive program:

(1) The applicant must be a developer, as defined in this article.

(2) The applicant must identify and commit to a project that will benefit the public. Such project may include, but is not limited to: (a) new or improved public utility infrastructure, such as water, sewer, gas, or electricity; (b) new or improved roads, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, parking lots, parks, or open spaces; (c) removal of blighted areas or slum clearance; (d) protection and conservation of public health; and (e) elimination of crime.

(3) If an applicant proposes to develop undeveloped land within the city of Lewiston, then the applicant shall provide infrastructure investment and building construction equal to or in excess of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00). Such development may be done in a phased approach over a period of one (1) to three (3) years.

(4) If an applicant proposes to develop a blighted area within the city of Lewiston, then the applicant shall provide infrastructure investment and building construction equal to or in excess of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00). (Ord. No. 4690, § 6, 6-26-17)

Sec. 40-24. Available incentives.
(a) The city of Lewiston offers the following incentive options for qualifying applicants:

(1) Expedited permitting process. The city of Lewiston may expedite the permitting process required for a development, as allowed by law.

(2) Waiver of fees. The city of Lewiston may waive all or a portion of the following fees associated with a proposed development: (a) land use application and plan review fees, and (b) building permit fees. However, no fee for which the services of an outside consultant are necessary to review an application, construction documents, or for any other purpose necessary to facilitate the issuance of an associated permit shall be waived.

(b) The incentive(s) offered to each applicant will depend upon the needs of and the benefits created by the proposed development.

(c) Any waiver of fees shall not exceed: (1) the amount of estimated city taxes to be levied on the capital improvements of the proposed development within seven (7) calendar years after receipt of the first certificate of occupancy, if there is more than one (1) building; or (2) five (5) percent of the estimated assessed valuation of the land and building(s) of the proposed development at the time of issuance of the last certificate of occupancy, if there is more than one building, whichever is less; provided, however, in no case shall a waiver of fees exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). (Ord. No. 4690, § 6, 6-26-17)

Sec. 40-25. Application procedure.
(a) A written application for the developer incentive program shall be submitted to the community development department.

(b) Applicants are strongly encouraged to apply for the developer incentive program before applying for related building and other permits. In all cases, permits related to a proposed development for which an applicant has submitted an application for the developer incentive program shall not be issued until the application is either approved by the Lewiston city council or withdrawn by the applicant.

(c) An application for the developer incentive program shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:

(1) The applicant’s name, name of business entity, principal place of business, physical mailing address, telephone number, fax number, email address, website address, and contact information of an officer or employee of the applicant who is responsible for completing the application;

(2) A legal description of the property where the proposed development will be located, along with a subdivision plat or record of survey showing the precise location of the proposed development;

(3) A description of the proposed development, including, but not limited to: (a) the type of development proposed, (b) an explanation of how the proposed development will benefit the city of Lewiston, (c) the projected start date of construction, (d) the expected duration of construction, and (e) the estimated total cost of construction;

(4) A description of the type of incentive(s) requested;

(5) A description of how the development will be financed; and

(6) Such other information as required or requested by the city of Lewiston. (Ord. No. 4690, § 6, 6-26-17)

Sec. 40-26. Evaluation.
(a) City of Lewiston staff shall evaluate an application for the developer incentive program, taking into consideration the following factors:

(1) Revenue benefit to the city of Lewiston;

(2) Strength of public benefit to the city of Lewiston, regardless of whether the proposed development is commercial or residential; provided, however, development that benefits residents in low-to-moderate income ranges and/or provides single-family homes, condominiums, or apartments will be considered a priority;

(3) Remediation of brownfield site;

(4) Conformance with the city of Lewiston comprehensive plan;

(5) Ability of the proposed development to spur additional economic development in the city of Lewiston;

(6) Impact of the proposed development on existing businesses within the city of Lewiston; and

(7) The applicant’s willingness to construct public facilities and infrastructure, including, but not limited to, parks, pathways, bus stops, public parking, public open space, and public recreational facilities, either on or off-site, beyond the minimum required by city code.

(b) After evaluating an application and within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application, city of Lewiston staff shall provide a written recommendation to the Lewiston city council.

(c) The Lewiston city council may adopt or reject, in whole or in part, the recommendation of city of Lewiston staff or otherwise approve or deny an application for the developer incentive program based upon its review of the application and the criteria set forth in this section. (Ord. No. 4690, § 6, 6-26-17; Ord. No. 4715, § 5, 3-26-18)

Sec. 40-27. Incentive agreement.
(a) If the Lewiston city council approves an application for the developer incentive program, then the applicant shall enter into an incentive agreement with the city of Lewiston, enumerating the type of incentive(s) granted and the conditions applicable to such incentive(s).

(b) All incentive agreements shall be in writing and, at a minimum, include:

(1) A description of the incentive(s) to be provided and the extent thereof;

(2) The commencement date of the incentive(s) and the duration of the incentive(s);

(3) A legal description of the property where the development will occur;

(4) Detailed information regarding the type, number, location, and cost of planned improvements;

(5) A provision requiring the applicant to certify, in writing, that the applicant is in compliance with the incentive agreement;

(6) A provision requiring the applicant to provide documentation substantiating the level of value provided by the applicant’s development to the city of Lewiston, including estimated construction costs and land value appraisal;

(7) A method for the city of Lewiston to recover all waived fees and costs that are lost as a result of the incentive agreement if the applicant fails to perform its obligations under the incentive agreement, which method may include a provision in the incentive agreement that gives the city of Lewiston authority to record a lien on the property;

(8) A provision requiring the applicant to keep accurate financial records sufficient to demonstrate applicant’s performance of the terms and conditions of the incentive agreement;

(9) A provision requiring the applicant to repay all incentives in the event the application contains any misstatement or misrepresentation of material fact, together with interest at a rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the date each fee would have otherwise become due, together with a penalty in the amount of five (5) percent of the total amount of the fees waived;

(10) A provision requiring the applicant to pay the city’s reasonable attorney fees and costs in the event legal action is required to enforce the incentive agreement;

(11) A provision stating that the incentive agreement is nontransferable and requiring the applicant to promptly disclose to the city of Lewiston, in writing, any transfer of ownership of the applicant’s business, any sale or transfer of shares in the applicant’s business that results in a change of control of the business, or any bulk sale of more than seventy-five (75) percent of the assets of the business; and

(12) Such other provisions as the Lewiston city council deems appropriate.

(c) An incentive agreement may be amended only upon a writing duly executed by the Lewiston city council and the applicant. In no case, however, shall the nature or purpose of the proposed development be changed from what was generally described in the original scope of work or budget. (Ord. No. 4690, § 6, 6-26-17; Ord. No. 4715, § 6, 3-26-18)

Sec. 40-28. Discontinuance of incentives.
Changing economic conditions and availability of funds may cause the Lewiston city council to modify, amend, or discontinue the developer incentive program at any time. In the event that the Lewiston city council discontinues the developer incentive program, the city of Lewiston shall honor any incentive agreement to which it committed before the discontinuance of the developer incentive program. (Ord. No. 4690, § 6, 6-26-17)

Secs. 40-29 – 40-40. Reserved.
Chapter 41
SMOKE-FREE AIR
Sec. 41-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the City of Lewiston Smoke-Free Air Ordinance. (Ord. No. 4677, § 1, 3-13-17)

Sec. 41-2. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Idaho Code, Sections 39-5511, 39-5713, 50-302, and 50-304. (Ord. No. 4677, § 1, 3-13-17)

Sec. 41-3. Findings and intent.
(a) The city of Lewiston finds that smoking tobacco products is inherently dangerous and individuals who are subjected to secondhand smoke have increased health risks, such as lung cancer, heart disease, asthma, respiratory infections, middle ear infections, and sudden infant death syndrome.

(b) The city of Lewiston finds that smoking electronic cigarettes that contain nicotine and/or other chemicals is dangerous. Nicotine is an addictive substance, and exposure to nicotine during pregnancy may harm the developing fetus, resulting in low birth weight, preterm delivery, and stillbirth. Nicotine also has negative impacts on adolescent brain development and has been associated with cognitive and behavioral impairments. Further, cancer-causing chemicals have been found in electronic cigarettes; and liquid used in electronic cigarettes presents a risk of poison.

(c) The city of Lewiston wishes to provide breathable, clean, smoke-free air in public buildings and outdoor spaces to protect the health of residents, visitors, employees, and nonsmokers. (Ord. No. 4677, § 1, 3-13-17)

Sec. 41-4. Definitions.
(a) E-cigarette means any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating or ultrasonic element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, which provides a vapor of nicotine and/or another substance, and the use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. This term shall include any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, or under any other product name or descriptor.

(b) Outdoor space means an outdoor area owned, managed, or maintained by the city of Lewiston for a public purpose, excluding public rights-of-way.

(c) Public building means a building or facility owned, managed, or maintained by the city of Lewiston where the public is invited or permitted for any purpose.

(d) Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, or burning of tobacco or the carrying or possession of any lighted, heated, or smoldering tobacco, whether contained in a cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other object. This term does not include possession of an unlit or unheated cigar, cigarette, or pipe. This term also includes using an e-cigarette to inhale or exhale vapors containing nicotine and/or other substances. (Ord. No. 4677, § 1, 3-13-17)

Sec. 41-5. Prohibition of smoking in public buildings and outdoor spaces.
Smoking shall be prohibited in all public buildings and outdoor spaces. Smoking shall also be prohibited within twenty (20) feet of all entrances and exits of public buildings. (Ord. No. 4677, § 1, 3-13-17)

Sec. 41-6. Posting of signs and removal of ashtrays.
In all public buildings and outdoor spaces where smoking is prohibited by this chapter, the city of Lewiston shall:

(1) Clearly and conspicuously post:

a. “No Smoking” signs or the international “No Smoking” symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it; and

b. A sign at every entrance that clearly states that smoking, including smoking of e-cigarettes, is prohibited.

(2) Remove all ashtrays, except in designated smoking areas. (Ord. No. 4677, § 1, 3-13-17)

Sec. 41-7. Designated smoking areas.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the city of Lewiston may designate smoking areas in outdoor spaces. The city of Lewiston shall designate a smoking area for all public parks. Such designated smoking areas shall be clearly marked. The city of Lewiston shall not designate smoking areas inside public buildings or within twenty (20) feet of any entrance or exit of a public building. (Ord. No. 4677, § 1, 3-13-17)

Sec. 41-8. Exemptions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the following shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 41-5 and 41-6 of this code:

(1) Areas designated as smoking areas by the city of Lewiston, in accordance with section 41-7 of this code.

(2) Religious practices. A person is exempt from the provisions of this chapter if the person is smoking as part of a bona fide religious ceremony or practice, which is protected by the First Amendment. (Ord. No. 4677, § 1, 3-13-17)

Sec. 41-9. Penalty.
(a) A person who violates section 41-5 of this code shall receive a written warning the first time such person violates section 41-5 of this code.

(b) For each violation thereafter, a person who violates section 41-5 of this code shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00).

(c) Violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the city of Lewiston by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law; and the city of Lewiston may take action to recover attorney fees and/or costs of the nuisance abatement. (Ord. No. 4677, § 1, 3-13-17)

Sec. 41-10. Other applicable laws.
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. (Ord. No. 4677, § 1, 3-13-17)

Sec. 41-11. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any other provision of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision. (Ord. No. 4677, § 1, 3-13-17)

Chapter 42
SHELTERS
Art. I.    Homeless Shelters, §§ 42-1 – 42-15

ARTICLE I. HOMELESS SHELTERS
Sec. 42-1. Homeless shelter standards.
Where a homeless shelter is allowed as a use permitted outright or as a conditional use in Chapter 37 of this code, the owner and/or operator of such homeless shelter shall comply with the following standards, unless otherwise amended by a conditional use permit or variance approval:

(1) A minimum of five (5) and a maximum of fifty (50) beds shall be provided.

(2) On-site management shall be provided by a minimum of one (1) staff person for a homeless shelter with twenty (20) occupied beds or less, and a minimum of two (2) staff persons for a homeless shelter with more than twenty (20) occupied beds, during all hours of operation.

(3) A facility management plan shall be submitted with each application for building permit for a homeless shelter. Such plan shall address the following:

(a) The training program (who, what, how, when, where) to be provided for facility staff, including any volunteer staff. Such training shall include: (1) review of the facility management plan; (2) training specific to conflict resolution; mediation; what to do if encountering a person displaying violent, suicidal, or criminal behavior, or suffering from a mental health crisis; abuse prevention; and substance abuse prevention; and (3) any other type of training deemed appropriate by the homeless shelter owner and/or operator;

(b) Protocols to address client acceptance, length of stay, and ancillary service offerings, including relationships with and referrals to and from other related service providers;

(c) Protocols to address emergency response and security for homeless shelter staff, including volunteer staff, and clients;

(d) Protocols to address outdoor noise, litter, indecent exposure, disturbing the peace, and other public nuisances; and

(e) Protocols to address neighborhood outreach and response to complaints.

(4) Operation of a homeless shelter shall be in compliance with the facility management plan.

(5) Securable storage facilities for personal property of residents and overnight clients equal to a minimum of eighteen (18) cubic feet per bed shall be provided. (Ord. No. 4689, § 12, 4-24-17)

Sec. 42-2. Administration and enforcement.
The community development department shall administer the provisions of this article. This article shall be enforced by the community development department and/or the code enforcement officer.

Additionally, in the event that violation of this article creates a public nuisance, such public nuisance may be abated by the city of Lewiston by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law; and the city of Lewiston may take action to recover attorney fees and/or costs of the nuisance abatement. (Ord. No. 4689, § 12, 4-24-17)

Sec. 42-3. Appeals.
(a) A person aggrieved by a written order or decision by the community development director pursuant to this article may appeal such written order or decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of such written order or decision. The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for appeal.

Service of the community development director’s written order or decision may be accomplished by hand delivery or by mail. If such order or decision is hand-delivered, it shall be deemed received immediately. If such order or decision is served by mail, it shall be deemed received forty-eight (48) hours after depositing the same in the U.S. mail, first class, certified, or registered; postage prepaid; and addressed to the recipient’s last known address.

If an appeal is not filed within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of the community development director’s written order or decision, then the decision of the community development director shall be final.

(b) Upon a timely notice of appeal, the city council may either: (1) refuse to accept jurisdiction of the appeal, in which case, the decision of the community development director shall be final; or (2) hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal.

(c) If the city council holds a hearing on the appeal, then notice of such hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Lewiston at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Additionally, notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the owners of all properties within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundary of the property that is the subject of such hearing. Notices shall be mailed at least eight (8) calendar days prior to the hearing. All notices shall include the date, time, and place of the hearing, as well as a short statement as to the subject matter of the hearing.

If notice is required to be mailed to two hundred (200) or more property owners, then public announcements of the hearing may be made in lieu of mailing notice. Such public announcements shall be made on local radio and televisions stations at least five (5), but not more than fifteen (15) calendar days, prior to the hearing.

(d) If the city council holds a hearing on the appeal, then the appellant shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel at the hearing and rebut any evidence that is submitted. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply.

(e) The city council shall issue a written decision within twenty (20) calendar days after the hearing. The city council may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the community development director. The city council’s decision shall be final.

(f) An appeal (other than an appeal of an emergency order) shall stay enforcement of the written order or decision until the appeal is heard and a final decision is rendered. (Ord. No. 4689, § 12, 4-24-17)

Sec. 42-4. Severability.
If any provision of this article is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any other provision of this article that can be given effect without the invalid provision. (Ord. No. 4689, § 12, 4-24-17)

Sec. 42-5 – 42-15. Reserved.