6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 1/315
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to
the left, have been passed, but have not been incorporated in
the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there
are any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary
from the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the
official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 802
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING A PORTION OF ORDINANCE NO. 778, TITLED: LIQUOR BY THE
DRINK; TITLE V, CHAPTER 6, SECTION 5-6-9 (C) OF OROFINO CITY CODE PROVIDING FOR HOURS
OF SALE. SECTION (C) WILL BE DELETED IN ITS ENTIRETY; AND PROVIDING FOR AN
EFFECTIVE DATE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF OROFINO, IDAHO THAT;
Section 5-6-9: This Section of the City Code be amended as follows:
HOURS OF SALE: No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, given away, consumed or permitted to be consumed
upon any licensed premises during the following hours:
Sunday, Memorial Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas from two o’clock (2:00) a.m. and ten o’clock (10:00) a.m.
the following day.
On any other day between two o’clock (2:00) a.m. and ten o’clock (10:00) a.m.
On the day of a general or primary election, until after the time when the polls are closed; provided, that this
provision shall not apply to city elections.
In all other respects the provisions of Ordinance No. 778 are unchanged; any provision of any ordinance in
conflict herewith is repealed.
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage approval and publication.
PASSED BY THE COUNCIL AND APPROVED BY THE MAYOR THIS 13TH DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2018.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 2/315
________________________________
Ryan Smathers, Mayor
ATTEST:
________________________________
Janet R. Montambo, City Clerk
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Orofino, as supplemented, contains ordinances and resolutions up to and
including ordinance 797, passed February 13, 2018, and resolution 08-392, passed August 12, 2008.
Ordinances and resolutions of the City adopted after said ordinance and resolution supersede the
provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended,
superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 688
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY OF OROFINO, IDAHO MUNICIPAL CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Orofino, Idaho as follows:
SECTION 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the City Code of the City of
Orofino, Idaho prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc. containing the compilation of all ordinances of a
general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the
governing body of the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law
of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
SECTION 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 3/315
binding together with the continuous supplement service, provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby
each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or
deleting provisions of the official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the
proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the
City Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open.
SECTION 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official City Code shall be considered
as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately
eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said official City Code. All ordinances of a special nature, such
as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances
shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City
Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the official City Code.
SECTION 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to
alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
SECTION 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such
conflict, hereby repealed.
SECTION 6: This ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be recorded and shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
PASSED BY THE COUNCIL AND APPROVED BY THE MAYOR this 26th day of October, 1998.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
This compilation and codification of the general ordinances of the City is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of the City of Orofino. Any reference to the number of
any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same under its
appropriate title heading, its chapter heading, and its section heading, and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this Code by title in
any legal document. (1962 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 4/315
in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this State as the ordinances of a general and
permanent effect of the City. (1962 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section
or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory
requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the said
ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this City Code.
Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each copy of the City
Code within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage. (1962 Code)
1-1-4: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
A. Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural number is used, in
describing or referring to any matters, parties, or persons, any single matter, party, or person shall
be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used.
B. When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the
singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties, or persons and females as
well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included. Provided, that these rules of
construction shall not be applied to any section of the City Code which contains any express
provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be repugnant
thereto. (1962 Code)
1-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
Words prohibiting anything being done, except in accordance with a license or permit or authority from
a board or officer, shall be construed as giving such board or officer power to license or permit or
authorize such thing to be done.
CITY: The City of Orofino, County of Clearwater, State of Idaho.
COUNTY: The County Of Clearwater, State of Idaho.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the act or omission within the
provisions of these ordinances. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or
omission.
NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, NEGLIGENT, AND NEGLIGENTLY: Import a want of such attention to the
nature or probable consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting
in his own concern.
OFFICER: Shall include officers and boards in charge of departments and members of such boards.
The words "City", "Clerk", "Treasurer", or other such titles shall mean City, City Clerk, City Treasurer,
or other City officer as the use may be applicable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 5/315
OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Shall be deemed to include any person, firm, association or corporation, or any
organization of any kind.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of
rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is
created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
STATE: The State of Idaho.
STREETS: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and
sidewalks.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the
whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose
or willingness to commit the act or make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to
violate law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN AND IN WRITING: May include printing. (1962 Code)
1-1-6: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this City Code the following rules shall be
observed:
A. Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order to constitute an offense, it
shall be sufficient if an intent appears to defraud any person.
B. Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section of this City Code prohibit the
commission of an act, not only the person actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed
act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said
person shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth. (1962 Code)
1-1-7: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of the official City Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so
construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to
perform such duty, unless the intention of the Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1962 Code)
1-1-8: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 6/315
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections
of the official City Code the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than
one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation
of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty
being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or
provision of the City Code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach,
the provisions of the general penalty clause shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (1962 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this Code are hereby repealed,
except such as are referred to herein as being still in force or are by necessary implication herein
reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), from which
are excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances
and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and
ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement
ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or
acceptance of real estate by or from the City; and all special ordinances. (1962 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY AND PUBLIC WORKS ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating
to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of
this Code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this Code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case this Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances
in respect of such provisions only. (1962 Code)
1-2-3: PENDING SUITS:
A. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former
ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance
or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act
so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued
or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter
shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so for as practicable. If any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 7/315
may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new
ordinance takes effect.
B. This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal
is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Nothing contained in this or the preceding Section shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein repealed; or as
discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance
or provision thereof in force at the time of adoption of this Code. (1962 Code)
Chapter 3
PENALTY
1-3-1: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code shall be fined in a sum not to exceed
three hundred dollars ($300.00) for any one offense and such person may be confined in the City jail
for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. Either or both such fine and imprisonment may be
imposed. (1962 Code)
1-3-2: DEFAULT:
Any person in default of payment of any fine imposed shall be imprisoned in the City jail for a period of
one day for each five dollars ($5.00) of such fine. (1962 Code)
1-3-3: DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED:
Any person convicted of driving a motor vehicle while intoxicated or under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or narcotic drug shall be fined in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) and may also be
confined in the City jail for not more than thirty (30) days; provided, that upon conviction, said person
shall also surrender his driver's license to the court. (1962 Code)
1-3-4: LABOR:
A. Any person imprisoned under the provisions of this Chapter may be put to work for the benefit of
the City for the term of his imprisonment.
B. No female prisoner shall be required to work in public, nor shall any prisoner be required to work on
Sunday. (1962 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 8/315
1-3-5: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this Code any license previously issued to
him by the City may be revoked by the court or by the City Council. (1962 Code)
1-3-6: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this Chapter shall be applicable to every section of this Code the same as
though it were a part of each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any
section of this Code, where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of
a continuing nature is forbidden or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues. (1962 Code)
Chapter 4
MAYOR
1-4-1: DUTIES:
The mayor, the superintending and administrative officer of the city, shall devote so much of his time
to the duties of his office as an efficient and faithful discharge thereof may require. He shall preside at
all meetings of the council and shall have a vote when the council is equally divided, and call special
meetings of the council when necessary. He shall appoint all officers and employees of the city,
subject to the approval of the council, and have such other powers as the council may prescribe. He
shall from time to time provide for the council such information and recommend such measures as he
may deem beneficial to the city. He shall examine the grounds of all complaints against any officer of
the city to determine existence of a violation or neglect of duty and report to the council the evidence
thereof, if deemed sufficient for the removal of said officer. He shall require that every officer, on the
expiration of his term of office or resignation or removal, deliver to his successor all assets belonging
to such office. He shall perform all other duties required and necessary for the efficient operation of
the business of the city. (Ord. 724, 4-11-2005)
1-4-2: CONTRACTS:
The mayor is authorized and empowered to sign his name officially for and in behalf of the city on all
contracts, documents and papers to which the city is a party, and to require that the conditions in any
instrument are faithfully performed. He may borrow money on the credit of the city when so authorized
by the council. (Ord. 724, 4-11-2005)
1-4-3: REWARD:
The mayor, whenever he deems it expedient, is hereby empowered to offer a reward not exceeding
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the arrest and conviction of any person charged with violating any of
the provisions of this code. (Ord. 724, 4-11-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 9/315
1-4-4: PARDONS:
The mayor is empowered to grant a pardon to any person imprisoned for a violation of any of the
provisions of this code, and to remit so much of any fine or forfeiture as in his judgment he may deem
just and reasonable, and he shall report such remittance or pardon to the council at its next meeting.
(Ord. 724, 4-11-2005)
1-4-5: ACCOUNTS OF OFFICERS:
The mayor shall have the power to require any officer of the city to exhibit his accounts or other
papers and make reports to the council in writing on any subject or matter pertaining to the office.
(Ord. 724, 4-11-2005)
1-4-6: POLICE POWER:
The mayor shall have jurisdiction over all places within five (5) miles of the city limits for the
enforcement of any health or quarantine ordinances and regulations and shall have jurisdiction in all
matters, excepting taxation, within one-half (1/2) mile of the city limits. (Ord. 724, 4-11-2005)
1-4-7: MAY REQUIRE AID:
The mayor is hereby authorized to call on every male inhabitant of the city over the age of eighteen
(18) and under the age of fifty (50) years to aid in enforcing the law. (Ord. 724, 4-11-2005)
1-4-8: COMMITTEES:
The mayor is hereby authorized to appoint city council members to different committees as shall be
deemed necessary to carry out the efficiency of the legislative process. The committees shall be one
or more of the following:
A. Standing committee: This is a permanent committee that is composed of council members who
focus on a specific policy area.
B. Special committee: This is a temporary committee composed of council members that is formed to
deal with short term problems. As soon as the problem is resolved, the committee is disbanded.
C. Ad hoc committee: Ad hoc committees are temporary committees that are formed to deal with
special problems or issues. The committee may be formed of only council members or may have
some representation from the general public.
D. Citizen committee: This committee enables elected officials to keep abreast of community attitudes.
This committee can provide expertise in particular areas, provide citizens with the opportunity to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 10/315
become directly involved in government, and give elected officials insight on community
preferences. (Ord. 724, 4-11-2005)
1-4-9: OTHER POWERS:
The mayor shall have all other powers provided by state statute or by specific provisions of this code.
(Ord. 724, 4-11-2005)
Chapter 5
CITY COUNCIL
1-5-1: DUTIES:
Members of the council, the legislative and policy making branch of the city, shall devote so much of
their time to the duties of their office as an efficient and faithful discharge thereof may require. They
shall attend all meetings of the council unless lawfully excused therefrom by the mayor or by a
majority of the remaining members, and perform all duties which by the nature of their office they
should reasonably perform, such as the passing of ordinances, resolutions and the investigation and
study of work done for the city according to the committees upon which they may severally be
appointed by the mayor. (1962 Code)
1-5-2: CONSTITUTION OF COUNCIL:
There shall be six (6) council members elected to represent the city. At each city election hereafter
three (3) council members shall be elected to serve for a term of four (4) years or until their
successors are elected and qualified. (Ord. 737, 2-12-2008, eff. 2-26-2008)
1-5-3: VACANCY; HOW FILLED:
In the event an office of council member shall become vacant, through death, removal of residence, or
for any other cause, the mayor shall appoint, with the approval of the council, a resident of the city to
serve until the next city election. (Ord. 737, 2-12-2008, eff. 2-26-2008)
1-5-4: HOW TO CONDUCT COUNCIL MEETINGS:
A. Rules And Order Of Procedure: The rules or order of procedure herein contained shall govern
deliberations and meetings of the city council.
B. Quorum: A quorum shall be a majority of the full council and questions before the council meetings
shall be decided by a majority of those present and voting unless otherwise provided by law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 11/315
C. Presiding Officer: The presiding officer of the council shall be the mayor, or in his absence the
president of the council. In the absence of both the mayor and president of the council, the clerk
shall call the council to order and call the roll. If there is a quorum present, the council shall elect,
by majority vote, a chairman to act until the arrival of the mayor or president of the council. The
presiding officer shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings.
D. Roll Call: Before proceeding with the business of the council, the city clerk or deputy city clerk shall
call the roll of the members and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes.
E. Order Of Business: The order of business shall be as follows:
1. Call to order.
2. Roll call.
3. Approval of minutes of previous meeting.
4. Approval of claims.
5. Public hearings.
6. Petitions, applications, appeals, communications, etc.
7. Report of boards and committees, department heads.
8. Introduction and adoption of resolutions and ordinances.
9. Unfinished business.
10. New business.
11. Adjournment.
F. Addressing Council: No person, not a member of the council, shall be allowed to address the
council while in session without permission of the presiding officer.
G. Compelling Attendance Of Absent Member: A majority of members present, even in the absence of
a quorum, may compel the attendance of absent members at regular and special meetings of the
council.
H. Resolutions And Ordinances: All resolutions and ordinances shall be in writing.
I. Motions:
1. Motions to reconsider must be by a member who voted with the prevailing side and at the same
or next succeeding meeting of the council.
2. Motions to lay any matter on the table shall be first in order; and on all questions, the last
amendment, the most distant day, and the largest sum shall be put first.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 12/315
3. A motion for adjournment shall always be in order.
J. Ayes And Nays: Whenever it shall be required by one or more members the "ayes" and "nays" shall
be recorded; and any member may call for a recording of the "ayes" and "nays". The passage of
an ordinance or resolution to enter into a contract shall be by roll call of the council with the "aye"
or "nay" of each being recorded.
K. Questions Of Order: All questions of order shall be decided by the presiding officer of the council
with the right of appeal to the council by any members, which appeal shall be decided by a majority
of those present.
L. Rules Temporarily Suspended: The rules of the council may be temporarily suspended by a vote of
one-half (1/2) plus one of the members present.
M. Committee Reports: The chairman of each respective committee, or the council member acting in
his place, shall submit or make all reports to the council when so requested by the presiding officer
or any member of the council.
N. Attendance Required When Requested: The city administrator, city clerk, attorney, chief of police,
public works superintendent, and such other employees of the city shall, when requested, attend
all meetings of the council and shall remain in the council room for such length of time as the
council may direct.
O. Reading Of Ordinances: Ordinances shall be read three (3) different days, two (2) readings of
which may be by title only and one reading shall be in full. No ordinance shall be adopted at the
meeting at which it is introduced unless one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full council
shall dispense with the rule and vote for immediate consideration of such ordinance, such consent
shall be by roll call and the vote thereon spread on the minutes. The council may also dispense
with the reading of the ordinance in full if one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full council
vote for dispensation, such vote to be by roll call and the vote spread on the minutes. (Ord. 556, 1-
12-1982)
1-5-5: ELECT PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL:
At the time of taking office the council shall elect one of its members president of the council who shall
preside at all meetings of the council and perform all other duties of the mayor. In the absence of the
mayor and in the absence of the president, the council shall elect one of its members to occupy his
place temporarily, who shall be styled acting president of the council, and the president and acting
president, when occupying the place of mayor, shall have the same privileges as other members of
the council and all actions of the president and acting president, while so acting, shall be binding upon
the council and upon the city as if performed by the mayor. (1962 Code)
1-5-6: TIME AND PLACE OF MEETINGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 13/315
The regular meetings of the Orofino city council shall be held on the second and fourth Tuesdays of
each month at the hour of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. All regular meetings of the council shall be held at
the city hall, 217 First Street, in the room provided therefor. (Ord. 737, 2-12-2008, eff. 2-26-2008)
1-5-7: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
Special meetings may be called by the mayor or by any three (3) members of the council. When the
mayor or council members desire to call special meetings, he or they shall give written notice to the
clerk, stating the time and object of the special meeting and it shall be the duty of the clerk to notify all
members of the council. The call and object, as well as the disposition thereof, shall be entered upon
the journal by the clerk. (Ord. 270, 8-12-1949)
Chapter 6
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-6-1: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
Certain officers shall give bonds in favor of the City with two (2) or more sureties, or surety bonds may
be furnished in lieu of personal bonds as follows:
Clerk $ 2,500.00
Treasurer 25,000.00
Chief of Police 1,000.00
Bonds so furnished in accordance with the provisions of this Section shall be furnished at the expense
of the City. (Ord. 274, 8-12-1949; amd. Ord. 574, 7-12-1983)
1-6-2: SALARIES:
A. Appointive Officers: The salaries of all appointed officers shall be as determined, from time to time,
by the Mayor and Council. (1962 Code)
B. Mayor And Council Salaries: Commencing January 1, 1998, the salaries of the Mayor and of the
members of the City Council shall be as follows:
1. The Mayor shall receive a monthly salary in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
2. Each member of the Council shall receive a monthly salary in the sum of three hundred dollars
($300.00). (Ord. 675, 8-25-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)
3. Whenever any member of the Council or the Mayor assumes their office after the first Council
meeting in any given month, their salary will be one-half (1/2) of the monthly salary for that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 14/315
month. (Ord. 633, 9-5-1989, eff. 1-1-1990)
ARTICLE A. CITY ADMINISTRATOR
1-6A-1: OFFICE ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL; AUTHORITY:
There is hereby established the office of City Administrator, which office shall be filled by the
appointment of the Mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority of the City Council. The City
Administrator shall be subject to removal by the Mayor with consent of one-half (1/2) plus one of the
full Council or by unanimous vote of the Council. The City Administrator shall be the executive and
liaison officer for the City, under direction and authority of the Mayor. (Ord. 561, 9-15-1982)
1-6A-2: DUTIES, POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The City Administrator shall have the following specific duties, powers and responsibilities. (S)he shall:
A. Under the authority of the office of the Mayor, supervise, administer and coordinate the activities
and functions of the various City departments and offices in carrying out the requirements of City
ordinances and the policies of the City Council.
B. Regularly report to the Mayor and Council concerning the status of all assignments, duties, projects
and functions of the various City departments and offices.
C. Be the Personnel Officer and recommend to the Mayor and Council concerning personnel
appointments, removals and discipline in accordance with the City's personnel policy.
D. Prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council the preliminary budget for each fiscal year. Upon
adoption of the annual budget by the City Council, the City Administrator shall supervise all
purchases and expenditures by the various City offices, departments, commissions and boards, for
the purpose of keeping the same within the limitations of the annual budget of the City.
E. Serve as Public Information Officer of the City government and investigate all complaints
concerning City facilities.
F. Attend all meetings of the City Council and report any matters concerning City affairs under his/her
supervision.
G. Assist generally in conducting the City's business in all matters, and perform such other duties and
assume such other responsibilities as the Council through the Mayor may direct or as by
ordinances and resolutions of the City Council may require. (Ord. 561, 9-15-1982)
1-6A-3: COMPENSATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 15/315
This shall be an unclassified position and the salary and benefits of the City Administrator shall be set
by the City Council upon recommendation by the Mayor. (Ord. 561, 9-15-1982)
1-6A-4: COMBINATION OF POSITIONS:
The office of City Administrator may be combined with any other appointive position in the City. (Ord.
561, 9-15-1982)
ARTICLE B. CITY CLERK
1-6B-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Council. He shall hold office
for the duration of his appointment unless sooner removed by the Mayor with the concurrence of the
Council. (1962 Code)
1-6B-2: DUTIES:
In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to any other department or office the Clerk shall
have supervision, control and responsibility of all of the records of the City. He shall serve as Clerk of
the City Council and perform such other duties of a like nature as shall be required by the Council.
(1962 Code)
1-6B-3: RECORDS OF CITY COUNCIL:
The Clerk shall be responsible for the recording, filing, indexing and safekeeping of all proceedings of
the City Council and shall have published all proceedings, legal notices, ordinances and resolutions
that are required to be published by this Code or by State statute. (1962 Code)
1-6B-4: ORDINANCES:
The Clerk shall record in full, uniformly and permanently, all ordinances and he shall authenticate the
same. (1962 Code)
1-6B-5: ELECTION RECORDS:
The Clerk shall keep and maintain all election records and have custody of all property used in
connection with elections. (1962 Code)
1-6B-6: NOTIFY OF TERM EXPIRATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 16/315
The Clerk shall notify the appointing authority of the impending expiration of the term of office of a
member of any board or commission at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the term. (1962
Code)
1-6B-7: OFFICIAL SEAL:
The Clerk shall be the custodian of the Official Seal of the City. (1962 Code)
1-6B-8: COPIES OF RECORDS:
The Clerk shall furnish to any member of the City Council a certified copy of any record or document
in his custody and he may furnish such a copy to any other person upon payment of a fee to be
determined by the City Council. (1962 Code)
1-6B-9: COLLECTIONS TO TREASURER:
Within ten (10) days after the first day of each month the Clerk shall turn over to the Treasurer all
funds collected by him during the preceding month. (1962 Code)
1-6B-10: LICENSES:
In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to any other department or office the Clerk shall
issue all licenses in accordance with the provisions of this Code. A record of all licenses issued,
including the name of the person to whom issued, the amount of the license fee, and the purpose of
the license shall be kept by the Clerk. (1962 Code)
1-6B-11: BONDS:
The Clerk shall keep a complete record of all outstanding bonds of the City and report such record
regularly to the City Council. (1962 Code)
1-6B-12: WARRANTS:
The Clerk shall countersign all warrants and keep a "warrant register and abstract of expenditures"
showing the number and amount of warrants issued and the person to whom issued, the date
redeemed, the interest paid and the several funds against which each of said warrants is drawn. (1962
Code)
1-6B-13: CLAIMS:
All claims against the City must be filed in writing with the Clerk. Claims must present a full account of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 17/315
the items and must contain a verification under oath by the claimant to the effect that the claim is
correct, reasonable and just and that no part of said claim has been paid. All such claims must be
approved by the City Council before payment can be made. (1962 Code)
1-6B-14: DAMAGES:
All claims for damages against the City must be filed with the Clerk within six (6) months after such
time as the damage is alleged to have accrued. All such claims shall specify the time, place, character
and cause of damage and no action shall be maintained against the City for any claim for damages
until sixty (60) days have elapsed after such presentation. Allowance of any claim for damages
against the City shall be made only by ordinance. (1962 Code)
ARTICLE C. CITY TREASURER
1-6C-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Treasurer shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Council. He shall hold
office for the duration of his appointment unless sooner removed by the Mayor with the concurrence of
the Council. (1962 Code)
1-6C-2: DUTIES:
In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to any other department or office the Treasurer
shall act to promote, secure and preserve the financial and property interests of the City. He shall
safely keep in designated depositories all funds belonging to the City and all other securities in safety
deposit boxes of an approved institution designated by the City Council. (1962 Code)
1-6C-3: ACCOUNTS:
The Treasurer shall keep in proper books a full and accurate account of all the monies received and
disbursed by him in behalf of the City, specifying the time of receipt and disbursement, from whom
received and to whom disbursed, and on what account received and disbursed, and how paid. (1962
Code)
1-6C-4: MONIES:
The Treasurer shall receive and have custody of all monies paid to the City and shall disburse monies
upon the official warrant of the City when so ordered by the City Council. (1962 Code)
1-6C-5: COLLECTIONS:
The Treasurer shall demand and receive all monies and fees owing to the City whenever any person
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 18/315
is indebted to the City in any manner, and the means of collection of such debt is not otherwise
provided for by law. When any claim shall not be collectible by other methods he shall report the same
to the Attorney for prosection. (1962 Code)
1-6C-6: WARRANTS:
A. Presented For Payment; Interest: Warrants shall be paid by the Treasurer from funds available in
the order in which the warrants are presented for payment. When a warrant is presented for
payment and no funds are available the Treasurer shall plainly mark the warrant "Not Paid for
Want of Funds" and enter the same in a book maintained for such purpose which shall be known
as the "warrant register". Such warrants shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per
annum from the date of presentation until paid.
B. Order Of Payment: Warrants shall be called for payment in the order in which they were presented
whenever sufficient funds are available to the Treasurer to make such payment. (1962 Code)
1-6C-7: CANCELLATION OF WARRANTS:
The Treasurer shall cancel all warrants and other evidence of debt against the City, whenever paid by
him, by writing or stamping across the face thereof the words "Paid by the Treasurer" with the date of
payment written or stamped thereon. These warrants and evidences of debt, so cancelled, shall be
delivered immediately to the Clerk. (1962 Code)
1-6C-8: MONTHLY REPORT:
The Treasurer shall make a detailed report to the City Council during the first week of each month
showing the business of his office during the month preceding, showing the balance on hand to the
credit of the different funds, the amounts received during the month, and on what account, together
with such other information as may be required by the City Council. (1962 Code)
1-6C-9: QUARTERLY REPORT:
The Treasurer shall cause to be published for at least one insertion in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City a full statement of the receipts and expenditures of the City, showing sources of
revenue and disposition of funds. This quarterly report shall be published before the third Monday of
the months of May, August, November and February. (1962 Code)
1-6C-10: DELIVERY TO SUCCESSOR:
The Treasurer shall deliver to his successor in office all materials, records, and resources of the office.
(1962 Code)
ARTICLE D. CITY ATTORNEY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 19/315
1-6D-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Council. He shall hold
office for the duration of his appointment unless sooner removed by the Mayor with the concurrence of
the Council. (1962 Code)
1-6D-2: SUITS AND ACTIONS:
The Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the City
may be a party, or in which it may be interested, or which may be brought against, or by, any officer of
the City on behalf of the City, or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the City. (1962 Code)
1-6D-3: JUDGMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the Attorney to see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered
or entered in favor of the City and of all similar interlocutory orders. (1962 Code)
1-6D-4: ADVICE:
The Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the City, and shall render advice on all legal questions
affecting the City, whenever requested to do so by any City official. Upon request by the Mayor or
Council, he shall reduce any such opinion to writing. (1962 Code)
1-6D-5: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the Attorney to see to the completion of all special assessment proceedings and
condemnation proceedings. (1962 Code)
1-6D-6: ORDINANCES AND DOCUMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the Attorney to draft or supervise the phraseology of any contract, lease or other
documents or instruments, to which the City may be a party, and upon request of the Council to draft
ordinances covering any subjects within the power of the City. (1962 Code)
ARTICLE E. CHIEF OF POLICE
1-6E-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Council. He shall
hold office for the duration of his appointment unless sooner removed by the Mayor with a
concurrence of the Council. (1962 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 20/315
1-6E-2: RANK:
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Department and have supervision over all the officers and
members thereof. The Chief of Police may, with the approval of the Mayor, appoint such special police
as may be required from time to time, however, such appointment may not be for a period of longer
than ten (10) days and special police shall not be reappointed following the specified ten (10) days
without the consent of the Council. (1962 Code)
1-6E-3: DUTIES OF CHIEF:
The Chief of Police shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of his
Department as may be required by statute or by the Mayor. He shall be responsible for the
performance of the Police Department and of its functions and all persons who are members of the
Police Department shall serve subject to his orders.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to see to the enforcement of all provisions of this Code, of all
applicable statutes and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators
thereof. He shall have authority to call upon any citizen or bystander to assist him in the execution of
his duty. He shall serve all processes issued to him and enforce all orders and judgments of the court.
(1962 Code)
1-6E-4: STOLEN PROPERTY:
The Chief of Police shall have the custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen property recovered within
the City. (1962 Code)
ARTICLE F. CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT
1-6F-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Chief of the Fire Department shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the
Council and may be an employee of the City in another department. He shall hold office for the
duration of his appointment unless sooner removed by the Mayor with the concurrence of the Council.
(Ord. 330, 3-14-1955)
1-6F-2: RANK:
The Chief of the Fire Department, commonly referred to as the Fire Chief, shall be the head of the
Department and have supervision over all officers and members thereof. The Fire Chief may, with the
approval of the Mayor, appoint such other Fire Department officers as may be deemed necessary,
including a First Assistant Chief and a Second Assistant Chief. (1962 Code)
1-6F-3: DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 21/315
The Fire Chief shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of his
Department as may be required by statute or by the Mayor. He shall be responsible for the
performance of the Fire Department and of its functions and all persons who are members of the Fire
Department shall serve subject to his orders. He shall be responsible for the control and custody of all
Fire Department property and equipment. He shall have the authority of a police officer while actively
engaged in fighting a fire, or going to or from a fire. (1962 Code)
Chapter 7
ORDINANCES
1-7-1: PRESENTMENT OF ORDINANCES:
All ordinances shall be written or printed and presented to the Council by a member at a regular or
special meeting. (Ord. 265, 8-8-1949)
1-7-2: ENDORSEMENT AFTER PASSAGE:
When such ordinance is passed it shall be signed by the Clerk, and the date of its passage, by the
Council, shall be added thereto, and within three (3) days thereafter it shall be presented to the Mayor,
or in case of his absence from the City to the President of the Council for his consideration. If he
approves the same he shall attach his signature thereto, together with the date of such approval. (Ord.
265, 8-8-1949)
1-7-3: VETO BY MAYOR; PASSAGE OVER:
Should the Mayor not approve the ordinance he shall return the same to the Council with his
objections to the same in writing on or before the date of the next regular meeting after the same was
presented to him. When an ordinance is so returned by the Mayor, the Council shall proceed to
reconsider the same. If, on such reconsideration, two-thirds (2/3) of all the members elected to the
Council vote in the affirmative the ordinance shall become a law notwithstanding the Mayor's veto.
(Ord. 265, 8-8-1949)
1-7-4: CERTIFICATE ATTACHED UPON PASSAGE OVER MAYOR'S VETO:
When any ordinance has been passed over the Mayor's veto, as provided in Section 1-7-3 of this
Chapter, the Clerk shall annex a certificate to the ordinance stating that the same was vetoed by the
Mayor, giving the date of such veto, and that on its reconsideration by the Council it received the
required two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the members elected to the Council, together with the date of such
action. (Ord. 265, 8-8-1949)
1-7-5: ORDINANCE BECOMING LAW WITHOUT MAYOR'S SIGNATURE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 22/315
Should the Mayor refuse or neglect to sign any such ordinance and return the same with his
objections in writing, on or before the date of the next regular meeting after the same was submitted to
him, it shall become a law without his signature. (Ord. 265, 8-8-1949)
1-7-6: FAILURE OF MAYOR TO SIGN OR VETO; CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
When any ordinance has become law without the signature of the Mayor, as provided in Section 1-7-4
of this Chapter, the Clerk shall annex to such ordinance a certificate to the effect that the Mayor has
failed to sign or veto the same, and it has therefore become a law without his signature. (Ord. 265, 8-
8-1949)
1-7-7: WHEN ORDINANCE PASSED:
An ordinance shall be considered passed on the date of its approval by the Mayor, and in case of his
vetoing an ordinance, on the date of the passage of such ordinance over his veto, and in the case of
the failure of the Mayor to sign or veto an ordinance, on the date of the next regular meeting after such
ordinance was presented to him. (Ord. 265, 8-8-1949)
1-7-8: EFFECTIVE DATE:
All ordinances, unless otherwise provided in such ordinance, shall take effect and be in force from and
after their passage, approval and publication. Publication shall be made by being inserted in one issue
of some newspaper published in the City. If no paper is published within the City, then in some paper
having general circulation in the City. (Ord. 265, 8-8-1949)
1-7-9: PRESERVING AND RECORDING OF ORDINANCES:
It shall be the duty of the Clerk to safely preserve the original ordinances and when passed and
approved to record the same in a book provided for that purpose, said book to be designated as,
"Ordinance Book No. , City of Orofino". The Clerk shall attach a certificate to each ordinance, so
recorded, to the effect that the same is a true and correct copy of the original ordinance as passed.
(Ord. 265, 8-8-1949)
Chapter 8
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
1-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a system of personnel administration. The system herein
established shall be consistent with the following merit principles:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 23/315
A. Considering Qualifications: Recruiting, selecting and advancing employees on the basis of their
relative ability, knowledge and skills, including open competition of qualified applicants for initial
appointment.
B. Pay Rates: Establishing pay rates consistent with the principle of providing equal or comparable
pay for equal or comparable work.
C. Training: Training employees, as needed, to assure high quality performance.
D. Employee Performance: Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance,
correcting inadequate performance and separating employees whose inadequate performance
cannot be corrected.
E. Fair And Impartial Treatment: Assuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of
personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, creed, national origin or
ancestry, age, sex, religion, or handicap. (Ord. 563, 9-28-1982)
1-8-2: CLASSIFIED SERVICE:
A. The classified service shall be a permanent service to which this law shall apply and shall include
all employees serving in continuing positions, now existing or hereafter established, except the
following:
1. Members of elective offices.
2. Members of appointed boards or commissions, judges, the City Attorney, Engineer, and City
Administrator.
3. Persons employed to conduct a temporary or special inquiry, investigation or examination on
behalf of the Council or a committee thereof.
4. Volunteer personnel who receive regular compensation.
5. Persons employed to work less than full time.
6. Temporary positions scheduled for less than one year's duration unless specifically covered by
the action of the City Council.
7. Persons performing work under contract for the City who are not carried on the payroll as
employees.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed as precluding the City from filling any excepted position in the
manner in which positions in the classified service are filled. (Ord. 563, 9-28-1982)
1-8-3: ADMINISTRATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 24/315
A. City Administrator Serve As Personnel Officer: The City Administrator shall perform the duties of
Personnel Officer. The incumbent in the position may have other staff members designated to
assist him/her or may delegate responsibilities to any member of his/her staff.
B. Duties: The Personnel Officer is responsible for the personnel administration system and shall
direct all of its administrative and technical activities. His/her duties shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
1. Encourage and exercise leadership in the development of effective personnel administration
practices within the City.
2. Investigate from time to time the operation and effect of this law and the policies made
thereunder and to report the findings and recommendations to the Council.
3. Establish and maintain comprehensive personnel records for each employee; including for each
employee the classification, pay, rate, date of employment and other relevant data.
4. Advise the Council on matters affecting the most effective use of human resources.
5. Make an annual report to the Council regarding the status of the personnel administration
program. Such report shall be submitted at least two (2) months prior to beginning of each fiscal
year.
6. Foster and develop programs for the improvement of employee effectiveness, including training,
safety, health, welfare, supportive services and other appropriate areas.
7. Apply and enforce this law and the policies thereunder and to perform any other lawful acts
which may be necessary to carry out the purposes of the provisions of this law.
C. Personnel Rules And Regulations: The Personnel Officer shall draft, or cause to be drafted, the
personnel rules and regulations for the jurisdiction. Such rules shall become effective upon
passage of an appropriate resolution. The rules and regulations shall provide for:
1. The classification of all positions, based on duties, authority and responsibility of each position,
with adequate provisions for reclassification of any positions warranted by changed
circumstances.
2. A pay plan for classified service positions.
3. Announcement of employee vacancies and acceptance of applicants for employment.
4. Preparation and administration of examinations, if appropriate.
5. Establishment and use of eligibility list, if appropriate.
6. Establishment of promotion policies and procedures.
7. Transfer, promotion and reinstatement of employees.
8. Performance evaluations of employees, including those on probationary periods.
9. Separation of employees from the classified service by resignation, suspension, dismissal,
layoff, or incapacity to perform required duties.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 25/315
10. Grievance and appeal procedures.
11. Establishment of hours of work, holidays, vacations, leave regulations and procedures.
12. Outside employment of employees.
13. Establishment of a probation period for all employees prior to final appointment.
14. Development of employee morale, safety and training programs.
15. Such other matters as may be necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this order.
D. Certification Of Payroll Vouchers: The Personnel Officer or the authorized agent shall be
responsible for the certification of the payroll vouchers that the persons named therein have been
appointed and employed in accordance with the provision of this law and the policies thereunder.
The disbursing or auditing officer shall not make or approve or take any part in making or
approving any payment for personnel service to any person holding a position, unless said payroll
voucher or account of such pay bears the certification of the Personnel Officer or the authorized
agent. (Ord. 563, 9-28-1982)
1-8-4: PERSONNEL ADVISORY BOARD:
A. Appointment; Duties: The Council may appoint a Personnel Advisory Board pro tem to serve in an
advisory capacity in personnel problems; to conduct grievance hearings for classified employees
upon their request and to render final decisions to the City Council and to hear appeals in the case
to any employee in the classified service being suspended, reduced or removed and to report its
decision in writing to the Council.
B. Compensation: The Board may serve, when called upon, without compensation.
C. Removal Of Members: Two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of the Council may remove, for cause, a Board
member. (Ord. 563, 9-28-1982)
1-8-5: AGREEMENTS AUTHORIZED:
A. Enter Into Reciprocal Agreement: The jurisdiction is authorized and empowered to enter into
reciprocal agreements upon such terms as may be agreed upon, for the use of equipment,
materials, facilities, and services with any public agencies or bodies for purposes deemed of
benefit to the public personnel system.
B. Cooperate With Other Governmental Agencies: The Personnel Officer, acting in behalf of the
Council, may cooperate with other governmental agencies charged with public personnel
administration responsibilities in conducting or validating personnel tests, recruiting personnel,
training personnel, establishing lists from which eligibles shall be certified for appointments and for
the interchange of personnel and their benefits. (Ord. 563, 9-28-1982)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 26/315
1-8-6: PROHIBITION AGAINST POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
A. Hold Political Office: No employee in the classified service shall be an officer of a political party or
hold political office during his or her employment.
B. Solicit For Political Party: No employee in the classified service shall solicit, orally or by letter, or be
in any other manner concerned in obtaining any assessments, contributions or services for any
political party from any other employee. (Ord. 563, 9-28-1982)
C. Resign Position Before Taking Political Office: Any employee holding a position in the classified
service, or a part-time position, who is elected or appointed to political office shall resign said
position upon taking office. (Ord. 619, 5-24-1988)
D. Right Of Employees: Nothing herein contained shall be construed to restrict the right of employees
in the classified service to hold membership in, and support, a political party, to vote as he or she
chooses, to express privately his or her opinions on all political subjects and candidates, to
maintain political neutrality, and to attend political meetings after working hours. (Ord. 563, 9-28-
1982)
1-8-7: UNLAWFUL ACTS PROHIBITED:
A. Fraud: No person shall make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report with regard to
any test, certification or appointment made under any provision of this law or in any manner
commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of this law and policies.
B. Give Or Accept Favors: No person shall, directly or indirectly, give, render, pay, offer, solicit, or
accept money, service or other valuable consideration for any appointment, proposed appointment,
promotion, or proposed promotion to, or any advantage in, a position in this jurisdiction's
government service.
C. Obstruct Rights Or Prospects Of Others: No employee of the personnel department, examiner, or
other person shall defeat, deceive or obstruct any person in his or her right to examination,
eligibility, certification or appointment under this law, or furnish to any person any special or secret
information for the purpose of affecting the rights or prospects of any person with respect to
employment by this jurisdiction. (Ord. 563, 9-28-1982)
1-8-8: PENALTIES:
Any person who wilfully violates any provision of this law or of the personnel rules and regulations
established thereunder may, upon hearing by the Personnel Advisory Board, be subject to disciplinary
action. Such action may include, but not be limited to:
A. Dismissal: Dismissal from government service and forfeiture of annual and sick leave or other
employee benefits as recommended by the Personnel Advisory Board;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 27/315
B. Ineligibility For Employment Or Appointment: Ineligibility for appointment to or employment in a
position in the classified service for the period of time stipulated by the Personnel Advisory Board;
C. Suspension: Suspension for a period of time up to two (2) weeks, as stipulated by the Personnel
Advisory Board. (Ord. 563, 9-28-1982)
1-8-9: STATUS OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES:
Employees holding positions in the classified service herein for six (6) months or more immediately
prior to the adoption of this law shall be continued in the respective positions without further
examination, until separated from their positions as provided by law. Those holding their positions less
than six (6) months immediately prior to the adoption of this law shall serve a probationary period as
prescribed by the personnel policies. (Ord. 563, 9-28-1982)
1-8-10: SEPARABILITY:
If any provision of this law or if any policy, or order thereunder of the application of such provision to
any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, the remainder of this law, and the application of
such provision of law or of such policy, or order to persons or circumstances other than those to which
it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 563, 9-28-1982)
1-8-11: REPEALER:
Any other ordinance or rules and regulations previously adopted which may conflict with this Chapter
are hereby repealed. (Ord. 563, 9-28-1982)
Chapter 9
CODE OF ETHICS
1-9-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
A. The public judges its government by the way public officials and employees conduct themselves in
the posts to which they are elected or appointed.
B. The people have a right to expect that every public official and employee will conduct himself in a
manner that will tend to preserve public confidence in and respect for the government he
represents.
C. Such confidence and respect can best be promoted if every public official and employee, whether
paid or unpaid, and whether elected or appointed, will uniformly: 1) treat all citizens with courtesy,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 28/315
impartiality, fairness and equality under the law; and 2) avoid both actual and potential conflicts
between their private self-interest and the public interest.
D. To help public officials and employees achieve these goals is one of the objectives of this code of
ethics. (Ord. 466, 6-24-1973)
1-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in this code of ethics are hereby defined as follows:
FINANCIAL INTEREST: Any interest which shall yield, directly or indirectly, a monetary or other
material benefit (other than the duly authorized salary or compensation for his services to the city) to
the official or employee or to any person employing or retaining the services of the official or
employee.
OFFICIAL OR EMPLOYEE: Any person elected or appointed to, or employed or retained by, any
public office or public body of the city whether paid or unpaid and whether part time or full time.
PERSON: Any person, firm, association, group, partnership or corporation, or any combination
thereof.
PERSONAL INTEREST: Any interest arising from blood or marriage relationships or from close
business or political association whether or not any financial interest is involved.
PUBLIC BODY: Any agency, board, body, commission, committee, department or office of the city.
(Ord. 466, 6-24-1973)
1-9-3: FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT:
A. Impartiality: No official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration,
treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make
available to the public at large.
B. Use Of Public Property: No official or employee shall request, use or permit the use of any publicly
owned or publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment, labor or service for the personal
convenience or the private advantage of himself or any other person. This rule shall not be
deemed to prohibit an official or employee from requesting, using or permitting the use of such
publicly owned or publicly supplied property, vehicle, equipment, material, labor or service which it
is the general practice to make available to the public at large or which are provided as a matter of
stated public policy for the use of officials and employees in the conduct of official business. (Ord.
466, 6-24-1973)
1-9-4: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
A. Financial Or Personal Interest: No official or employee, either on his own behalf or any other
person, shall have any financial or personal interest in any business or transaction with any public
body unless he shall first make full public disclosures of the nature and extent of such interest.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 29/315
B. Disclosure And Disqualification: Whenever the performance of his official duties shall require any
official or employee to deliberate and vote on any matter involving his financial or personal interest,
he shall publicly disclose the nature and extent of such interest and disqualify himself from voting.
C. Incompatible Employment: No official or employee shall engage in private employment with, or
render services for, any private person who has business transactions with any public body unless
he shall first make full public disclosure of the nature and extent of such employment or services.
D. Representation Of Private Persons: No official or employee shall appear on behalf of any private
person, other than himself, before any public body in the city.
E. Gifts And Favors: No official or employee shall accept any gift, whether in the form of money, thing,
favor, loan or promise, that would not be offered or given to him if he were not an official or
employee.
F. Confidential Information:
1. No official or employee shall, without prior formal authorization of the public body having
jurisdiction, disclose any confidential information concerning any other official or employee, or
any other person, or any property or governmental affairs of the city.
2. Whether or not it shall involve disclosure, no official or employee shall use or permit the use of
any such confidential information to advance the financial or personal interest of himself or any
other person.
G. Nepotism: No elected official shall appoint or vote for appointment of any person related to him by
blood or marriage to any clerkship, office, position, employment or duty, when the salary, wages,
pay or compensation is to be paid out of public funds as provided in section 59-701 et seq., Idaho
Code. (Ord. 466, 6-24-1973)
Chapter 10
PRECINCTS
1-10-1: ELECTION A AND B PRECINCTS DESIGNATED:
As provided in sections 50-407 and 50-408, Idaho Code, as amended, the election precincts formerly
described in this Chapter, as precincts No. 1, 2, 3 and 4 are hereby consolidated into two (2) election
precincts to be known as Precinct A and Precinct B. The boundaries of Precinct A shall be that part of
the corporate limits of the City lying east of the Clearwater River; the boundaries of Precinct B shall be
that part of the corporate limits of the City lying west of the Clearwater River. (Ord. 543, 2-26-1980)
Chapter 11
ELECTIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 30/315
1-11-1: APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION OF ELECTION OFFICIALS:
The City Council, at a regular meeting in the month preceding an election, shall appoint an election
judge and such clerks as may be necessary for each voting precinct within the City. The election
officials shall be qualified City electors. The City Clerk shall notify the election officials of their
appointment within five (5) days following appointment. If any election judge or clerk fails to report for
duty on the day of the election, the City Clerk shall fill such vacancies from among the qualified
electors presenting themselves to vote. Compensation for the election judges and clerks shall be
predetermined by the City Council at the time of the appointment and shall be not less than the
minimum wage as prescribed by the laws of the State. (Ord. 628, 6-13-1989)
1-11-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
Such officials shall hold office for the period of two (2) years and shall be the officials of all elections,
both general and special, during that period. (Ord. 266, 8-8-1949)
1-11-3: ALL POLITICAL PARTIES REPRESENTED:
The selection of such officers must, as nearly as practical, represent all political parties of the City.
(Ord. 266, 8-8-1949)
1-11-4: NOTICE OF APPOINTMENT:
The Clerk shall give such appointees notice of their appointment and shall request each appointee to
give notice of his acceptance or declination of his appointment to the Clerk within ten (10) days
thereafter. (Ord. 266, 8-8-1949)
1-11-5: VACANCIES; HOW FILLED:
Any vacancies arising in the office of said election officers shall be filled by the Council at its regular
meeting. If such vacancy does not become apparent until the time for the opening of the polls, the duly
appointed election officers present may fill such vacancies from any electors present. (Ord. 266, 8-8-
1949)
1-11-6: DESIGNATE POLLING PLACES; FURNISH SUPPLIES:
The Council shall designate suitable polling places as required by law, and shall cause the same to be
supplied with voting compartments, supplies, official stamps, ballot boxes and such other supplies as
may be required by law. (Ord. 543, 2-26-1980)
1-11-7: TIME OF VOTING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 31/315
All elections within the City shall either be conducted between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to
eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. or between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and eight o'clock (8:00)
P.M. The Council shall have the option of setting the hours for each election pursuant to the published
"Notice of Election" as required by law. (Ord. 680, 9-8-1997, eff. 9-8-1997)
Chapter 12
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
1-12-1: CREATION OF RIGHT:
The people of the City shall have the right to enact ordinances through the initiative process, and to
repeal ordinances through the referendum process, according to the procedures set forth herein. (Ord.
520, 10-10-1977)
1-12-2: NUMBER OF PETITIONERS REQUIRED:
To enact an ordinance by initiative or to repeal an ordinance by referendum, there shall be attached or
appended to the petition the signatures of legal voters of the City equal to at least twenty percent
(20%) of the total number of voters registered to vote at the last general election in the City. (Ord. 520,
10-10-1977)
1-12-3: FORM OF PETITION:
A. The initiative petition shall be in substantially the following form:
Initiative Petition to the Mayor and Council of the City of Orofino, Idaho: We the undersigned
citizens and legal voters of the City of Orofino, respectfully demand that the following proposed
ordinance, to-wit: (setting out full text of measure proposed) shall be submitted to the legal voters
of the City of Orofino, for their approval or rejection at an election to be called in accordance with
Idaho Code Section 50-501 (3), and each for himself says: I have personally signed this petition; I
am a legal voter of the City of Orofino; my residence, post office address and the date I have
signed this petition are correctly written after my name.
Name
Street and Number
Post Office Address
Date
(Here follow numbered lines for signatures)
B. The petition for referendum on any ordinance passed by the Council shall be in substantially the
same form with appropriate title and changes, setting out in full the text of the ordinance to be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 32/315
referred to the people for their approval or rejection. (Ord. 520, 10-10-1977)
1-12-4: TIME FOR FILING PETITIONS:
Referendum petitions with the requisite number of signatures attached shall be filed with the City Clerk
not less than sixty (60) days following the final adoption of the ordinance to be subject to referendum.
(Ord. 520, 10-10-1977)
1-12-5: PRINTING OF PETITION AND SHEETS; TIME LIMIT:
A. Printing Of Petition And Sheets: Before or at the time of beginning to circulate any petition for
initiative or referendum, the person or persons, organization or organizations under whose
authority the petition is to be circulated, shall send or deliver to the City Clerk a copy of such
petition duly signed by at least twenty (20) electors eligible to sign such petition. The Clerk shall
immediately examine the petition and specify the form and kind and size of paper on which the
petition shall be printed and circulated for further signatures. All petitions and sheets for signatures
shall be printed on a good quality bond or ledger paper, on pages eight and one-half inches in
width by thirteen inches in length (81/2" x 13") with a margin of one and three-fourths inches (13/4")
at the top for binding, and the sheets for signatures shall have numbered lines thereon from one to
twenty (20) for signatures. The petition shall be prepared in sections, with each section numbered
consecutively. Each section of a petition must have a printed copy of the petition as the first page,
and each section shall have attached to it not more than ten (10) sheets for signatures.
B. Time Limit: The City Clerk shall indicate in writing on the petition that he has approved it as to form,
and the date of such approval. Upon approval the person or persons, organization or organizations
under whose authority the petition is to be circulated, in writing, that the petition must be perfected
with the required number of certified signatures within sixty (60) days following the date of approval
as to form. Any petition that has not been perfected with the required number of certified
signatures within the sixty (60) days allowed shall be declared null and void ab initio in its entirety.
(Ord. 520, 10-10-1977)
1-12-6: VERIFICATION ON SHEETS FOR SIGNATURES:
Each and every signature sheet of each petition containing signatures shall be verified on the fact
thereof in substantially the following form by the person who circulated said sheet of the petition, by
his or her affidavit thereon, as a part thereof:
State of Idaho)
)ss.
County of Clearwater )
I , swear, under penalty of perjury, that every person who signed this sheet of the foregoing petition
signed his or her name thereto in my presence. I believe that each has stated his or her name and the
accompanying required information on the signature sheet correctly, and that the person was eligible
to sign this petition.
Signature
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 33/315
Street and Post Office Address
Subscribed and sworn to before me this day of , 19 .
(Notary Seal)
Notary Public
Residing at
(Ord. 520, 10-10-1977)
1-12-7: EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATION OF SIGNATURES:
A. Examination Of Signature Sheets: All petitions with attached signature sheets shall be presented
on the same day to the City Clerk, who shall make a cursory examination of them to determine
whether the petitions apparently contain the necessary number of signatures.
1. If the total number of signatures on the petition is not sufficient to satisfy the number required by
Section 1-12-2 of this Chapter, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be retained by
the Clerk who shall notify in writing the person filing the petition of the number of signatures
needed, and further signatures may be gathered, if within the time limit of Section 1-12-5 of this
Chapter.
2. If the cursory examination of the signature sheet reveals:
a. Erasures on any signature;
b. Illegible or indecipherable signatures;
c. Signatures not properly identified by all of the information required on the sheet;
d. Duplicate signatures;
e. Signatures of persons who have requested in writing to have their names removed from the
petition;
the Clerk shall summarily reject such signatures, and they shall not be counted. Each rejected
signature shall be drawn through with ink and initialed by the Clerk. If the total number of
signatures not rejected is not sufficient to satisfy the number required by Section 1-12-2 of this
Chapter, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be retained by the Clerk who shall
notify in writing the person filing the petition of number of signatures needed, and further
signatures may be gathered, if within the time limit of Section 1-12-5 of this Chapter.
B. Certification Of Signatures:
1. All petitions presented to the City Clerk found to apparently contain the necessary number of
signatures, after the cursory examination provided for, shall be filed with the City Clerk and
become public records of the City not to be returned. The City Clerk shall examine each such
signature purported to be that of a registered elector of the City, and compare each such
signature with the registration documents available to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 34/315
summarily reject all signatures which are not the signatures of a registered elector of the City;
and such rejected signatures shall not be counted. Each rejected signature shall be drawn
through with ink and initialed by the City Clerk. The City Clerk may take not to exceed ten (10)
days after filing of the petition to complete his examination. The City Clerk shall certify each
signature found to comply with all of the requirements of this Chapter by an appropriate mark
following each signature.
2. The City Clerk shall total the number of certified signatures, and if found to total the number of
signatures required by Section 1-12-2 of this Chapter, shall proceed as provided in Section 1-12-
8 of this Chapter. (Ord. 520, 10-10-1977)
1-12-8: SUFFICIENCY OF PETITION; NOTIFICATION; COUNCIL ACTION:
A. Sufficiency Of Petition: In the event that a petition filed with a City Clerk does not contain the
required number of certified signatures, the City Clerk shall inform the person or organization
under whose authority the petition was circulated that the petition is defective for lack of certified
signatures, and specify the number of additional signatures required to make the petition valid. The
petition must be perfected within thirty (30) days of the date that the City Clerk finds the petition
defective for lack of certified signatures. If the petition is not perfected within the thirty (30) day
period, the Clerk shall declare the petition null and void ab initio in its entirety.
B. Notification; Effect Of Council Action: In the event that a petition filed with a City Clerk is found by
the City Clerk to contain the required number of certified signatures, the City Clerk shall promptly,
by certified mail, inform the petitioners, and shall also notify the City Council at its next meeting,
that the initiative or referendum petition is in proper form.
1. If the petition is for a referendum, the City Council shall have thirty (30) days from the date of
certification of the petition to repeal the ordinance being referred to the voters. In the event the
Council repeals the ordinance, the referendum petition shall be declared null and void.
2. If the petition is an initiative petition, the City Council shall have thirty (30) days to pass an
ordinance substantially as proposed by the petition. In the event the Council passes such an
ordinance, the initiative petition shall be null and void.
3. In the event the City Council neither repeals the ordinance which is the subject of a referendum
petition, nor enacts an ordinance which is the subject of an initiative petition, an election shall be
ordered by the City Clerk to be conducted City-wide. A special election for initiative or
referendum shall be provided not more than ninety (90) days following the certification of the
petition, provided that in the event a City election will occur within the ninety (90) days, the
initiative or referendum shall be submitted at the time of the City election. (Ord. 520, 10-10-1977)
1-12-9: FORM OF BALLOT:
A. Ways Of Preparing Ballot: The City Council shall prepare a ballot for an initiative or referendum
election in one of the following ways:
1. If the full text of the ordinance or proposed ordinance to be voted upon does not exceed thirty
(30) words in length, it may be set out in full on the election ballot; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 35/315
2. If the full text of the ordinance or proposed ordinance to be voted upon exceeds thirty (30) words
in length, and the Council votes not to have it printed at length on the election ballot, it shall, with
the assistance of the City Attorney, prepare a short title and description of the ordinance or
proposed ordinance which shall clearly and impartially state its purpose and effect, which short
title and description shall be printed on the election ballot.
B. Initiative Election Ballot: After the initiative election ballot has been prepared as set forth herein,
there shall be printed the following instructions to the voter:
"To vote on the initiative make a mark in the square at the right of yes or no" and immediately
thereunder the question "Shall the ordinance set forth herein be enacted?" and immediately to the
right of such question shall be printed the word "Yes" and "No" not less than three-sixteenths (3/16)
of an inch in height and at the right of "Yes" and at the right of "No" a square shall be printed on the
ballot in which the voter may indicate his preference.
C. Referendum Election Ballot: After the referendum election ballot has been prepared as set forth
herein, there shall be printed the following instructions to the voter:
"To vote on the referendum make a mark in the square at the right of yes or no", and
immediately thereunder the question "Shall the ordinance set forth herein be retained?" and
immediately to the right of such question shall be printed the word "Yes" and "No" not less than
three-sixteenths (3/16) inch in height and at the right of "Yes" and at the right of "No" a square shall
be printed on the ballot in which the voter may indicate his preference.
(Ord. 520, 10-10-1977)
1-12-10: CONDUCT OF ELECTION:
Initiative or referendum elections, whether special or general, shall be conducted and the results
thereof canvassed and certified in all respects as near as practicable, in like manner as general
elections, except as otherwise provided. (Ord. 520, 10-10-1977)
1-12-11: CANVAS OF RETURNS:
The Mayor and Council shall meet within five (5) days after said election to canvas the votes cast at
such election, and the City Clerk shall immediately announce the results. Any initiative measure
approved by a majority of the votes cast shall be in full force and effect from the date of such
announcement. Any ordinance which is the subject of a referendum receiving less than a majority of
the votes cast shall be repealed, effective on the date of such announcement. (Ord. 520, 10-10-1977)
1-12-12: PROHIBITED ACTS; PENALTIES:
A person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:
A. Signs any name other than his own to an initiative or referendum petition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 36/315
B. Knowingly signs his name more than once on the same initiative or referendum petition.
C. Knowingly signs his name to an initiative or referendum petition if he is not a registered City elector.
D. Wilfully or knowingly circulates, publishes or exhibits any false statement or representation
concerning the contents, purport or effect of any initiative or referendum petition for the purpose of
obtaining any signature to any such petition, or for the purpose of persuading any person to sign
any such petition.
E. Presents to any officer for filing any initiative or referendum petition to which is attached, appended
or subscribed any signature which the person so filing such petition knows to be false or
fraudulent, or not the genuine signature of the person purporting to sign such petition, or whose
name is attached, appended or subscribed thereto.
F. Circulates or causes to circulate any initiative or referendum petition, knowing the same to contain
false, forged or fictitious names.
G. Makes any false affidavit concerning any initiative or referendum petition or the signatures
appended thereto.
H. Offers, proposes or threatens for any pecuniary reward or consideration:
1. To offer, propose, threaten or attempt to sell, hinder or delay any initiative or referendum petition
or any part thereof or any signature thereon.
2. To offer, propose or threaten to desist from beginning, promoting or circulating any initiative or
referendum petition.
3. To offer, propose, attempt or threaten in any manner or form to use any recall petition or any
power of promotion or opposition in any manner or form for extortion, blackmail or secret or
private intimidation of any person or business interest. (Ord. 520, 10-10-1977)
Chapter 13
ELEVATIONS
1-13-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF ELEVATIONS:
All official elevations hereafter established in the City shall be described with reference to their
elevation as compared with the official base in feet and decimal parts of a foot, no grade or official
elevation shall be established other than by ordinance and in the manner described in this Chapter.
(Ord. 282, 9-12-1949)
1-13-2: BASE POINT ESTABLISHED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 37/315
For the purpose of establishing grades in the streets, avenues, alleys and block intersections in the
City, the following datum point shall be taken as a base, or starting point:
The brass USGS bench mark situated in the northeast abutment of the Orofino Creek Bridge on
Johnson Avenue as now located, the elevation of said point being one thousand sixteen feet
(1016.00') above sea level. (Ord. 282, 9-12-1949)
Chapter 14
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER
1-14-1: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The Clearwater Tribune, a weekly newspaper published within the City, is hereby designated as the
official newspaper of the City. (1962 Code)
Chapter 15
DEPOSITORY
1-15-1: DEPOSITORY DESIGNATED:
The official depository for the city of Orofino is hereby designated as U.S. Bank. (Ord. 740, 8-12-2008)
1-15-2: INSUFFICIENT FUNDS CHECKS:
A service charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) to be assessed for each check issued and deposited in the
official depository by an individual, company, or other for which there are insufficient funds (monies) in
the bank or other applicable financial institution to cover the amount of said check(s). (Ord. 740, 8-12-
2008)
1-15-3: AMENDMENTS:
The city council is authorized to amend any portion of this chapter by a resolution. (Ord. 740, 8-12-
2008)
Chapter 16
CORPORATE LIMITS
1-16-1: CORPORATE LIMITS OF CITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 38/315
The corporate limits of the city, and the boundaries thereof shall be as follows:
Commencing at a point where the South line of Section 7, Township 36 North, Range 2, East, B.M.,
intersects the meander line of the right bank of the Clearwater River;
thence due East on said section line to the southeast corner of said Section 7;
thence due North along the east line of said Section 7 to the northerly right-of-way line of the Upper
Fords Creek County Road;
thence easterly and northerly along said right-of-way line to a point 504 feet south of the East-West
center line of Section 8, Township 36 North, Range 2 East, B.M.;
thence West 560 feet more or less to the West boundary of said Section 8;
thence N. 78°40' W. 594.46 feet;
thence S. 18°44'30" W. 209.96 feet;
thence N. 60°35' W. 286.61 feet;
thence N. 00°07' W. 445.88 feet;
thence Westerly along the East-West center line of said section 7 to the NW corner of the NE1/4 SE1/4
of Section 7;
thence due North to the point where the same intersects the thread of Orofino Creek;
thence Northeasterly along the thread of Orofino Creek to a point where the same is intersected by
the south line of the NW1/4 NW1/4 of Section 8, Township 36 North, Range 2, East, B.M.;
thence due East to the southeast corner of the NE1/4 NE1/4 of said Section 8;
thence North 660 feet;
thence East to the west line of the NE1/4 NW1/4 of Section 9, Township 36 North, Range 2 East B.M.;
thence South to the SW corner of the NE1/4 NW1/4 of said Section 9;
thence East to the SE corner of the W1/2 NW1/4 NE1/4 of said Section 9;
thence North 235 feet to a point 130 feet south of the northerly right-of-way line of the Grangemont
Highway;
thence Easterly, parallel with and 130 feet distant from said northerly right of way line, 482.9 feet;
thence S. 16°26' E. 20 feet;
thence N. 73°34' E. 185 feet;
thence N. 16°26' W. 150 feet to the northerly right-of-way line of said Grangemont Highway;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 39/315
thence Westerly along said Northerly right-of-way line to the East line of the W1/2 NW1/4 NE1/4 of said
Section 9;
thence North to the north line of the SW1/4 SE1/4 of said Section 4, Township 36 North, Range 2 East
B.M.;
thence West to the NW corner of the SW1/4 SW1/4 of said Section 4;
thence South 660 feet;
thence West to the West line of the SE1/4 SE1/4 of Section 5, Township 36 North, Range 2 East B.M.;
thence South to the NE corner of the NW1/4 NE1/4 of Section 8, Township 36 North, Range 2, East
B.M.;
thence due West to the NW corner of the NW1/4 NE1/4 of said Section 8;
thence due North 40 rods;
thence due West to a point where the same intersects the West line of the SE1/4 SE1/4 of Section 6,
Township 36 North, Range 2 East B.M.;
thence North to the NW corner of the SE1/4 SE1/4 of said Section 6;
thence West to the NW corner of the SW1/4 SE1/4 of said Section 6;
thence South to the NE corner of the S1/2 SE1/4 SW1/4 of said Section 6;
thence West to the SE corner of Pine Drive Heights Subdivision, according to the recorded plat
thereof;
thence N. 0°08' W 482 feet;
thence S. 89°57' W. 466 feet to a point on the East line of Lot 7 of said Section 6;
thence North along the East line of Lots 7 and 6 of Section 6 to a point 620 feet South of the NE
corner of said Lot 6;
thence East 1000 feet;
thence North 620 feet to the North line of the NE1/4 SW1/4 of said Section 6;
thence West 1000 feet to the NE corner of said Lot 6;
thence North 660 feet;
thence West to the point of intersection with the meander line of the left bank of the Clearwater River;
thence downstream along said meander line to a point N. 13°46' E. of the southwest corner of Lot 3
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 40/315
Block 7, Laqa Vista Addition, according to the recorded plat thereof;
thence S 13°46' W. to the southwest corner of Lot 3, Block 7, Laqa Vista Addition;
thence West to the northwest corner of Block 21, Riverview Subdivision, according to the recorded
plat thereof;
thence South to the southwest corner of Block 22 of said Riverview Subdivision;
thence West 330 feet;
thence South 660 feet to the southwest corner of Block 24 of said Riverview Subdivision;
thence East 3960 feet on the East-West center line of Section 3, Township 36 North, Range 1 East
B.M., to the quarter corner common to sections 2 and 3, Township 36 North, Range 1 East B.M.;
thence East on the East-West center line of said Section 2 to the southwest corner of Lot 5, Section 2,
Township 36 North, Range 1 East B.M.;
thence North 306.2 feet;
thence Easterly along the South line of Block 4 of Richardson Platted Tracts, according to the
recorded plat thereof, to the SE corner of said Block 4;
thence North along the East line of said Block 4 to the southerly line of lot 12, Riverside Tracts,
according to the recorded plat thereof;
thence Southeasterly along the southerly line of Lot 12 of said Riverside Tracts to the SE corner of
said Lot 12;
thence South to the SW corner of Lot 11 of said Riverside Tracts;
thence East along the East-West center line of Section 2, Township 36 North, Range 1 East B.M. to
the West line of Lot 7 of said Riverside Tracts;
thence South to a point which is 330 feet north of the SW corner of Lot 7 of said Riverside Tracts;
thence Southeasterly to a point on the east line of Lot 7 of said Riverside Tracts, which is 270 feet
north of the SE corner of said Lot 7;
thence South to the SE corner of Lot 7 of said Riverside Tracts;
thence East to the S.E. Corner of Lot 3 of said Riverside Tracts;
thence N. 0°55' E. to a point 110 feet South of the SW corner of Lot 5, Subdivision of Lot 2 of
Riverside Tracts, according to the recorded plat thereof;
thence S. 78°27' E. 125 feet;
thence N. 0°55' E. 110 feet to the SE corner of Lot 6, Subdivision of Lot 2 of Riverside Tracts,
according to the recorded plat thereof;
thence S. 78°27' E. 75 feet;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 41/315
thence N. 0°55' E. 20 feet;
thence S. 78°27' E. 100 feet to the SE corner of Lot 8, Subdivision of Lot 2 of Riverside Tracts,
according to the recorded plat thereof;
thence north to the East-West center line of Section 2, Township 36 North, Range 1 East B.M.;
thence East on the East-West center line of said Section 2 to the W1/4 corner of Section 1, Township
36 North, Range 1 East B.M.;
thence East to the West line of Lot 12 of said Section 1;
thence South to a point 900 feet north of the SW corner of said Lot 12;
thence East 484 feet;
thence South 900 feet to the South line of said Lot 12;
thence East to the NW corner of the NE1/4 of Lot 10, Section 1, Township 36 North, Range 1, East
B.M.;
thence South to the SW corner of said NE1/4 of Lot 10 in said Section 1;
thence East to the SE corner of said NE1/4 of Lot 10 in said Section 1;
thence South to the SW corner of Lot 1 of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 1 East B.M.;
thence East to the SE corner of Lot 1 of said Section 12;
thence South to the SW corner of Lot 2, Section 7, Township 36 North, Range 2 East B.M.;
thence East to the point of intersection with the meander line on the right bank of the Clearwater
River;
thence up stream along said meander line of the Clearwater River to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 526, 3-28-1978)
Chapter 17
CORPORATE SEAL
1-17-1: DESCRIPTION:
The Corporate Seal of the City shall be circular in form with inner and outer circles. The outer circle
shall be one and five-eighth inches (15/8") in diameter, and the inner circle one and one-sixteenth
inches (11/16") in diameter. It shall bear upon the space between the two (2) circles, the words, "City of
Orofino, Idaho", and upon the space within the inner circle the words, "Incorporated January 17,
1906", and the word "Seal", as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 42/315
(Ord. 267, 8-8-1949)
Chapter 18
POLICE TRAINING AID
1-18-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
The City hereby declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid for police training from the Law
Enforcement Planning Commission under the provisions of title 19, chapter 51, Idaho Code. (Ord.
431, 4-13-1970)
1-18-2: ACCEPTANCE OF REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 43/315
Pursuant to section 19-5117, Idaho Code, the City, while receiving aid from the Law Enforcement
Planning Commission pursuant to said chapter 51, will adhere to the standards for employment and
training established by the Idaho Peace Officers Standards and Training Advisory Council. (Ord. 431,
4-13-1970)
Title 2
COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Chapter 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter:
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission created by this Chapter.
COUNCIL: The Council of the City of Orofino.
IMPACT AREA: The area of City impact described in Section 11-4-3 of this City Code.
MEMBERS: All voting members of the Commission. (Ord. 544, 4-22-1980)
2-1-2: CREATION; MEMBERSHIP:
A. Membership; Term: The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor
and confirmed by the Council. All members must have been residents of the City or of Clearwater
County (impact area member) for at least two (2) years immediately preceding appointment and
must reside within the City or within the impact area while serving on the Commission. The term of
office for the members shall be six (6) years, except that three (3) of the seven (7) members
initially appointed shall serve terms of only three (3) years. (Ord. 693, 1-24-2000)
B. Vacancies; Compensation: All vacancies shall be filled for the balance of the term vacated in the
same manner as original appointments. Members shall be selected without respect to political
affiliations and shall serve without compensation.
C. Resignation, Removal Of Members: Any member who is absent from three (3) consecutive regular
meetings or five (5) regular meetings during a single calendar year shall be deemed to have
resigned. Such resignations shall be effective the day immediately following the third consecutive
regular meeting absence or the fifth regular meeting absence during a calendar year. Members
may be removed for cause by an absolute majority vote of the Council. (Ord. 544, 4-22-1980)
2-1-3: RULES; ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 44/315
The Commission shall elect a chairman and shall create and fill such offices as it may determine
necessary. Meetings of the Commission shall be held when duly called by the chairman by written or
oral notice. At least one regular meeting shall be held each month for not less than nine (9) months in
a year. A majority of members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. All meetings shall be
open to the public. Written rules consistent with this Chapter and the laws of the State for the
transaction of business of the Commission shall be adopted. Written records of meetings, hearings,
resolutions, findings, studies, permits and actions shall be maintained at the office of the City Clerk
and shall be open to the public. The Commission shall have a reasonable time, to be set by the
Council, within which to examine and consider such actions as are required by this Chapter. (Ord.
544, 4-22-1980)
2-1-4: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Planning and Zoning Commission to:
A. Conduct a planning process designed to prepare, implement, review and update at least once
annually a comprehensive plan that includes all lands within the City limits, and in the impact area
pursuant to sections 67-6508 and 67-6509, Idaho Code;
B. Hold public hearings prior to recommendations pertaining to the comprehensive plan, changes to
the plan, and ordinances relative thereto;
C. Provide ways and means to obtain citizen participation in the planning process;
D. Recommend to Council subdivision and zoning ordinances;
E. Recommend to Council any changes to the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinances prior to the
annexation of an unincorporated area;
F. Recommend to Council a map, a governing plan and ordinances for the City and the impact area;
G. Provide ways and means to obtain citizen participation in the administration of the duties of the
Commission including, but not limited to, appointing nonvoting ex officio advisors, establishing
subcommittees and advisory committees, and organizing neighborhood groups;
H. Prepare procedures for processing zoning permits, special use permits, rezoning applications,
planned unit development proposals and variance applications;
I. Hear all requests for amendments to the zoning ordinances, hold at least one public hearing
thereon, and make recommendations to Council;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 45/315
J. Recommend to Council changes to the zoning ordinances which the Commission deems
appropriate;
K. Recommend to Council the adoption of coordinated plans for the physical development of the City;
L. Recommend to Council the formation of zoning districts;
M. Make recommendations to Council concerning the layout, design, widening, extending and locating
the streets, roads and highways for relief of traffic;
N. Make recommendations to Council concerning the density of population and development of land
within the City;
O. Make recommendations to Council concerning the future growth, development and beautification of
the City in respect to its public buildings, streets, parks, grounds and land consistent with the future
growth and development of the City and the impact area in order to promote the public health,
morals, safety and welfare of the inhabitants thereof;
P. Make recommendations to Council for legislation and regulations concerning the landscaping and
the location of buildings, structures, or works to be erected, constructed, or altered and to give
suggestions and advice to individuals concerning such landscaping and the location of buildings,
structures, or works to be erected, constructed, or altered;
Q. Hear all applications for special exceptions, special uses, zoning changes and/or variances and
make recommendations to Council thereon; provided, that the Commission shall not submit such
recommendations to Council until a public hearing is held at which interested persons shall have
an opportunity to be heard following notice as provided in Sections 11-2-14, 11-2-15, 11-2-16, and
11-2-17 of this Code as is applicable;
R. With the consent of the owner, through its members, officers, agents and employees, in the
performance of their functions, enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys and place
and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon;
S. Consider and pass upon all maps, plats and re-plats of lands which require the approval of the
Council. Any and all maps, plats and re-plats shall be first submitted to the Commission for its
consideration and recommendation to the Council; and
T. Perform any other duties deemed appropriate by Council which do not conflict with the laws of
Idaho. (Ord. 544, 4-22-1980)
2-1-5: EXPENDITURES:
With approval of the Council, the Commission may receive and expend funds, goods and services
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 46/315
from the Federal Government or agencies and instrumentalities of the State or local governments or
from civic and private sources and may contract with said entities and provide information and reports
as necessary to secure aid. Any expenditures of the Commission shall, exclusive of gifts, be within the
amount appropriated and set aside, from time to time, by Council, for purposes of the Commission as
set forth in this Chapter. Within such limits the Commission is authorized to hire employees and
technical advisers, including, but not limited to, planners, engineers, architects and legal assistants.
(Ord. 544, 4-22-1980)
2-1-6: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
No member or employee of the Council or the Commission shall participate in any proceeding or
action when the member or employee or his employer, business partner, business associate or any
person related to him by affinity or consanguinity within the second degree has an economic interest
in any proceeding shall be disclosed at or before any meeting at which the action is being heard or
conducted. (Ord. 544, 4-22-1980)
Title 3
DEPARTMENTS
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
3-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a Police Department which shall consist of the Chief of Police and such other
personnel as may be provided by the City Council. (Ord. 278, 8-12-1949)
3-1-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to the enforcement of all of the
laws of the City and all statutes applicable therein; and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the
law and arrest violators thereof. (1962 Code)
3-1-3: WITNESS FEE:
Every member of the Police Department shall appear as witness whenever necessary in a prosecution
for a violation of any law or of any State or Federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee
for service as witness in any action or suit to which the City is a party; any fees paid for such services
shall be turned over to the Chief of Police, who shall deposit the same with the Treasurer. (1962
Code)
3-1-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 47/315
The Chief of the Police Department may make or prescribe such rules and regulations as he shall
deem advisable; such rules, when approved by the City Council, shall be binding on such members.
Such rules and regulations may cover, besides the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment
to be worn or carried, hours of service, vacations and all other similar matters necessary or desirable
for the better efficiency of the Department. (1962 Code)
3-1-5: MATRON:
The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, may appoint a Police Matron, who shall perform such
duties as may be assigned to her by the Chief of Police or by the Mayor. (1962 Code)
3-1-6: REWARDS:
The Chief of Police, for meritorious service rendered by any member of the police force in the due
discharge of his duty, may permit such member to retain for his own benefit, so far as he may be
permitted by law, any reward or present tendered him therefor, and it shall be cause of removal for any
member of the force to receive any such reward or present without notice thereof to the Chief of Police
and without his permission. (1962 Code)
Chapter 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
3-2-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a Fire Department which shall consist of a Fire Chief and such other
personnel as may be provided for by the Mayor and Council of the City. (1962 Code)
3-2-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of members of the Fire Department to provide for the immediate answering of all
fire calls and to fight all fires in the best and most modern available methods. Members shall see to
the care and maintenance of all firefighting equipment and have such equipment in constant workable
condition at all times. (1962 Code)
3-2-3: FIRE PREVENTION:
Every possible action shall be taken by the members of the Fire Department to eliminate fire hazards
and to provide for fire prevention methods and operations within the City. (1962 Code)
3-2-4: VOLUNTEER MEMBERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 48/315
All volunteer members of the Fire Department shall conduct themselves in the same manner and
under the same rules and regulations as regular members of the Department. They shall respond to
all fire calls according to a schedule prescribed by the Chief of the Fire Department and they shall
attend all meetings and drills called by the Chief. (1962 Code)
Title 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
4-1-1: CODES ADOPTED:
A. International Building Code: The international building code, 2012 edition, prepared by the
International Code Council, Inc., as adopted by the state of Idaho or the Idaho building code board,
together with any amendments or revisions to the international building code through the
negotiated rulemaking process is adopted.
B. International Residential Code: The international residential code, 2009 edition, prepared by the
International Code Council, Inc., as adopted by the state of Idaho or the Idaho building code board,
together with any amendments or revisions to the international residential code through the
negotiated rulemaking process is adopted.
C. International Energy Conservation Code: The international energy conservation code, 2009 edition,
prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted by the state of Idaho or the Idaho
building code board, together with any amendments or revisions to the international energy
conservation code through the negotiated rulemaking process is adopted. (Ord. 780, 1-14-2014)
4-1-2: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the
city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the codes
adopted in this chapter.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the codes adopted in this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of
the codes adopted in this chapter is committed, continued or permitted. Upon the conviction of any
such violation, such persons shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars
($300.00), or by imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 780, 1-14-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 49/315
Chapter 2
NORTHWEST ENERGY CODE1
(Rep. by Ord. 780, 1-14-2014)
Chapter 3
SIGN CODE
4-3-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of regulating and controlling signs within the city of Orofino,
Idaho, the uniform sign code, 1997 edition and all future editions and amendments. (Ord. 698, 3-26-
2001)
4-3-2: ADMINISTRATION:
The building official shall have the power and duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter; and all
fees herein shall be paid into the city treasury. (Ord. 698, 3-26-2001)
4-3-3: INTERPRETATION:
Whenever in the building regulations it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or
subject to the direction of the building official or any other designated representative of the city, this
shall be construed to give such officer only the discretion of determining whether the rules and
standards established by this chapter have been complied with, and no such provision shall be
construed as giving any other officer discretionary powers as to what such regulations and standards
shall be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by this chapter, or to enforce any law provisions
in any arbitrary or discriminatory manner. (Ord. 698, 3-26-2001)
4-3-4: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, or convert any sign in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any of the provisions of this code. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any
violation of the provisions of this code is committed, continued or permitted. Upon the conviction of
any such violation, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars
($300.00), or by imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 698, 3-26-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 50/315
4-3-5: SIZE:
No sign within the city limits of Orofino shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in size. If more
than one sign is placed on the same sign structure, the aggregate size of all signs shall not exceed
one hundred (100) square feet. (Ord. 698, 3-26-2001)
4-3-6: HEIGHT:
No sign or sign structure shall exceed twenty five feet (25') in height from the base of the ground to
the top of the sign or sign structure. (Ord. 698, 3-26-2001)
4-3-7: SPECIAL USE:
All signs or sign structures not meeting the requirements of the uniform sign code or the size and
height limitation of this chapter may apply for a special use permit through the city planning and
zoning commission. (Ord. 698, 3-26-2001)
4-3-8: PERMIT FEES:
Permit fees shall be as follows:
$50.00 for signs up to 100 square feet
50.00 for all signs that are approved under a special use permit
(Ord. 698, 3-26-2001)
Chapter 4
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
4-4-1: DEFINITION:
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed "dangerous
buildings":
A. Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent
that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
B. Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty three percent (33%) or more, of damage or
deterioration of the supporting member or members, or fifty percent (50%) of damage or
deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 51/315
C. Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floor or roof or in which the same are
overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
D. Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to
life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the City.
E. Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly
fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or are
likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general
welfare of those living therein.
F. Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals,
safety or general welfare of those living therein.
G. Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient
stairways, elevators, fire escapes,or other means of communication.
H. Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the
public or property.
I. Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals,
safety or general welfare of the people of the City.
J. Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the Building Code of this City, or any
provision of the Fire Prevention Code, or other ordinances of this City. (Ord. 397, 6-13-1966)
4-4-2: STANDARDS FOR REPAIR, VACATION OR DEMOLITION:
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Building Inspector and the Mayor and
Council in ordering repair, vacation or demolition:
A. If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the
terms of this Chapter, it shall be ordered repaired.
B. If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety,
or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.
C. In any case where a dangerous building is fifty percent (50%) damaged or decayed, or deteriorated
from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot
be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this Chapter, it shall be
demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 52/315
of the terms of this Chapter or any ordinance of the City or statute of the State, it shall be
demolished. (Ord. 397, 6-13-1966)
4-4-3: NUISANCES:
All dangerous buildings within the terms of Section 4-4-1 of this Chapter are hereby declared to be
public nuisances, and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as hereinbefore and hereinafter
provided. (Ord. 397, 6-13-1966)
4-4-4: DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR:
The Building Inspector shall have the power to:
A. Inspections Semi-Annually: Inspect or cause to be inspected semi-annually, including, but not
limited to, all buildings, schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements, commercial,
manufacturing, residential, agricultural or loft buildings for the purpose of determining whether any
conditions exist which render such place a dangerous building within the terms of Section 4-4-1 of
this Chapter.
B. Inspection Upon Complaint: Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed
by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of this
Chapter.
C. Inspection Following Reports Of Police And Fire Departments: Inspect any building, wall or
structure reported (as hereinafter provided for) by the Fire or Police Departments of the City as
probably existing in violation of the terms of this Chapter.
D. Notify Property Owner Or Occupant Of Violation: Notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee,
mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the land
records of the Recorder of Clearwater County, of any building found by him to be a dangerous
building within the standards set forth in Section 4-4-1 of this Chapter, that:
1. The owner must vacate, or repair, or demolish said building in accordance with the terms of the
notice and this Chapter;
2. The occupant or lessee must vacate said building or may have it repaired in accordance with the
notice and remain in possession;
3. The mortgagee, agent or other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the land
records of the Recorder of Clearwater County may at his own risk repair, vacate, or demolish
said building or have such work or act done; provided, that any person notified under this
subsection to repair, vacate, or demolish any building shall be given such reasonable time, not
exceeding thirty (30) days, as may be necessary to do, or have done, the work or act required by
the notice provided for herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 53/315
E. Contents Of Notice: Set forth in the notice provided for in subsection D of this Section, a description
of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building
or structure a dangerous building and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to
comply with the terms of this Chapter within such length of time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, as
is reasonable.
F. Report Noncompliance: Report to the Mayor and Council any noncompliance with the notice
provided for in subsections D and E of this Section.
G. Appear At Hearings: Appear at all hearings conducted by the Mayor and Council, and testify as to
the condition of dangerous buildings.
H. Place Notice On Building: Place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows:
This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the Building Inspector. This notice is
to remain on this building until it is repaired, vacated, or demolished in accordance with the notice
which has been given the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent of this building and all
other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the County
Recorder of Clearwater County, Orofino, Idaho. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such notice
is complied with.
(Ord. 397, 6-13-1966)
4-4-5: DUTIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL:
The Mayor and Council shall:
A. Notify Property Owner Or Occupant To Appear: Upon receipt of a report of the Building Inspector as
provided for in subsection 4-4-4F of this Chapter, give written notice to the owner, occupant,
mortgagee, lessee, agent, and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the
land records of the Recorder of Clearwater County to appear before them on the date specified in
the notice to show cause why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous building should
not be repaired, vacated, or demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars as set forth
in the Building Inspector's notice provided for herein in subsection 4-4-4E.
B. Hold Hearing: Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the Building Inspector or the owner,
occupant, mortgagee, lessee, or any other person having an interest in said building as shown by
the land records of the Recorder of Clearwater County shall offer relative to the dangerous
building.
C. Written Findings: Make written findings of fact from the testimony offered pursuant to subsection B
of this Section as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building within the terms
of Section 4-4-1 of this Chapter.
D. Issue Order: Issue an order based upon findings of fact made pursuant to subsection C of this
Section commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 54/315
an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the Recorder of Clearwater County, to
repair, vacate, or demolish any building found to be a dangerous building within the terms of this
Chapter; and provided, that any person so notified, except the owners, shall have the privilege of
either vacating or repairing said dangerous building or any person not the owner of said dangerous
building but having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the Recorder of
Clearwater County may demolish said dangerous building at his own risk to prevent the acquiring
of a lien against the land upon which said dangerous building stands by the City as provided in
subsection E hereof.
E. Abatement By City; Assessment Of Costs: If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, or lessee fails to
comply with the order provided for in subsection D of this Section, within ten (10) days, the Mayor
and Council shall cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated, or demolished as the
facts may warrant, under the standards hereinbefore provided in Section 4-4-2 of this Chapter, and
shall with the assistance of the City Attorney cause the costs of such repair, vacation, or demolition
to be charged against the land on which the building existed as a Municipal lien or cause such
costs to be added to the tax duplicate as an assessment, or to be levied as a special tax against
the land upon which the building stands or did stand, or to be recovered in a suit at law against the
owner; provided, that in cases where such procedure is desirable and any delay thereby caused
will not be dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of the people of the City, the
Mayor and Council shall notify the City Attorney to take legal action to force the owner to make all
necessary repairs or demolish the building.
F. Report Violators To Attorney: Report to the City Attorney the names of all persons not complying
with the order provided for in subsection D of this Section. (Ord. 397, 6-13-1966)
4-4-6: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
A. Violation By Owner: The owner of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with any notice
or order to repair, vacate or demolish said building given by any person authorized by this Chapter
to give such notice or order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day such failure to comply continues beyond the date fixed for compliance.
B. Violation By Occupant: The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any notice to
vacate and who fails to repair said building in accordance with any notice given as provided for in
this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day such failure to comply continues beyond the date fixed for compliance.
C. Removal Of Notice From Building: Any person removing the notice provided in subsection 4-4-4H
of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 397, 6-13-1966)
4-4-7: DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY:
The City Attorney shall:
A. Prosecute Violators: Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notices provided
for herein in subsections 4-4-4D and E of this Chapter and the order provided for in subsection 4-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 55/315
4-5D of this Chapter.
B. Appear At Hearings: Appear at all hearings before the Mayor and Council in regard to dangerous
buildings.
C. Suits To Collect City Liens: Bring suit to collect all City liens, assessments, or costs incurred by the
Mayor and Council in repairing or causing to be vacated or demolished dangerous buildings.
D. Other Legal Actions: Take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and
provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 397, 6-13-1966)
4-4-8: EMERGENCY CASES:
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any person
unless a "dangerous building" as defined herein is immediately repaired, vacated, or demolished, the
Building Inspector shall report such facts to the Mayor and Council, and the Mayor and Council shall
cause the immediate repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building. The costs of such
emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected in the same
manner as provided in subsection 4-4-5E of this Chapter. (Ord. 397, 6-13-1966)
4-4-9: OWNER ABSENT FROM CITY:
In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee is absent from
the City all notices or orders provided for herein shall be sent by certified mail to the owner, occupant,
mortgagee, lessee, and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the land
records of the Recorder of Clearwater County to the last known address of each, and a copy of such
notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the dangerous building to which it relates. Such
mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate service. (Ord. 397, 6-13-1966)
4-4-10: ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY:
No officer, agent or employee of the City shall render himself personally liable for any damage that
may occur to persons or to property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
duties under this Chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the City as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this Chapter shall be
defended by the City Attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. (Ord. 397, 6-13-
1966)
4-4-11: DUTIES OF FIRE DEPARTMENT:
The employees of the Fire Department shall make a report in writing to the Building Inspector of all
buildings or structures which are, may be, or are suspected to be dangerous buildings within the terms
of this Chapter. Such reports must be delivered to the Building Inspector within twenty four (24) hours
of the discovery of such buildings by any employee of the Fire Department. (Ord. 397, 6-13-1966)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 56/315
4-4-12: DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT:
All employees of the Police Department shall make a report in writing to the Building Inspector of any
buildings or structures which are, may be, or are suspected to be dangerous buildings within the terms
of this Chapter. Such reports must be delivered to the Building Inspector within twenty four (24) hours
of the discovery of such buildings by any employee of the Police Department. (Ord. 397, 6-13-1966)
4-4-13: SEPARABILITY:
It is the intention of the Council that each separate provision of this Chapter shall be deemed
independent of all other provisions herein, and it is further the intention of the Council that if any
provision of this Chapter be declared invalid, all other provisions hereof shall remain valid and
enforceable. (Ord. 397, 6-13-1966)
Chapter 5
GAS CODE
4-5-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the GAS ORDINANCE OF OROFINO, IDAHO, and may be cited as
such. (Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for safe
installation of gas appliances and gas pipes, and to regulate the sale, maintenance, and repair of such
appliances. (Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-3: SCOPE:
Any and all gas appliances or gas pipes hereafter sold, installed, maintained, or repaired within the
corporate limits shall conform to the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are provided for the sole purpose of proper interpretation and administration
of this Chapter.
APPROVED: Accepted by the American Gas Association or tests conducted by recognized technical
or scientific testing laboratories.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL: A document issued and attached to the material, piping, or appliance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 57/315
inspected, completely filled out, together with date of inspection, address of the premises or
consumer, and signed by the Inspector.
CONSUMER'S PIPING: The gas piping leading from the point of delivery to the building and the gas
appliances served.
GAS APPLIANCE: Any appliance or device used for burning natural gas or liquid petroleum gas.
GAS COMPANY: Any person holding and exercising a franchise or permit to distribute natural gas or
liquified petroleum gas within the corporate limits.
GAS COMPANY SERVICE LINE: The gas piping leading from the gas main to the point of delivery.
GAS FITTER: Any person who does any pipe fitting work, installs, repairs, or remodels any gas piping
or gas appliances.
INSPECTOR: The Building Inspector or Assistant Building Inspector, and is so designated by the
Mayor and Council of the City.
NEW GAS APPLIANCE: A gas appliance which has not been previously installed and used.
OUTLET: A threaded connection in a piping system to which a gas burning appliance is or may be
attached.
POINT OF DELIVERY: The junction of the utility's meter with the consumer's piping.
TYPE A FLUE OR VENT: A flue or vent of masonry (clay tile lined), reinforced concrete or metal
smoke stacks or approved special flues designed for gas burning equipment to accommodate flue gas
temperatures in excess of five hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (550°F) at the draft hood.
TYPE B VENT: Vent piping of noncombustible, corrosion-resistant material of sufficient thickness and
cross-sectional area double walled, locked seam joint construction or single walled vent pipes as
approved by the National Fire Protection Association when installed in accordance with the limitations
as set forth therein.
TYPE B-W VENT: The same as type B vent but to be used with only listed vented recessed heaters.
TYPE C VENT: A vent of galvanized iron of not less than #20 U.S. Standard Gauge or of other
approved corrosion-resistant material.
USED GAS APPLIANCE: A gas appliance which has been previously installed and used.
VENT: A pipe, flue, or chimney designed and installed to carry the products of combustion from an
appliance to the outside atmosphere.
VENT OPENING: An opening or collar which is provided on a gas appliance for the purpose of
connecting the vent.
VENTED APPLIANCE: A gas appliance designed to be installed in such a manner that the products of
combustion are conveyed directly to the outside atmosphere by a vent. (Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-5: RESTRICTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 58/315
No person shall engage in or work at the installation, extension, alteration, or repair of any gas
appliance or piping pertaining to or in connection with gas service on consumer's premises within the
corporate limits unless such person has first procured a license therefor in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-6: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Gas Installations: No person shall engage in the business of installing, extending, altering or
repairing any gas appliance or piping, vent or flue connection pertaining to or in connection with
gas installations within the City either as employer or individual unless such person has received a
gas installation license therefor in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Gas Fitting Work: No person shall do any gas fitting work, install, repair or remodel any piping or
appliances which would be subject to inspection under the provisions of this Chapter unless such
person be a licensed plumber or a qualified employee of the holder of a gas installation license.
(Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-7: LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE:
No person shall lend his gas installation license to any other person, nor shall any such licensed
person apply for a permit in his name for use of any other person, and any such licensed person so
doing or refusing to comply with any other requirements of this Chapter shall have his gas installation
license suspended or revoked by the Mayor and Council, on the recommendation of the Board of
Examiners. (Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-8: APPLICATION TO DO BUSINESS:
Every person desiring to engage in the business of gas fitting or the installation of gas appliances or
gas burners of whatsoever nature in the City shall make application therefor to the Board of
Examiners and shall at such time and place as may be designated by the Board of Examiners
hereinafter provided for, to whom such application shall be referred, be examined as to his
qualifications for such business. (Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-9: BOARD OF EXAMINERS:
A. Membership; Term: The Board of Examiners shall consist of the representative of the Building
Inspector, Chief of the Fire Department and three (3) members to be appointed by the Mayor. One
of the appointees shall be a representative of the distributing gas company, the second shall be a
practical man engaged in gas installation, and the third, any competent person. The three (3)
appointed members shall serve for three (3) years, except for the first term, when one shall be
appointed for three (3) years, one for two (2) years and one for one year.
B. Board Of Appeals: The Board of Examiners shall also constitute the Board of Appeals. The Board
of Appeals shall meet upon call of the Inspector. (Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 59/315
4-5-10: EXAMINATION:
The Board of Examiners shall meet and organize by selection of a chairman and clerk and shall
designate the time and place for examination of all applicants desiring to engage in or work at the
business of installing gas appliances or gas piping in the City. Said Board shall examine said
applicants as to their practical and theoretical knowledge of gas fitting, appliance installation and
adjustment, shall submit the applicant to some satisfactory form of practical test and if satisfied of the
competency of the applicant, shall so certify to the Mayor and Council which shall authorize the Clerk
to issue a license to such applicant, authorizing him to work at the business of installing gas
appliances or gas piping, at which time he shall also cause the applicant to register in the office of the
Building Inspector, his name, place of business, residence, license number, date of examination and
to what capacity licensed. In the case of a firm or corporation, the examination of one member of the
firm or an executive of the corporation shall fulfill the requirements of this Section. The Clerk for the
Board of Examiners shall be the Building Inspector and shall be known as secretary of the Board.
(Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-11: LICENSE FEE AND BOND:
A. Annual Fee: The annual fee for the gas installation license for any firm or corporation under this
Chapter for installing gas appliances or for gas fitting shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year
and the license shall be renewed on or before January 15 of each year. Said license shall continue
in force for the calendar year in which it is issued or until revoked or suspended, but shall not be
transferable.
B. Bond: Any individual engaged in the business of installing gas fixtures shall furnish a performance
bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), acceptable to the Council. All licenses and
bonds shall expire on January 15 of each year.
C. License Displayed: Every licensed gas installer shall display his license number conspicuously at
his place of business. (Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-12: LIABILITY:
This Chapter shall not be construed as relieving such persons owning, operating, installing or selling
any gas piping, appliances or other gas apparatus from liability to anyone injured by any defect
therein. Nor shall the City or any agent thereof be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the
inspection authorized hereunder or certificate of inspection issued by the Building Inspector. (Ord.
410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-13: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The Building Inspector or his authorized representative shall have the right to enter all buildings which
contain gas piping or appliances for the purpose of inspecting same, at any reasonable time. (Ord.
410, 5-23-1967)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 60/315
4-5-14: PERMITS AND FEES:
No person shall install any gas appliance to house piping in any building or structure without first
obtaining a permit to do such work from the City. Failure to obtain a permit within forty eight (48) hours
(holidays and Sundays not included) from the time of starting work on the installation, alteration, or
repairs of any gas equipment except as otherwise provided shall pay double the fee herein specified
when such permit is finally secured. The payment of such double fee, however, shall in no way relieve
the person of the penalties otherwise provided for the violation of this Chapter.
Gas stoves $ 1.00
Gas refrigerators 1.00
Gas space heaters to 70,000 BTU input capacity 1.00
Each additional heater 0.50
Gas hot water tank, residential up to 60 gallon 1.00
Gas space heaters over 70,000 BTU input capacity 1.50
Each additional heater 1.00
Gas hot water tanks, commercial over 60 gallon 1.50
Gas boilers and furnaces up to 180,000 BTU input capacity 2.50
Gas boilers and furnaces 180,000 BTU to 400,000 BTU input capacity 4.00
Gas boilers and furnaces 400,000 BTU to 1,000,000 BTU input capacity 7.00
Gas boilers and furnaces over 1,000,000 BTU input capacity 10.00
Conversion units the same rate as above
All small appliances 1.00
Pipe Inspections:
First 50 feet or less 1.00
Each additional 50 feet or part thereof 0.50
Call back inspection, 1/2 price. Reinspection order shall be obtained from City Engineer's office.
Inspection Of Used Appliances Offered For Sale:
First appliance 1.00
Each additional appliance 0.25
When a permit is issued to connect an appliance to an existing stub or outlet, no additional fee
will be charged for piping inspection. Where new piping is required to supply the appliance, the
above fees for consumer's piping inspection will be collected.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 61/315
(Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-15: INSPECTIONS:
A. Rough Piping Inspection: Rough piping inspection shall be made after all piping authorized by the
permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any
fixtures or gas appliances have been attached thereto.
B. Test For Final Piping Inspection:
1. Test for final piping inspection shall be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been
installed and after all portions thereof which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have
been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been attached thereto. This
inspection shall include a pressure test, at which time the piping shall stand an air pressure
equal to not less than the pressure of a column of mercury six inches (6") in height, and the
piping shall hold this air pressure for a period of at least ten (10) minutes without any perceptible
drop. A U-Gauge type mercury column shall be used for the test.
2. All tools, apparatus, labor and assistance necessary for the test shall be furnished by the gas
fitter.
3. Used gas appliances for resale shall be connected to gas outlets at the time the inspection is
made.
C. Inspection Required If Structure Has Not Used Gas For Twelve Months: A new inspection
certificate shall be required for a structure in which no gas has been used for a period of twelve
(12) consecutive months or more. (Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-16: CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL:
The Inspector shall issue a certificate of approval at the completion of the work for which a specific
permit has been issued, if after inspection it has been found that such work complied with the
provisions of this Chapter and all other requirements of law or ordinances applicable thereto. A
duplicate of each piping certificate shall be delivered to and filed by the gas company and used as its
authority to grant gas service. (Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-17: AUTHORITY AND DUTY OF INSPECTOR:
A. Enforcement; Right Of Entry: The Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the
provisions of this Chapter, and the Inspector or his authorized representative, upon presentation of
proper credentials, may enter any building or premises for the purpose of making inspection or
preventing violations of this Chapter at any reasonable time.
B. Authority To Disconnect; Notice: The Inspector or his authorized representative is hereby
authorized to disconnect any gas piping or fixture or appliance, which has been connected before
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 62/315
a certificate of approval has been issued, or which, upon inspection, shall be found defective or in
such condition as to endanger life or property. In all cases where such a disconnection is made, a
notice shall be affixed thereto and shall state that the same has been disconnected by the
Inspector or his representative together with the reason or reasons therefor, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to remove said notice or reconnect said gas piping or appliance until
authorized by the Inspector to do so.
C. Present Helpful Information To Council: It shall be the duty of the Inspector to confer with the
representatives of the local gas companies, of local plumbers or gas fitters associations, of the
local Health Department and the local Fire Department, and otherwise obtain from proper sources
all helpful information and advice, presenting same to the Mayor and Council from time to time for
their consideration. (Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-18: AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT:
A. Issue Notice: Gas companies are hereby authorized to discontinue or refuse to supply gas for any
gas piping or gas appliance which may appear to be defective or leaking, or otherwise considered
to endanger life or property; provided, however, that the gas company shall immediately give
notice of discontinuance of service to the Inspector and the occupant of the building or premises
where such gas supply is discontinued or refused. Notice may be given by registered or certified
mail.
B. Safety Reasons: In all cases where the supply of gas has been discontinued for safety reasons, the
supplying of gas shall not be resumed until authorized by the Inspector.
C. Utility Functions: Gas companies shall not be required to secure permits to extend gas service or
set pipes or set meters or any other utility function.
D. Street Opening Permit: Gas companies shall secure street opening permits prior to installing or
extending services. Gas companies shall pay cost of opening and closing of the streets. (Ord. 410,
5-23-1967)
4-5-19: MAINTENANCE:
All gas piping, vents, vent connections, and appliances shall be maintained in good condition;
provided, however, that no gas piping, vent, vent connection, fixture, or appliance not conforming to
the requirements of this Chapter shall be used or maintained if the use or maintenance thereof would
endanger life or property, and no gas appliance shall be operated which, in the opinion of the
Inspector, is not provided with ample ventilation. (Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-20: VIOlATIONS; PENALTY:
A. Violations: It shall be unlawful for any person by any means to restore the flow of gas through pipes
which have been shut off either by the utility supplying the gas, or the Building Inspector. It shall be
unlawful for any person, by any means, to cause gas supplied by any utility company to bypass the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 63/315
meter by which the amount of gas supplied by the utility company is measured and such acts shall
be prosecuted according to the terms contained in this Chapter.
B. Penalty Imposed: Any person who shall fail to comply with or who shall violate any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in an amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00), or by imprisonment in the City jail
not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both such fine or imprisonment. (Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
4-5-21: STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The following, and as the same may hereafter be amended, are hereby adopted by the City and made
a part of this Chapter by reference as though fully set forth herein:
ASA B31.8-1963: Section 8 of American Standard Code on Pressure Piping.
IENGA-1965: Inland Empire Natural Gas Association Standard for Installation of Gas Appliances and
Gas Piping, Domestic Gas Conversion Burners and Equipment in Excess of 400,000 BTU/HR Input.
NFPA No. 58: Standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters for the Storage and Handling of
Liquefied Petroleum Gases.
NFPA No. 59: Standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters for the Storage and Handling of
Liquefied Petroleum Gases at Utility Gas Plants.
Provided, however, that in the event the standards embodied in State and Federal laws, rules and
regulations are higher or in conflict with those contained in sources adopted by reference herein, such
standards shall control. (Ord. 410, 5-23-1967)
Chapter 6
MANUFACTURED HOUSING STANDARDS
4-6-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be referred to as the CITY OF OROFINO MANUFACTURED HOUSING
STANDARDS. (Ord. 603, 9-24-1985)
4-6-2: OBJECTIVES:
The objectives of this Chapter are to provide that manufactured living units located on lots within the
City are safe, sanitary and structurally sound. The requirements contained herein shall be considered
minimum standards. (Ord. 603, 9-24-1985)
4-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 64/315
ANCHORING SYSTEM: A system of straps, cables, turnbuckles, chains, bolts, etc., which is used to
secure a home to the foundation base.
FOUNDATION BASE: A base for support of a manufactured home meeting the requirements
contained herein.
FOUNDATION FACIA: A fire- and weather-resistant material surrounding the entire perimeter of a
home and completely enclosing the space between the exterior wall of such home and the ground.
LOT: A "building site" as defined by law.
MANUFACTURED HOME: Housing built on a chassis designed and constructed for transportation to
a site for installation and use when connected to required utilities. May also be commonly referred to
as "mobile home" or "modular home".
NONCONFORMING USE: A manufactured home which was placed and maintained upon a lot prior to
the effective date of this Chapter and which otherwise complies with this Chapter.
PERMANENTLY AFFIXED: A home which has the running gear and towing hitch removed, is
equipped with permanent foundation base and foundation facia conforming to this Chapter, and has
permanently installed connections conforming to this Code. (Ord. 603, 9-24-1985)
4-6-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Insignias: All manufactured homes shall bear a tag or a seal of approval of the State of Idaho and
HUD which shall be permanently affixed.
B. Smoke Detectors: All dwelling units shall be provided with approved detectors of combustion other
than heat, conforming to HUD standards. (Ord. 603, 9-24-1985)
4-6-5: SITE AND DRAINAGE:
A. Compliance With Zoning Regulations: Manufactured homes shall be permanently affixed on a lot in
compliance with provisions applicable to the zones contained in the City Zoning Ordinance.
B. Surface Water Drainage; Ground Slope: The ground around the manufactured home shall be
sloped to provide positive drainage of surface water away from the foundation for a distance of ten
feet (10') unless restricted by lot line, with care being taken to avoid draining onto adjoining
property.
C. Drain Line To Storm Sewer: When the area under the manufactured home is below natural grade
level, drainage shall be provided by means of a drain line to a storm sewer, or other suitable
methods. (Ord. 603, 9-24-1985)
4-6-6: FOUNDATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 65/315
A. Excavation: Except as otherwise provided in this Section, excavation for footings or foundation
walls shall extend into solid, undisturbed natural bearing soil. All vegetation and organic material
shall be removed and footings shall not be placed on fill or uncompacted gravel material unless
such fill has been compacted, and it has been certified by a licensed engineer that compaction is
sufficient to support the weight of a mobile home, as specified by the manufacturer.
B. Piers: Piers shall be set on two thousand five hundred (2,500) psi minimum concrete pads, sixteen
inches by sixteen inches by six inches (16" x 16" x 6"). All pad installation shall be pursuant to the
manufactured home standard drawings and installed at least six inches (6") into the ground so that
the exposed surface is flush with the ground. Spacing shall be eight feet (8') on center maximum.
Shims shall be required between concrete block pier and steel beam supports. Any alternate
design shall be supported by engineering calculations. (Ord. 608, 12-10-1985)
1. Piers comprised of a single tier of open cell concrete blocks must be placed with cells in a
vertical position. The height between ground level and the mobile home floor joists shall be at
least eighteen inches (18") and cannot exceed the height of twenty four inches (24"). The blocks
must be installed at right angles to the steel chassis beam.
2. Any pier height over twenty four inches (24") must be double-tiered and interlocked. In no case
can this type of support system exceed seventy two inches (72") nor shall more than twenty
percent (20%) of the total number of piers exceed forty inches (40") in height. The top blocks are
to be installed at right angles to the steel beams.
3. All piers exceeding seventy two inches (72") in height require a variance. (Ord. 603, 9-24-1985)
4-6-7: ANCHORING:
Tie down devices must be approved by the Building Official and shall be installed as to secure home
to foundation footing: tie down loops in footing, a system of straps, cables, turnbuckles, chains, bolts,
etc. Tie down straps shall be installed a minimum of five feet (5') from each corner and thereafter at
intervals not to exceed sixteen feet (16') around the complete perimeter of the home. (Ord. 603, 9-24-
1985)
4-6-8: SKIRTING:
A. Foundation Facia: The space between the wall of the home and the ground shall be fully enclosed
with a foundation facia which is aesthetically harmonious and compatible with the home, must
provide adequate ventilation and access and must be properly maintained.
1. Access Door: Access door shall be at least eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24") in
size.
2. Ventilation Openings: Ventilation openings must be provided for each twenty five (25) lineal feet
of skirting and within two feet (2') of each corner. Each opening shall have a minimum net area
of thirty six (36) square inches and must have a corrosion-resistant wire mesh not less than onefourth
inch (1/4") nor more than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 66/315
B. Pressure-Treated Wood: Wood in contact with the ground is not acceptable unless wood is
pressure-treated and bears a stamp identifying the materials as pressure-treated for ground
contact.
C. Wood Skirting Support Members: Wood skirting support members must be pressure-treated or
have a minimum of six inches (6") of clearance by use of a metal end clamp. (Ord. 603, 9-24-1985)
4-6-9: AWNINGS:
A. Metal Awnings And Carports: Metal awning and carports must be approved and be installed in an
approved manner and meet all design loads for the City.
B. Site-Built Awnings: Site-built awnings must be UBC minimum standards. (Ord. 603, 9-24-1985)
4-6-10: PORCHES AND ENTRY PLATFORMS:
A. Entry Platform Or Porch Floor: The main entry platform or porch floor shall be at least forty eight
inches by forty eight inches (48" x 48").
B. Handrails; Guardrails; Decks: When the floor of the platform or porch exceeds a height of four (4) or
more risers, a handrail and guardrail must be provided on open sides of the porch deck.
1. Guardrails for platforms and decks shall be no less than thirty six inches (36") in height,
constructed of durable materials and have adequate strength for the intended purpose.
2. Stair handrails shall be from thirty inches (30") to thirty four inches (34") above the front edge of
each stop.
3. Decks constructed of wood, platforms, or porches shall be supported on concrete blocks or slab
with a minimum of four inch (4") separation between wood and ground surface.
C. Service Entries: Service entries four (4) steps or higher or served by doors swinging outward shall
have porch floors, steps and handrails conforming to the main entry requirements.
D. Step Designs: The following shall be required for stairs serving main and service entrance doors:
1. Width, that of walk but not less than thirty inches (30").
2. Run, minimum of nine inches (9").
3. Rise, maximum eight inches (8"). All riser heights shall be the same.
4. Provide handrails continuous on all open sides of stair flights to a platform with four (4) or more
risers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 67/315
E. Compliance: All porch and entry platforms must comply with the City manufactured home standard
drawings. (Ord. 603, 9-24-1985)
4-6-11: WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION:
All units shall be connected to an approved water and sewer system in accordance with City
standards. (Ord. 603, 9-24-1985)
4-6-12: FIREPLACES; STOVES:
A. Conformance With Section: Solid fuel-burning factory-built fireplaces, wood heaters and fireplace
stoves UL or ICBO approved for use in mobile homes may be installed in mobile homes, provided
the units and their installation conform to this Section. A fireplace or fireplace stove shall not be
considered as the primary heating facility.
B. Installation Requirements: A solid fuel-burning fireplace or fireplace stove shall be equipped with
integral door(s) or shutter(s) designed to close the fireplace or fireplace stove fire chamber opening
and shall include complete means for venting through the roof, a combustion air inlet, a hearth
extension, and means to securely attach the fireplace or the fireplace stove to the mobile home
structure. The installation shall conform to the following:
1. A listed factory-built chimney designed to be attached directly to fireplace or fireplace stove shall
be used. The listed factory-built chimney shall be equipped with and contain as part of its listing
a termination device(s) and a spark arrester.
2. A fireplace or fireplace stove, air intake assembly, hearth extension and the chimney shall be
installed in accordance with the terms of their listings and their manufacturer's instructions.
3. The combustion air inlet shall conduct air directly into the fire chamber and shall be designed to
prevent material from the hearth dropping into the area beneath the mobile home.
4. Hearth extension shall be of noncombustible material not less than three-eighths inch (3/8")
thick. The hearth shall extend at least sixteen inches (16") in front of and at least eight inches
(8") beyond each side of the fireplace or fireplace stove opening. Furthermore, the hearth shall
extend over the entire surface beneath a fireplace stove and beneath and elevated for an
overhanging fireplace.
5. The label on each solid fuel-burning fireplace and solid fuel-burning fireplace stove shall include
the following wording: "For use with solid fuel only" and shall indicate ICBO or UL approved.
6. The chimney shall extend at least three feet (3') above the part of the roof through which it
passes and at least two feet (2') above the highest elevation of any part of the mobile home
within ten feet (10') of the chimney. Portions of the chimney and termination that exceed an
elevation of thirteen feet (13') above ground level may be designed to be removed for
transporting the home. (Ord. 603, 9-24-1985)
4-6-13: ALTERATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 68/315
A permit from the State is required for alterations for any mechanical, electrical, plumbing system for a
structural change. (Ord. 603, 9-24-1985)
4-6-14: SITE PERMIT; INFORMATION REQUIRED:
A site permit shall be acquired from the Building Official prior to occupancy. The following information
shall be included in the site permit application:
A. Show lot and block number, street address if known.
B. Show dimensions of plat and north arrow.
C. Show locations and dimensions of mobile home, floor plan, setback requirements, easements if
any, awnings, carports, garages, and other accessory buildings.
D. Show location and dimension of walks, driveway and approach steps, patios and porches.
E. Show easements off-site to public right of way and nonbenefiting easement to adjoining properties.
F. Show water and sewer site schematics.
G. Show the nature and type of skirting.
H. Show foundation and placement permit.
I. Show septic tank permit (if manufactured home is not connected to an approved sewer). (Ord. 603,
9-24-1985)
4-6-15: PERMIT FEES:
Fees for permits will be established by Council action. (Ord. 603, 9-24-1985)
Chapter 7
MECHANICAL CODE
4-7-1: ADOPTION:
The 2003 international mechanical code is hereby adopted along with all future editions and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 69/315
amendments establishing minimum regulations governing the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of mechanical systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said mechanical code on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in section 4-7-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 727, 8-22-2005, eff. 10-1-2005)
4-7-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code Of The City Of
Orofino, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule: The fee for a mechanical inspection shall be $35.00.
Section 106.5.3 Fee Refunds: This section is hereby deleted from the international mechanical code.
Section 108.4 Violation Penalties: Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work
in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$300.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each
day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders: Upon notice from the official code that mechanical work is being
done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall
immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or
to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under
which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be
required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on
the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine not less than
$300.00.
(Ord. 727, 8-22-2005, eff. 10-1-2005)
Chapter 8
CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION
4-8-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be referred to as the IDAHO CONTRACTORS REGISTRATION ACT. (Ord. 730, 1-
10-2006)
4-8-2: CONTRACTORS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 70/315
All contractors who perform work in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) (material and labor)
within the city limits of the city of Orofino shall be required to register with the Idaho bureau of
occupational licenses (IBOL) and provide a registration number to the building official prior to receiving
a permit to perform any work. (Ord. 730, 1-10-2006)
4-8-3: EXEMPTIONS:
Contractors who are exempt from registration pursuant to Idaho Code 54, chapter 52 shall not be
required to register with the Idaho bureau of occupational licenses (IBOL). (Ord. 730, 1-10-2006)
4-8-4: DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL:
The building official or his representative shall not issue a building or construction permit to
contractors who are not registered with the Idaho bureau of occupational licenses by January 1, 2006.
The building official shall conspicuously enter the contractor's registration number on the face of any
permit issued. If a contractor or individual is exempt from registration, the building official shall
conspicuously enter on the face of any permit issued "No Contractor Registration Provided". (Ord.
730, 1-10-2006)
4-8-5: PERMITS TO BE POSTED:
All building permits or other permits for construction of any type shall be posted at the construction site
in such a manner that the conspicuous statements set forth in section 4-8-4 of this chapter are visible.
(Ord. 730, 1-10-2006)
Title 5
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUSINESS PERMITS
5-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORITY; PURPOSE:
The licensing of all retail occupations and businesses within the city and the levying of a permit fee,
uniform to all classes imposed, pursuant to the statutory authority vested in the city by Idaho Code
section 50-307 is hereby declared to be justified and necessary for the purpose of protecting and
providing services to the citizens of the city and the businesses and occupations doing business
therein. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
5-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 71/315
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated, unless the
context clearly requires otherwise:
BUILDING: A structure completely enclosed by walls and covered by a roof which is permanently
affixed to a foundation and permanently attached to water and sewer utility services.
BUSINESS OR OCCUPATION: All activities, occupations, callings, trades, pursuits or professions
located or engaged in within the city with the object of gain, profit, benefit or advantage. Each
business location shall be deemed to be a separate business, unless it is a specific annex to the main
location of the business.
CANVASSER OR SOLICITOR: Any individual, whether resident of the city or not, either traveling by
foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house
to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise, personal property or personal services of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or
for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or
exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments
on such sales or not.
EMPLOYEE: Any person employed at any business location within the city and any person furnishing
or performing services within the city. It shall include all persons who are self-employed and shall
include part time employees.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Commencing, conducting or continuing any business or occupation, the
exercise of corporate and franchise powers and the liquidating of a business where the liquidators
hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business. Any person shall be deemed to be
engaging in doing business when s/he does one act of the following:
A. Selling any goods or performing any services;
B. Soliciting business or offering or holding out goods or services for sale or hire;
C. Acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in the city for business purposes;
D. Delivery of any goods for the purpose of retail unless permitted under another section of this
code.
HOME OCCUPATION1: Any occupation by one member of the family without employees and located
in one or two (2) rooms of a home or its accessory buildings and without storage of materials or stock
of finished products for sale on the premises. A home occupation shall not detract from or change the
integrity or character of the residential zone. There shall not be any outside indication such as signage
or other indication that a home occupation exists at a residence.
MOBILE VENDING CART: A movable pushcart that is operated by a vendor standing on the sidewalk.
MOBILE VENDING TRAILER: A mobile trailer operated by a vendor standing on or within the frame of
the trailer on the public rights of way between the curbs.
MOBILE VENDING VEHICLE: Motorized vehicle operated by a vendor standing on or within the frame
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 72/315
of the vehicle on the public rights of way between the curb lines.
PEDDLER: Any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive
vehicle or any other type of conveyance from place to place offering for sale any goods, wares,
merchandise, farm products or provisions. A person who solicits orders and, as a separate
transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this chapter. The word peddler
shall include the definition of hawker and huckster. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the sale of
agricultural products grown in Idaho, without such permit.
PERSON: Any person doing business in the city.
PREMISES: All lands, structures, places and equipment and appurtenances connected or used
therewith in any business, and also any personal property, including any vehicle, which is either
affixed to or is otherwise used in connection with any such business conducted on said premises.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the public right of way which is between the curb lines or the lateral lines
of a roadway and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians in public places of the
city of Orofino.
SIDEWALK VENDING: The peddling, selling, displaying, or offering for sale any item of tangible
personal property or other thing of value from a mobile vending cart by a vendor to persons on the
public right of way including sidewalks.
SPECIAL EVENT: The temporary use, with a valid permit, of public property, including streets, parks,
sidewalks or any other city right of way, for the purpose of conducting certain short term events such
as fairs, circuses, sporting events, music concerts, sidewalk sales, amusement attractions, swap
meets, fundraising events, or any event for which a special event permit has been issued by the city.
STREET VENDING: The peddling, vending, selling, displaying, or offering for sale any item of tangible
personal property or other thing of value from a vending trailer or vehicle situated on the public rights
of way between curb lines by a vendor to persons on the sidewalk.
TEMPORARY: Five (5) days or less.
TEMPORARY MERCHANT: Any person, whether owner or otherwise, whether a resident of the city or
not, who engages in a temporary business selling and delivering goods, wares, merchandise and
services within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any
building, structure or motor vehicle within the city for the exhibition and sale of food, beverages,
goods, merchandise or services. A temporary merchant is classified as a nonmobile vendor and must
operate entirely from a private business or private property unless they are associated with a special
event.
VENDOR: Any person, including an employee or agent of a group of individuals, partnership, or
corporation, who sells or offers to take orders or sell food, beverages, goods, or merchandise from a
mobile vending cart, mobile vending vehicle, or mobile vending trailer, or any other type of
conveyance or from his or her person. The word vendor shall include the words "hauler", "huckster",
"peddler" and solicitor".
YARD SALE (No Permits Or License Required): Yard sale shall include garage sale, carport sale,
estate sale, rummage sale, or any similar casual sale of personal property. All items sold, traded,
bartered or exchanged at a yard sale shall be of personal property items.
YEAR: The calendar year. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 73/315
5-1-3: RESTRICTIONS:
A. Mobile carts, mobile trailers and mobile vehicles are restricted from permanently setting up
business within the city. In order to secure a business license they must be associated with a
special event approved by the city. The business license is valid for the calendar year but only
during special events authorized by city officials.
B. No yard sales shall display or advertise (except in newspapers) any items for sell, trade, barter,
exchange or display for more than four (4) consecutive days. Yard sales are limited to two (2)
nonconsecutive yard sale events per month. At the conclusion of every yard sale event all items
associated with the yard sale shall be removed from sight.
C. All advertisement associated with a yard sale shall be removed the day of conclusion of any yard
sale. It shall be forbidden to place any yard sale advertisement or information regarding yard sales
on any utility poles, street signs or public buildings. Signs placed on private property shall have the
permission of the property owner. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
5-1-4: FEES:
A. There is hereby levied upon and shall be collected from every person engaged in any business or
occupation within the city a permit fee for the privilege of engaging in business, in an amount to be
determined by the application of the rates hereinafter set forth. Such permit fees shall be
determined by business and occupation classification as follows:
1. Class A ($35.00): Class A businesses are all businesses, occupations or activities that fall under
any of the definitions set forth in section 5-1-2 of this chapter, but excluding those businesses,
occupations or activities that are exempt under section 5-1-5 of this chapter, or which are
specifically reclassified under this chapter. These businesses are the permanent establishments
which are on the tax rolls and maintain an office or building within the city limits.
2. Class B ($35.00 Per Week/$50.00 Per Month/$200.00 Per Year): Class B businesses are all
businesses, occupations or activities which fall under the definition of hawker, canvasser,
solicitor or "peddler" as defined in section 5-1-2 of this chapter.
3. Class C ($350.00): Class C businesses, occupations or activities include all circuses, fairs,
carnivals, animal shows and similar activities that are temporary in nature and who request
permission to operate within the city. Excluded from this class are those businesses which have
entered into a contract with the city either directly or through a third party or organization.
4. Class D ($35.00): Home occupations as defined in section 5-1-2 of this chapter and section 11-
2-1 of this code.
5. Class E ($35.00): Class E businesses are all businesses, occupations or activities which fall
under the definition of mobile cart, mobile trailer, and mobile vehicle as defined in section 5-1-2
of this chapter.
6. Class F ($35.00): Temporary merchants who are classified as a nonmobile vendor who set up
business on private property for five (5) days or less.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 74/315
7. Class G (unspecified): Class G businesses are all businesses, occupations or activities that
cannot easily be classified in any of the preceding classes, but constitute engaging in business
activity with the intent to profit thereby. The fee will be determined by city staff and based upon
the services required from the city and upon the nature of the business. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
5-1-5: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. Persons or organizations qualifying as nonprofit businesses or occupations, including charitable
activities, within the meaning of section 503 of the United States internal revenue code.
Possession of a certificate of tax exempt status from the internal revenue service shall be required
to qualify for this exemption, except that the mayor and council may waive the license fee for bona
fide charitable or civic groups within the city, including, but not necessarily limited to, private
schools, churches, fraternal organizations and lodges, with respect to their educational, religious or
fraternal activities, but this exemption shall not apply to any business activity for profit engaged in
by such organization.
B. Any agency of the United States government, any state of the United States, any political
subdivision of the state of Idaho, including, but not necessarily limited to, counties, school districts,
irrigation districts, water/sewer districts, or fire districts.
C. Domestic servants, newspaper carriers, blind persons or casual labor not included as temporary
employees of a regularly conducted business. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
5-1-6: ENGAGING IN BUSINESS WITHOUT OBTAINING PERMIT PROHIBITED;
EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
No person shall engage in any business or activity in the city for which a permit fee is imposed by this
chapter without first having obtained and being the holder of a valid and existing permit to do so, to be
known as a business and occupation permit, issued under the provisions of this chapter and without
paying the permit fee imposed by this chapter, which permit fee shall accompany the application for
the permit. Such permit shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which it is issued; however, all
class A businesses shall be required to submit a renewal application and fee by December 1 of each
year for administrative processing. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
5-1-7: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; CONTENTS; PERMIT FEE TO ACCOMPANY
APPLICATION:
The application for a permit shall be made to the city clerk on a form provided by the city. The
application shall set forth the name of the applicant, his or her residence, place of business, the nature
of the business and the amount of the permit fee prescribed by this chapter and shall be accompanied
by a deposit of the permit fee by the applicant. Every application shall be personally signed by the
applicant or his or her agent. In so signing, every applicant or agent shall swear, under penalty of
perjury, that the statements made in the application are true and factual statements. (Ord. 784, 5-12-
2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 75/315
5-1-8: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATIONS:
Upon receipt of an application for a permit where laws of the city necessitate an inspection or
investigation before the issuance of such permit, the clerk shall refer such application to the proper
officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time of such receipt, excluding
weekends. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a
report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or a copy
thereof. The health officer shall make or cause to be made an inspection in regard to such permits in
the connection of the care and handling of food and the preventing of nuisances and the spread of
disease. For the protection of health, the building inspector shall make or cause to be made any such
inspection relative to the construction of buildings or other structures. All other investigations except
where otherwise provided, shall be made by the chief of police or by some other officer designated by
the mayor. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
5-1-9: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Applications for business permit may, after investigation, be denied if it is found that any fraud,
misrepresentation or false statements have been committed in connection with the application
process. Notice of denial of permit shall be mailed by the clerk to the applicant within ten (10) days of
such denial. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
5-1-10: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any applicant may appeal any denial or revocation of permit according to the following procedure:
A. Hearing: Within ten (10) days after the initial denial or revocation, the mayor shall call a hearing for
the purpose of determining whether or not the license should be denied or revoked.
B. Notice Of Hearing: Notice of such hearing for denial or revocation of a permit shall be given in
writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and the place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the applicant or permittee at his or her last known address at
least five (5) days prior to the hearing.
C. Hearing Procedures: At the hearing, the applicant or permittee shall be permitted to be represented
by counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and to cross examine witnesses. The
mayor shall preside and shall render the decision and recommendation. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
5-1-11: DISPLAY OF PERMIT; OPERATION OF BUSINESS AFTER EXPIRATION OF
PERMIT PROHIBITED; TRANSFER OF PERMITS:
Every permittee, under this chapter, shall display such permit in a prominent location upon the
permitted premises, and shall refrain from operating the permitted business on such premises after
the expiration of the permit. No permittee shall allow any permit to remain posted, displayed, or used
after the period for which it was issued has expired, or when it has been suspended or revoked or for
any other reason has become ineffective. No permittee shall loan, sell, give, or assign to any other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 76/315
person or allow any other person to use or display, or to destroy, damage or remove, or to have in his
or her possession any permit which has been issued to said permittee. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
5-1-12: CHANGE IN OWNER OF PERMITTED BUSINESS:
Any change of owner or owners shall automatically void an existing permit granted under this chapter
and shall necessitate application and issuance of a new permit. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
5-1-13: MAILING OF APPLICATION FORMS; FAILURE TO FILE APPLICATION:
The city may, but is not required to, mail to persons forms for applications for permits; but failure of
any person to receive any such forms shall not excuse the person from making application for and
securing the permit required and payment of the permit fee when and as due hereunder. If any person
fails, neglects or refuses to file his or her application and to pay any fee as and when required herein,
the city will determine the amount of fee payable and to notify such person by mail of the amount so
determined. The amount so fixed shall thereupon be immediately due and payable, subject to the
person's right to appear before the council and show cause why his or her fee should not be altered or
reduced. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
5-1-14: WHEN FEES DUE AND PAYABLE; PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT:
Each annual permit fee herein provided shall become due and payable on December 1 of each
calendar year as to any business taxable hereunder and in existence on that date. Failure to pay any
permit fee within forty five (45) days after the day upon which it is due and payable shall render the
person subject to a penalty of twenty percent (20%) of the amount of the permit fee, in addition to
other penalties provided herein. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
5-1-15: PERMIT FEES AND PENALTIES CONSTITUTE DEBT TO CITY:
Any permit fee, including penalties thereon, shall constitute a debt to the city and may be collected by
court proceedings in the same manner as any other debt in like amount. No civil action or judgment
shall bar or prevent a criminal prosecution for each and every violation of this chapter. (Ord. 784, 5-12-
2015)
5-1-16: USE OF FUNDS:
All funds received by the city under the terms of this chapter shall be paid into the general fund of the
city and budgeted annually for general municipal purposes in the departments of police, fire, building
and finance. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
5-1-17: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Any permit may be revoked by the mayor and city council during the life of such permit for the violation
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 77/315
by the permittee of any provision relating to the permit, the subject of the permit or the premises
occupied; such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed. The mayor and city council shall be
authorized to summarily order the cessation of business, the closing of the premises and the
suspension of any permit.
Causes for revocation of any permit issued under this chapter, unless otherwise provided, may be
revoked by the mayor and city council after notice and hearing as provided in section 5-1-10 of this
chapter, shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit;
B. Any violation by the permittee of the provisions of this chapter, or state law relating to the permit,
the subject matter of the permit, or the premises occupied;
C. Conviction of the permittee of any felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or other
criminal activity related to the nature of their business.
D. Failure of the permittee to pay any fine or penalty owing the city;
E. Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling or any interference with a duly authorized city officer or
employee while in the performance of his or her duties in making such inspections, as provided in
this chapter.
F. Complaints received by the city on an individual or business prior to or during the business permit
period. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
5-1-18: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who operates any business or occupation for
which a permit is required by this chapter without first having obtained a permit as herein provided
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and be subject to a three hundred dollar ($300.00) fine. Each day
that a violation of this chapter occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
5-1-19: ENFORCEMENT:
The police department is given the authority and is instructed to watch and observe the conduct of
businesses holding such permits and operating under this chapter. Upon discovering a violation of the
provisions of this chapter, the police department may take appropriate action to ensure that the
business complies with this chapter or to ensure that action is taken to revoke the permit. (Ord. 784, 5-
12-2015)
5-1-20: CHANGE BY RESOLUTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 78/315
The fee portion of this chapter may be amended as needed by resolution by a vote of one-half (1/2)
plus one of the city council. (Ord. 784, 5-12-2015)
Chapter 2
MISCELLANEOUS LICENSES
5-2-1: SEPARATE LICENSES FOR EACH BUSINESS:
In every case where more than one of the trades, businesses, occupations, employments or
professions for which a license is required shall be carried on in the same place by the same person,
a separate license shall be required for each. (Ord. 214, 1-12-1940)
Chapter 3
MOTELS
5-3-1: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
Before construction of a motel is started, an application for a permit for such construction shall be
submitted to the Clerk. The Clerk shall present such application to the City Council for its approval.
Only after approval of the City Council shall a permit for construction of a motel be issued. (1962
Code)
5-3-2: SERVICE STATION RESTRICTIONS:
Automobile service stations shall be located no closer than fifty feet (50') to any motel. (1962 Code)
5-3-3: PARKING SPACE ON PREMISES:
Each unit of a motel or tourist court shall be provided with an assigned parking space entirely on the
premises. (1962 Code)
5-3-4: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum space for each unit shall be twelve feet by twenty feet (12' x 20') and shall contain one
full bath, toilet facilities, dressing compartment and sleeping room. (1962 Code)
5-3-5: EXISTING STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 79/315
The plumbing, heating and ventilation components shall meet all local Fire, Plumbing and Building
Code requirements. (1962 Code)
5-3-6: APPLICATION TO INCLUDE PLAN:
Each application for a motel or tourist court shall be submitted with a complete plan, including the plot
plan and adjacent buildings, parking arrangement and driveways, unit sizes, plumbing and heating
layout, accessory uses, materials to be used, front and rear elevations and architectural design. (1962
Code)
5-3-7: GUESTS REQUIRED TO REGISTER:
Every operator of a motel shall maintain a register in which each guest shall register his name, home
address and license number of the vehicle in which he is traveling. The date of his arrival and
departure shall also be recorded. Such register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting
the motel and shall be preserved for a period of not less than one year. (1962 Code)
Chapter 4
HOTELS
5-4-1: DEFINITION:
Every building maintained or advertised as a public lodging house or where more than six (6) rooms
are provided for sleeping accommodations shall be known as a hotel. (1962 Code)
5-4-2: FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT:
The Fire Chief, or other officer designated by the City Council, shall survey each hotel and specify
suitable fire detecting devices or extinguishing appliances which shall be provided. (1962 Code)
5-4-3: MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT:
Fire protective or extinguishing systems of appliances which have been installed in compliance with
any permit or order, or according to any provisions of this Code, shall be maintained in operative
condition at all times and it shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of
the protection so required. (1962 Code)
5-4-4: INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief and the Health Officer, or other officers so designated by the City
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 80/315
Council, to make periodic and regular inspections of every hotel and to make regular reports to the
City Council of such hotel or hotels concerning regulations imposed by this Code. (1962 Code)
5-4-5: HOTEL REGISTER:
A register shall be maintained at every hotel and each guest shall be required to register his name and
home address. The date of arrival and departure shall be clearly indicated and the register shall be
maintained for a period of at least one year following registration. The register shall be open for
inspection to any authorized person. (1962 Code)
Chapter 5
BEER REGULATIONS
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
BEER: Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, malt
and/or other ingredients in drinkable water of not more than six percent (6%) of alcohol by weight.
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of beer to the consumer. (Ord. 777, 2-11-
2014)
5-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disperse beer without first obtaining a proper license. (Ord. 777,
2-11-2014)
5-5-3: APPLICATION; LICENSE PERIOD; INVESTIGATION:
Application for a retail beer license shall be made under oath to the clerk and the application shall
show that the applicant possesses all of the qualifications required by this chapter.
A. License Period:
1. All licenses shall be granted by the mayor and council for a period of one year beginning
February 1 and ending January 31. The city council shall grant or deny the application within
thirty (30) days of the time it is filed with the city clerk. Prior to any revocation or suspension, the
licensee shall be afforded a hearing according to section 23-1016, Idaho Code. Whenever the
mayor and council deny an application, they shall specify in writing:
a. The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
b. The reason for the denial; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 81/315
c. The action, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal
thereof.
2. In all cases where the city council is considering applications for licenses, transfers, or renewals
thereof, a transcribable verbatim record of the proceedings shall be made. If the applicant for a
license, transfer or renewal is denied, a transcribable, verbatim record of the proceedings shall
be kept for a period of not less than six (6) months after a final decision on the matter. Upon
written request and within the time period provided for retention of the record, any person may
have the record transcribed at his expense. The city council shall also provide for the keeping of
the minutes of the proceedings. Minutes shall be retained indefinitely or as otherwise provided
by law.
B. Investigation Of Applications:
1. No license shall be granted hereunder until there has been an investigation by the police
department of all applications hereunder. After investigation, the applications will be forwarded to
the city council with a recommendation from the chief of police. If the chief of police recommends
that an application be denied, he shall state in writing:
a. The statutes or ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
b. The reason for the denial; and stating sufficient facts for identification of the licensee and the
grounds and date of revocation;
c. The action, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal
thereof.
2. Investigation of applicants is not required when the applicant has previously been approved for
licensing, and the circumstances and information provided in the applicant's previous application
has not changed. Application for renewal of license must still be made in writing to the city clerk,
but such renewal application need not be approved by the city council. (Ord. 777, 2-11-2014)
5-5-4: QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
A. Disqualifications: No retail license shall be issued to any applicant who:
1. Is not a bona fide owner of such business, or is not a citizen of the United States, or has not
been a bona fide resident of the state for a period of one year prior to the date of application;
provided, that if the applicant is a partnership, all partners shall be such citizens, and at least
one thereof, or the actual manager thereof, shall have been such resident and if the applicant is
a corporation, such corporation shall be qualified to do business in the state and the manager of
such business shall be such citizen and shall have been such resident.
2. Has, or any partner or actual manager or officer or employee or spouse of which has been
convicted of the violation of any laws of the state or of the United States regulating, governing or
prohibiting the sale of alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquor, or has within two (2) years
forfeited or suffered the forfeiture of a bond for his appearance to answer charges of such
violation.
3. Has, or any partner or actual active manager or officer of which has been convicted of any
felony within five (5) years or has paid any fine or completed any sentence of confinement
therefor within five (5) years.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 82/315
B. Revocation Of License: A retail licensee must continue throughout the license period to have all of
the foregoing qualifications and none of the foregoing disqualifications, and for failure therein upon
proof thereof to an issuer of a license, such issuer shall revoke the license issued, and in writing
sent by the United States registered mail notify each of the other issuers of a retailer's license to
such licensee, stating sufficient facts for identification of the licensee and the grounds and date of
revocation. (Ord. 777, 2-11-2014)
5-5-5: FEES:
For a period of one year the fees for the sale of draught, bottled or canned beer shall be as follows:
A. Fifty dollars ($50.00) for the sale of bottled or canned beer, when it is not to be consumed on the
premises.
B. Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the sale of draught, canned or bottled beer, when it is consumed
on the premises where sold. (Ord. 777, 2-11-2014)
5-5-6: HOURS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. (Ord. 777, 2-11-2014)
5-5-7: AGE RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer beer to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
and it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to frequent, loiter in or
about or patronize any beer dispensary and it shall be unlawful for any owner of such beer dispensary
or his employees to permit any such person under the age of nineteen (19) years to be in or to be
employed in such dispensary. (Ord. 777, 2-11-2014)
5-5-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council shall retain the right at all times to revoke and cancel any license for just cause. When
any license is revoked, the licensee shall have the privilege of appearing before the city council to
appeal such revocation. Any conduct or act on the part of the licensee which may be sufficient cause
for revocation of the license must be brought to the attention of the city council. (Ord. 777, 2-11-2014)
Chapter 6
LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 83/315
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall be given the following interpretation:
BARTENDER: Any person, whether agent, servant, employee, licensee, or any other capacity, who
pours, mixes, prepares, serves or delivers any liquor by the drink upon any licensed premises.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The law enforcement officer of the city.
CITY COUNCIL: The mayor and council of the city.
GAMING: Any and all gambling or games of chance.
INTERDICTED PERSON: A person to whom the sale of liquor is prohibited under the law of the state.
LICENSE: A license issued by the city under the provisions of the state statutes.
LICENSEE: The person to whom a license is issued.
LIQUOR: All kinds of liquor sold by and in a state liquor store.
PERSON: Every individual, partnership, corporation, organization or association holding a retail liquor
license, whether conducting the business singularly or collectively.
PREMISES: The building in which the sale of liquor by the drink at retail is authorized.
RULES AND REGULATIONS: All rules and regulations made and promulgated by the council.
STATE LIQUOR STORE: A liquor store or distributor established under and pursuant to the laws of
the state of Idaho for the package sale of liquor at retail. (Ord. 778, 2-11-2014)
5-6-2: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful to sell liquor by the drink unless a license has been obtained and all rules and
regulations concerning the licensing and operation of a place of business where liquor is sold are
complied with. (Ord. 778, 2-11-2014)
5-6-3: LICENSE FEE:
Each licensee shall pay an annual license fee of five hundred sixty two dollars ($562.00) in advance;
provided, that all licenses issued hereunder shall expire at one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on February 1 of
the following year. (Ord. 778, 2-11-2014)
5-6-4: APPLICATION; REQUIREMENTS:
A. Information, State License Required: Before there shall be any lawful sale of liquor by the drink an
application by the proposed licensee must be made for such license and filed with the clerk in the
form and manner herein provided. Such application shall provide for the name of the applicant, the
location of the proposed business, and such other information as may be prescribed and required
by the city council. At the time said application is filed the applicant shall also present a copy of an
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 84/315
application for a state license and also the license issued by the state for the sale of liquor by the
drink at retail and no license will be issued until a license has first been issued by the state.
B. Approval Of Council: All applications shall be filed with the clerk and referred to the council for
approval. The license fee shall be paid to the clerk at the time of making application and, upon
approval of said application by the council; the clerk shall issue and deliver the license to the
applicant. (Ord. 778, 2-11-2014)
5-6-5: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION:
A. Approval Or Disapproval: Upon receipt of application for a license accompanied by the license fee,
within ninety (90) days thereafter, the chief of police shall cause to be made a thorough
investigation of all matters pertaining thereto and report his findings to the council. The council
shall then act upon said application according to the facts presented and either approve or
disapprove the application. Upon approval by the council, the clerk shall then issue said license; or,
upon disapproval by the council, the clerk shall so notify the applicant and return the license fee,
less the costs of investigation, to the applicant.
B. Power To Investigate: In making the investigation required by this chapter the chief of police or his
designated representative shall have the power to investigate and examine the books and records
of the licensee and any person having a financial interest in any business to be conducted on the
licensed premises.
C. Exception: Investigation of applicants is not required when the applicant has previously been
approved for licensing, and the circumstances and information provided in the applicant's previous
application has not changed. Application for renewal of license must still be made in writing to the
city clerk, but such renewal application need not be approved by the city council. (Ord. 778, 2-11-
2014)
5-6-6: SEIZURE OF ILLEGAL LIQUORS:
The police officers of the city or of the county or of the state shall have the right to enter into and upon
the premises licensed at any and all times when said premises are occupied for the purpose of
checking the licenses, and the liquors held for sale, and said premises for such purpose are termed to
be public and no writ of search shall be required. (Ord. 778, 2-11-2014)
5-6-7: SALE TO LICENSEE:
All liquor sold by any licensee shall be purchased from the Idaho liquor dispensary through its regular
retail stores and distributors at the posted price thereof. The state liquor dispensary is hereby
authorized and directed to make such sales for cash to be paid at the time of purchase upon a special
permit issued to such licensee in such form as shall be prescribed by the superintendent of the state
liquor dispensary. The "posted price" as used herein shall mean the retail price of such liquor as fixed
and determined by the state liquor dispensary. (Ord. 778, 2-11-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 85/315
5-6-8: SALE BY THE DRINK ONLY:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, keep for sale, dispense, give away, or otherwise dispose of
any liquor in the original containers or otherwise than by retail sale by the drink. (Ord. 778, 2-11-2014)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 802 - LIQUOR BY THE DRINK. Go to
new ordinance.
5-6-9: HOURS OF SALE:
No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, given away, consumed or permitted to be consumed upon any
licensed premises during the following hours:
A. Sunday, Memorial Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. the following day.
B. On any other day between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
C. On the day of a general or primary election, until after the time when the polls are closed; provided,
that this provision shall not apply to city elections. (Ord. 778, 2-11-2014)
5-6-10: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
No licensee or his or its employed agents, servants or bartenders shall sell, deliver or give away, or
cause or permit to be sold, delivered or given away, any liquor to:
A. Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
B. Any person actually, apparently or obviously intoxicated.
C. Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or other person, who knowingly misrepresents
his or her qualifications for the purpose of obtaining liquor from such licensee shall be equally
guilty with such licensee, of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 778, 2-11-2014)
5-6-11: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
All peace officers appointed by the state, the city or the county shall have free access at all times to
the licensed premises, and any information touching the manner and method of the operation of said
premises or the sale of said liquor shall be submitted to the council for appropriate action. (Ord. 778,
2-11-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 86/315
5-6-12: LOITERING BY MINORS:
No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall enter, remain in or loiter in or about any place
licensed for the sale of liquor by the drink at retail; nor shall any licensee therein permit or allow any
person under the age specified to remain in or loiter in or about such place. (Ord. 778, 2-11-2014)
5-6-13: EXCEPTIONS:
It shall not be unlawful nor shall section 5-6-12 of this chapter be construed to restrict any person
under the age of twenty one (21) years from being:
A. Upon the premises of any restaurant, notwithstanding that such premises may also be licensed for
the sale of liquor by the drink or for the sale of beer for consumption on the premises, or that
alcoholic beverages or beer, or both, are prepared, mixed or dispensed and served and consumed
therein.
B. In any building, a part or portions of which is used as a place where liquor is sold by the drink,
provided such place is separated or partitioned from the remainder of said building and access to
such place through a doorway or doorways or other means of ingress can be controlled to prevent
persons under the age specified herein from entering therein.
C. In any baseball park, sports arena or fairgrounds notwithstanding that such premises or any portion
thereof may be licensed for the sale of beer for consumption on the premises or that beer is
dispensed and served and consumed therein. (Ord. 778, 2-11-2014)
5-6-14: POSTING RESTRICTIONS:
Every licensee herein referred to shall keep a sign conspicuously posted over or near each entrance
to any place from which persons under twenty one (21) years are herein restricted giving public notice
of such fact. The wording and size of such signs shall be in accordance with such regulations as the
chief of police may prescribe. (Ord. 778, 2-11-2014)
5-6-15: PREMISES OPERATED AS RESTAURANTS:
Every applicant for a state license for the sale of liquor by the drink or for the sale of beer for
consumption on the premises claiming that the premises for which such license is sought constitute
and are operated as a restaurant shall, with each application for state license and with each
application for renewal of license, file with the chief of police a statement under oath setting forth that
such premises constitute and are operated as such restaurant. Upon issuance of a state license for
the sale of liquor by the drink or for the sale of beer for consumption on the premises, for premises
constituting and operated as a restaurant, the licensee of which has filed the sworn statement herein
required, the chief of police shall endorse on the face of the license the fact that it has been issued to
a restaurant. Unless such sworn statement shall have been filed with the chief of police and his said
endorsement shall appear on the face of the license, the restriction contained in section 5-6-12 of this
chapter shall apply, notwithstanding that such premises may in fact constitute and be operated as a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 87/315
restaurant, and the posting of signs as provided for in section 5-6-14 of this chapter shall be required.
The filing of any false statement sworn to as herein required shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of license. If the premises, licensed as a restaurant under this chapter, subsequently
ceases to meet the qualification of a restaurant, the restrictions contained in section 5-6-12 of this
chapter shall apply and the posting of signs as provided for in section 5-6-14 of this chapter shall be
required. In such event the licensee shall advise the chief of police, by mail, that his premises no
longer constitute a restaurant, so that the certificate of endorsement may be recalled. (Ord. 778, 2-11-
2014)
5-6-16: REQUIREMENTS OF PREMISES:
Every licensee must conform to all regulations and laws of the state and the provisions of this chapter.
Liquor by the drink shall be sold only on premises where there is a full and unobstructed view from the
outside and nothing shall be placed on or over the windows or doors to obstruct said view. All
premises shall be adequately lighted and subject to periodic sanitary inspection. No gambling of any
kind or character shall be operated upon said premises and no gambling devices shall be maintained
thereon, except that which is permitted under article III, section 20 of the Idaho constitution and title
67, chapter 74, Idaho Code. (Ord. 778, 2-11-2014)
5-6-17: ADVERTISING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to adopt or use any name, sign or advertisement outside of the
licensed premises advertising the handling or sale of liquor. (Ord. 778, 2-11-2014)
Chapter 7
WINE
5-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms as used in this chapter are hereby defined as follows:
COMMISSIONER: Commissioner of law enforcement of the state of Idaho.
PERSON: An individual, firm, copartnership, association, corporation, or any group or combination
acting as a unit, and includes the plural as well as the singular unless the intent to give a more limited
meaning is disclosed by the context in which it is used.
RETAIL WINE LICENSE: A license issued by the commissioner authorizing a person to sell wine at
retail for consumption off the licensed premises.
RETAILER: A person to whom a retail wine license has been issued.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume
obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar content of fruits or other agricultural products
containing sugar.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 88/315
WINE BY THE DRINK LICENSE: A license to sell wine by the individual glass or opened bottle at
retail, for consumption on the premises only. (Ord. 779, 2-11-2014)
5-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell wine by the drink within the corporate limits of the city unless
he has first procured either a license for the sale of liquor by the drink or a wine by the drink license. It
shall be unlawful for any person to sell wine at retail for consumption off the licensed premises unless
he has first procured a retail wine license. (Ord. 779, 2-11-2014)
5-7-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Filed With The Clerk: Application for license shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the
applicant upon application forms furnished by the clerk. Such application shall be filed by the clerk
and presented to the mayor and council at the next meeting of the council for their approval,
rejection or further consideration.
B. Investigation Of Applicant: Investigation of applicants is not required when the applicant has
previously been approved for licensing, and the circumstances and information provided in the
applicant's previous application has not changed. Application for renewal of license must still be
made in writing to the city clerk, but such renewal application need not be approved by the city
council. (Ord. 779, 2-11-2014)
5-7-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
The applicant for a license shall possess all of the qualifications necessary to obtain a license from the
commissioner of law enforcement of the state, as prescribed by the laws of the state, and maintain
such qualifications throughout the period for which such license is issued. The possession of licenses
regularly issued by the department of law enforcement and the county, in addition to a city beer
license, shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant's qualifications to receive a license hereunder.
(Ord. 779, 2-11-2014)
5-7-5: LICENSE FEES:
The license fee imposed and collected shall be the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year for
a retail wine license and the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year for a wine by the drink
license; provided, however, that any person already licensed to sell liquor by the drink shall pay a sum
of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a wine by the drink license. Such license year shall be from one minute past
twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. February 1 through January 31. (Ord. 779, 2-11-2014)
5-7-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon filing the application for a license and production of evidence as required by section 5-7-4 of this
chapter as to the qualifications of the applicant and by the payment of the required license fee, the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 89/315
clerk shall, upon approval of the council, issue to the applicant a license to sell wine at retail or a wine
by the drink license within the city for such calendar year or the remainder thereof. (Ord. 779, 2-11-
2014)
5-7-7: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
The assignment of a retail wine license or a wine by the drink license shall be the same investigative
procedure as provided by section 5-6-5 of this title. (Ord. 779, 2-11-2014)
5-7-8: CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES:
Retailers who do not possess a valid license for the retail sale of liquor by the drink or a valid wine by
the drink license shall not permit the consumption of wine on the licensed premises and may sell the
wine only in its original unbroken, sealed container. Wine sold for consumption on the retailer's
premises may be sold pursuant to the laws of this state. Wine sold by the retailers for consumption off
the premises of the retailer may be sold only during the hours that beer may be sold pursuant to the
laws of this state. (Ord. 779, 2-11-2014)
5-7-9: POSSESSION:
No person may, while operating or riding in or upon a motor vehicle upon a public highway of this
state, have in his possession any wine in an open or unsealed container of any kind. (Ord. 779, 2-11-
2014)
5-7-10: MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE:
A. No person under the age of twenty one (21) years may purchase, consume or possess wine.
B. No person shall give, sell or deliver wine to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
C. No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall by any means represent to any retailer or
distributor or to any agent or employee of such retailer or distributor that he or she is twenty one
(21) years or more of age for the purpose of inducing such retailer or distributor, or his agent or
employee, to sell, serve or dispense wine to such person.
D. No person shall, by any means, represent to any retailer or distributor, or the agent or employee of
such retailer or distributor, that any other person is twenty one (21) years or more of age when, in
fact, such other person is under the age of twenty one (21) years for the purpose of inducing such
retailer or distributor to sell, serve or dispense wine to such other person. (Ord. 779, 2-11-2014)
5-7-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 90/315
The right shall be and remain at all times vested in the mayor and council, and the mayor and council
may, as hereinafter provided, revoke or cancel any license for fraud or misrepresentation in its
procurement, or for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or for any conduct or act of the
licensee or his employees or any conduct or act permitted by him or them on the premises where such
business is conducted, or in connection therewith or adjacent thereto, tending to render such business
or such premises where the same is conducted as a public nuisance or a menace to the health,
peace, safety or general welfare of the city; provided, that revocation or suspension of the state
license by the commissioner of law enforcement shall be deemed prima facie evidence for revocation
or suspension of the license issued herein. (Ord. 779, 2-11-2014)
Chapter 8
BILLPOSTING AND HANDBILLS
5-8-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the distribution or attaching of any signs, bills, pictures
or advertising matter unless the person shall first have obtained a license therefor. (1962 Code)
5-8-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
Application for a license shall be made to the Clerk, together with all necessary information including,
but not limited to, the names of all owners and the business addresses of the same. Upon approval of
said application by the City Council, the Clerk shall issue a license for which a fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per annum shall be paid. (1962 Code)
5-8-3: LITTERING PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or throw upon the public thoroughfares any handbills,
posters, advertisements or papers. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any person to
obstruct the public thoroughfares or create any nuisance therein. These provisions shall not interfere
or prevent the posting of notices required by low to be posted. (1962 Code)
5-8-4: CONSENT REQUIRED FOR POSTING ON FENCES OR POLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint, tack or otherwise attach any notice or other
advertising matter to any fence, wall or building or other property until first obtaining the consent of the
owner of such property. It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint, tack or otherwise attach any
notices or advertising matter to any telegraph, telephone, electric or other such poles. (1962 Code)
Chapter 9
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS AND MOBILE HOME
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 91/315
PARKS
5-9-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AND MOBILE HOME PARK
ORDINANCE and may be cited as such and will be referred to in this Chapter as the Recreational
Vehicle and Mobile Home Park Chapter. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard, protect and promote
health, morals, convenience, safety and welfare; to preserve the appropriate use and character of
each area within the sound principles of the existing laws of the City and to provide for regulations,
permits and fees for the location, operation and use of recreational vehicle parks and mobile home
parks within the City. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-3: SCOPE:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the layout, construction and location of recreational parks
and mobile home parks and any main or necessary building existing or proposed to be built, which will
be located within the area for which a permit is required. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-4: APPLICATION TO EXISTING PARKS:
A. Continuation Of Existing Parks: A recreational vehicle or mobile home park lawfully existing and in
use at the time of the effective date of this Chapter may be continued although such recreational
vehicle or mobile home park may not conform to the provisions of this Chapter as herein set forth.
B. Exception: When conditions exist that affect the health, morals, safety and public welfare, the
Building Official or his duly appointed representative shall cause such condition or conditions to be
abated as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this Section:
APPROVED: Approval by the Building Official as the result of investigation for compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
BARRIER: Any street, river or canal, railroad, embankment or screening by appropriate site-obscuring
fence or hedge at least fifty percent (50%) solid.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 92/315
property of any kind.
GRADE: The average of the finished ground level of the premises.
INSPECTOR: The Building Official or any legally designated representative of the City.
MOBILE HOME: All vehicles used, or so constructed as to permit being conveyed upon the public
streets or highways as such and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof for
human habitation, including sleeping and living quarters for one or more persons; provided, that this
definition shall refer to and include any contrivance with or without wheels attached, used or intended
to be used generally for living and sleeping quarters and which is capable of being moved by its own
power, towed or transported by another vehicle.
MOBILE HOME OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SPACE: A plot of ground within a mobile home or
recreational vehicle park, or any plot of ground which is designated for or designated as the location
for one unit and not used for any other purpose whatsoever other than the customary accessory uses
thereof.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any area, tract, plot, or site of land whereupon two (2) or more "mobile
homes", as defined in this Section, are placed, located and maintained for dwelling purposes only,
either on a permanent or semi-permanent basis and for which a fee, rental or contract for payment for
such use is collected or collectible to the person holding the land.
MOBILE STRUCTURES: All vehicles designed for human habitation other than as defined in this
Section, when such mobile structures are not provided with either living or sleeping and cooking
facilities, such as field office, sales office, display, etc.
OFFICIAL: A person who has either been duly elected or appointed to a public office and who
represents the City Government for a prescribed duty or capacity.
PERMITTEE: One who has received a permit as set forth in this Chapter.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation, whether tenant, owner,
lessee, licensee, permittee, agency, heirs or assigns.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): Any vehicle or structure designed and used for temporary, seasonal
human living quarters which meets all of the following qualifications:
A. Is towed or self-propelled on public streets or highways incidental to such recreational or
vacation activities;
B. Examples of such vehicles include van campers, tent camping trailers, self-contained travel
trailers, pickup campers, camping buses, and self-contained, self-propelled truck chassis
mounted vehicles providing living accommodations.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of
work artificially built up or composed of parts joined in some definite manner.
TRAILER: See definition of Mobile Home.
YARD: An open space within a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. (Ord. 610,
8-12-1986)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 93/315
5-9-6: PERMITS REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to build, establish, maintain, operate or permit to be built, established,
maintained, or operated, any trailer park within the bounds of the City without first having secured a
permit therefor. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-7: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
To obtain a permit for the construction or alteration of a recreational vehicle park, the applicant shall:
A. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which the application is made.
B. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description and street
address.
C. Show the use and occupancy for such lot, block and tract.
D. Be accompanied by such plans and specifications as required.
E. State the true valuation of the proposed improvements.
F. Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent.
G. Give such other information as may reasonably be required by the Building Official. (Ord. 610, 8-
12-1986)
5-9-8: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
The application, with two (2) sets of plans and specifications filed by the applicant for a permit, shall
be checked by
the Building Official and shall include the plot plan and building plans and specifications for all
buildings, improvements and facilities to be constructed within the recreational vehicle park. Such
plans may be reviewed by other City departments to check compliance with laws or ordinances under
this jurisdiction. If the Building Official is satisfied that the proposal, as submitted, subject to
corrections, meets the requirements as set forth in this Chapter, he shall then issue the permit therefor
to the applicant. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-9: RETENTION OF PLANS:
One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be retained by the Building Official
for a period of not less than ninety (90) days from date of completion of the work covered therein, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 94/315
one set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant, which set shall be kept
on such building or work during the time the work authorized thereby is in progress. (Ord. 610, 8-12-
1986)
5-9-10: VALIDITY OF PERMIT:
The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to
be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 610, 8-
12-1986)
5-9-11: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this Chapter shall expire by
limitation and become null and void, if the building or work authorized by such permit is not
commenced within six (6) months from the date of such permit. Also, such permit shall become null
and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of
one year. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-12: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The Building Official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this
Chapter whenever the permit is issued on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of
any ordinance or regulations or any of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-13: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEES:
The permit fee for each recreational park shall be on the true value of construction, as set forth in the
Uniform Building Code, current edition1. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-14: INSPECTIONS:
A. General: All construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the
Building Official.
B. Inspection Record Card: Work requiring a permit shall not be commenced until the permit holder or
his agent shall have posted an inspection record card in a conspicuous place on the front premises
and in such position as to allow the inspector conveniently to make the required entries thereon
regarding inspection of the work. This inspection record card must be submitted to the Building
Official before the certificate of occupancy has been issued. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-15: MOBILE HOME PARKS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 95/315
A. Existing Parks: Every mobile home park existing before July 1986, that conforms to any of the
standards listed below, shall not abandon any of the standards listed below without obtaining
approval from the City Council.
B. Central Facilities: Central facilities such as toilets, baths, or laundry rooms are not required.
C. Open Space: There shall be an open area or areas provided for of not less than one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet per each ten (10) units. It shall be maintained with a well kept lawn
and trees.
D. Permitted Improvements By Occupant: The space occupant may erect or install accessory
structures such as patio covers, storage buildings or cabanas, provided any such accessory
structure shall meet City codes.
E. Streets And Roads:
1. All spaces shall abut upon a roadway not less than twenty four feet (24') in width which shall
have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. Dead-end roadways shall provide
adequate vehicle turning space or cul-de-sac with not less than forty foot (40') radius exclusive
of parking.
2. Directory and regulation signs shall be provided as required to assure maximum safety and
convenience to occupants and visitors, consistent with accepted safety standards.
F. Utilities To Be Underground: All utility lines shall be underground including power and light,
telephone, TV cable, water and sewer. Installation and inspection must comply with the provisions
of all applicable City and/or State codes. However, when due to subsurface soil conditions or other
special conditions, it is determined by the Building Official or his other duly authorized
representative that it is impractical to construct facilities underground, and when approved by
Planning and Zoning Commission, such installations may be overhead.
G. Minimum Requirements: Minimum requirements for each mobile home space:
1. An all weather surfaced space not less than ten feet by twenty feet (10' x 20') and located in
such manner to provide one off-street parking space.
2. Minimum Yard Requirements: Mobile homes or accessory structures shall be so located to
provide a minimum front yard of ten feet (10') measured from the edge or curb of road to wall
line of structure or trailer. At all times, a distance of fifteen feet (15') shall be maintained between
all trailers and seven feet (7') between covered patios, accessory buildings, or added structures
of any kind. Also, a side yard of four feet (4') shall be maintained on the left side (commonly
referred to as the off side from the trailer entrance) between the nearest structures. (Ord. 610, 8-
12-1986)
5-9-16: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 96/315
A. Landscaping And Screening: The park boundaries shall be reasonably screened whether by
barriers of ornamental fences, walls, trees, shrubs, or open spaces, to assure reasonable
integration with adjoining land usages and to assure the health, safety, and quiet enjoyment of the
area.
B. Storage Area: Storage area is not required.
C. Common Open Space: A common open space shall be provided in a ratio of one hundred (100)
square feet per trailer space.
D. Occupant Improvements: The space occupant shall not be permitted to erect or install or place any
structure or facility upon the space.
E. Waste Disposal Facilities: Waste disposal facilities for recreational vehicles shall be provided in an
isolated screened service area in a manner and method acceptable to the District Health Officer,
Water/Wastewater Superintendent and Building Official.
F. Spaces: All spaces shall abut upon a roadway not less than twenty four feet (24') in width which
shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. Dead-end roadways shall provide
adequate vehicle turning space or cul-de-sac with not less than a forty feet (40') radius exclusive of
parking.
G. Utilities: All utilities shall be underground.
H. Minimum Requirements: Minimum requirements for each recreational vehicle space:
1. Each space shall be not less than twenty five feet wide and fifty feet long (25' x 50').
2. All spaces shall be provided with one frostproof exterior culinary water supply.
I. Central Facilities: Central facilities required for recreational vehicle parks:
1. A sufficient supply of pure, healthful drinking water, approved by the Idaho Department of Health
and not less than one water outlet for each recreational vehicle shall be provided. An abundant
supply of hot water shall be provided at all times for bathing, washing and laundry facilities.
There shall be no drinking water in toilet compartments.
2. The park shall provide flush toilets in conveniently located buildings. The buildings shall be welllighted
at all times, ventilated with screened openings and constructed of moisture-proof material
permitting satisfactory cleaning. The floors shall be concrete or similar material, slightly pitched
to a floor drain.
Toilets shall be enclosed in a separate compartment with fly doors, and have a minimum width
which meets code requirements. Toilets shall be provided for each sex in the ratio of one toilet
for every eight (8) females and one toilet for every twelve (12) males. Toilet seats shall be
disinfected daily. Every male toilet room shall have one urinal for each sixteen (16) males, but in
no case shall a male toilet room be without one urinal. Toilet rooms shall contain one lavatory
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 97/315
with hot and cold running water for each three (3) toilets, provided there shall be at least one
lavatory in every toilet room. Each lavatory shall at all times be provided with paper towels or
electric dryers and dispensable soap.
3. Separate bathing facilities for each sex shall be provided in conveniently located buildings. A
shower room at least three feet by three feet (3' x 3'), equipped with shower, with a dressing
compartment of at least twelve (12) square feet shall be provided for each fifteen (15) spaces.
No duck boards shall be used in shower rooms and the floors thereof shall be disinfected daily.
4. All waste from showers, toilets, faucets and lavatories shall be emptied into a sewage system
extended from and connected with the City sewer or approved septic tanks. All sanitary facilities
in any recreational vehicle which are not connected with the City sewer or septic tank system by
means of air-tight connection shall be sealed and their use is unlawful. Each faucet site shall be
equipped with facilities for drainage of excess water into a sump or sanitary sewer. In no case
shall any wastewater be thrown or discharged on the surface of the ground or disposed of by
means other than as provided in this Chapter. Supervision and equipment sufficient to prevent
littering the grounds with rubbish and debris shall be provided.
5. Utility buildings shall be screened and the floor of toilets, showers and laundries shall be of
concrete, tile or similar material, impervious to water and easily cleaned and pitched to a floor
drain.
6. The recreational park capacity shall be computed on a basis of two (2) persons to each
recreational space. The sex ratio shall be considered as one to one. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-17: LOCATION:
A recreational vehicle park shall be located only within the areas as provided by the Zoning
Ordinance. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-18: MOBILE HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS:
All such parks shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Location: Shall be located on a well-drained site with all roadways and spaces properly graded to
ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
B. Roadways And Walks: All roadways and walks within a recreational vehicle or mobile home park
shall be all-weather surfaced, maintained and adequately lighted. A minimum of two-tenths (0.2)
foot-candles of light is required for protective lighting the full length of all driveways and walkways.
C. Existing Facilities; Service Buildings: Existing facilities for maintaining service to recreational
vehicles and mobile homes shall at all times meet the standards set forth by the State Health
Department. Service buildings shall be required as provided in this Chapter for recreational vehicle
parks. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-19: WATER SUPPLY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 98/315
The water supply shall be easily accessible to each recreational vehicle and mobile home space, and
shall provide not less than twenty five (25) pounds pressure at all times and not less than one hundred
twenty five (125) gallons per unit per day. All water supplies must be approved by the State Health
Department, and if other than a public supply, shall conform with the standards set forth in the Idaho
State Department of Public Health Bulletin No. 5 Recommended Standards for Individual Water
Supply Systems. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-20: PLUMBING:
All plumbing within the recreational vehicle or mobile home park shall conform to the standards set
forth in the State Code. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-21: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A. All sewage shall be collected and disposed of in a sanitary manner, in a public sewage system or
approved septic tank.
B. Each mobile home space in a mobile home park shall be provided with not less than one three inch
(3") sewer connection. The sewer connection shall be provided with the connections so that a
watertight union may be made between the mobile home drain and the sewer connection. Such
mobile home space connection shall be provided with an air-tight closure when not linked to a
mobile home and so trapped to maintain an odor-free condition. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-22: ELECTRICITY:
A. Conformance With State Code: All installations of electrical wiring and equipment in recreational
vehicle and mobile home parks shall conform to the minimum requirements of the State Electrical
Code.
B. Guidelines:
1. An individual circuit shall be provided for each recreational vehicle and mobile home unit and
this circuit shall supply no other load. The current-carrying capacity of such circuits shall be not
less than thirty (30) amperes and not less than the load to be served.
2. A weatherproof receptacle outlet shall be provided for connection of each mobile home and
recreational unit. The outlet shall be so located that it will not be more than fifteen feet (15') from
the rear one-third (1/3) of the left (road) side of the unit which it supplies. Such receptacles shall
be of the grounding type and shall provide one noncurrent-carrying contact for grounding of the
mobile home and recreational vehicle and equipment in the unit.
3. Portable cords supplying recreational vehicle and mobile home units shall be without splice.
4. Receptacle outlets, portable cords, connectors, attachment plug caps and other current-carrying
equipment used for the purpose of delivering energy from the supply system to the recreational
vehicle and mobile home unit shall have a current-carrying capacity of not less than the load to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 99/315
be served and not less than the rating of the over-current devices in series with each
ungrounded conductor.
5. It is unlawful for any person to bridge, bypass or alter any overcurrent device in any way which
will prevent such device from serving the function for which it is intended. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-23: FUEL:
A. Natural or liquefied petroleum gas which is installed within mobile homes and recreational vehicle
parks and buildings within the parks shall be installed as set forth in the current issue of National
Board of Fire Underwriters.
B. Liquid petroleum gas used for cooking or heating purposes shall not be used at individual
recreational vehicles and mobile home spaces unless the containers are properly connected in
accordance with the City Gas Code2. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-24: FIRE PROTECTION:
When not in conflict with more specific regulations, the recreational vehicle and mobile home park
area shall conform to the requirements of the fire regulations of the City. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-25: ALTERATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
Skirting of mobile homes is required when wheels are removed. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-26: REGISTRATION OF OCCUPANTS:
Every owner or operator of a recreational vehicle park shall maintain a register containing a record of
all recreational vehicles and occupants. Such register shall be available to authorized persons
inspecting the court and shall be preserved for a period of five (5) years. Such register shall contain:
A. Names and addresses of recreational vehicle occupants stopping at the court.
B. The make and license number of motor vehicles.
C. The date of arrival and departure of each recreational vehicle. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-27: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
Upon presentation of proper credentials, authorized officials may enter at reasonable times any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 100/315
building, trailer, structure or premises in the City to perform any duty imposed upon him by this
Chapter. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-28: UNSAFE CONDITIONS:
All recreational vehicles, recreational vehicle and mobile home parks, buildings or premises, which
constitute a hazard to health, morals, safety or fire by reason of inadequate maintenance, insanitation,
dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment are nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in Section 5-9-29 of
this Chapter. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-29: NOTICE TO OWNER:
The Building Official or his duly authorized representative shall examine or cause to be examined
every recreational vehicle park and mobile home park, building or premises reported as a public
"nuisance" as defined in Section 5-9-28 of this Chapter and if found to be such a public nuisance, shall
give to the owner written notice, stating the defects thereof. The notice shall require the owner or
person in charge of the recreational vehicle, recreational vehicle and mobile home park, building or
premises, within forty eight (48) hours, to commence corrective measures such as improvements,
repairs, demolition or removal and all work shall be completed within ninety (90) days from the date of
notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the official. Proper service of such notice shall be by personal
service upon the owner of record, or by certified mail with return receipt, addressed to the owner at the
location of the nuisance, or at his last known address. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-30: POSTING OF SIGNS:
The official may cause to be posted on each recreational vehicle park and mobile home park, building
or premises, a notice to read:
DO NOT ENTER, UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
Building Department, Orofino, Idaho
Such notice shall remain posted until the corrections, as noted, are completed. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-31: APPEALS:
Any person whose application has been denied or any person whose permit has been revoked or who
feels he has been grieved by the Building Official's decision, may request and shall be granted a
hearing of the matter before the City Council. Any exceptions to the requirements of this Code shall be
granted only by City Council action upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
5-9-32: ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 101/315
The Building Official of the City or his duly authorized representative shall be charged with the
enforcement of this Chapter and shall keep a permanent, accurate account of all fees and other
monies collected, the amount, purpose and person from whom it was received, together with the
location of the premises to which they relate. (Ord. 610, 8-12-1986)
Chapter 10
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
5-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless the
context clearly requires otherwise:
PAWNBROKER: Every person, other than banks, trust companies or bond brokers who may
otherwise be regulated by law and authorized to deal in commercial papers, shares of stock, bonds
and other certificates of value, who keeps a loan or pawn office or engages in or carries on the
business of receiving jewelry, precious stones, valuables, firearms, clothing, personal property or any
other articles in pledge for loans, as security or in pawn for the repayment of monies, and exacts an
interest for such loans, except as hereinafter provided.
REPROCESSED GOODS: Any item of personal property that is substantially rebuilt or
remanufactured.
SECONDHAND DEALER: Any pawnbroker, or any person engaged in the business of purchasing,
selling, trading or otherwise transferring for value, secondhand goods.
SECONDHAND GOODS: Any item of personal property offered for sale not as new, including metals
in any form, except coins that are legal tender and precious metals in a nonidentifiable form, but
excluding books, magazines and postage stamps. (Ord. 614, 8-11-1987)
5-10-2: APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the following secondhand dealers or transactions:
A. Dealers in motor vehicles, the owners of which are required by State law to have certificates of title
therefor.
B. Dealers in furniture and household goods which are hereby defined as clothing (except furs), beds,
bedding, davenports, tables, desks, chairs, stoves, floor coverings, crockery, glassware, kitchen
and cooking utensils, refrigerators, ranges, shades, blinds, curtains, washing machines and power
ironers.
C. Junk dealers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 102/315
D. To give an allowance for the trade-in or exchange of used goods on the purchase of other
merchandise of the same kind of greater value, and to then resell the trade-in.
E. To engage in the business of reprocessing goods or selling reprocessed goods.
F. For any secured party to dispose of his or her own collateral after default as provided in the Uniform
Commercial Code.
G. To sell unredeemed or unclaimed goods repaired in the regular course of a repair service in order
to satisfy mechanics' liens.
H. Individuals operating sales of secondhand goods on any infrequent basis, not to exceed two (2)
sales not exceeding forty eight (48) hours in duration within any calendar year. (Ord. 614, 8-11-
1987)
5-10-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It is a misdemeanor for any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer to:
A. Refuse to allow the inspections as required in Section 5-10-6 of this Chapter.
B. Falsify, obliterate, display or remove from their place of business any record that is required to be
maintained by this Chapter within three (3) business years from the date of the transaction.
C. Receive any property from any person under eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 614, 8-11-1987)
5-10-4: RECORDS OF TRANSACTIONS REQUIRED:
Every person managing, maintaining or conducting the business of a pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer in the City shall keep, or cause to be kept, at the store or place of business, a chronological
record in which shall be kept, in the English language, in ink or indelible pencil at the time of every
purchase, pledge, pawn or other transfer of possession to such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer of
any article or loan thereon, a description of such article received in such transaction, sufficient to
identify the same, including all particular or prominent marks or identification that may be found on
such property, the signature, address, age, sex and description of the person receiving, delivering, or
transferring the property who is otherwise dealt with, and the date and the hour of the transaction.
(Ord. 614, 8-11-1987)
5-10-5: REPORTS TO POLICE DEPARTMENT:
Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall, each day, excepting holidays, on the required business
forms and/or ledgers, make report of transactions for that day.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 103/315
A. Report Open For Inspection: Said report shall be open to the Chief of Police, his designee, or any
law enforcement officer for inspection, and a copy of said report(s) deemed to be relative in the
conduct of police business shall be provided upon request.
B. Report Permanently Filed: The Chief of Police shall, upon receipt of such reports, cause the same
to be permanently filed in the office of the Police Department, or other law enforcement agency, or
upon an order of the court duly made for that purpose.
C. Exemption: Auctioneers who maintain records pursuant to Section 5-10-4 of this Chapter shall be
exempt from daily reporting requirements as provided in this Section. (Ord. 614, 8-11-1987)
5-10-6: INSPECTIONS:
A. Records Open For Inspection: The record of transactions required by this Chapter shall be open for
inspection by the Police Department of the City, or any law enforcement agency, at any time during
business hours. The Police Department shall also have the right to thoroughly inspect the
premises, store or place where the business so recorded is being conducted at any time in search
of any lost or stolen property, or to compare the entries kept in such records with articles located
on such premises or place of business.
B. Render Assistance: All persons in charge of such business and the agents and employees thereof
shall render to the Police Department such assistance as may be reasonably necessary in such
inspection or search. (Ord. 614, 8-11-1987)
5-10-7: RECORDS OF SALES:
If any article received by any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall be sold within forty five (45)
days from the date that it is so received, such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall, on his copy of
the record of its reception, write in ink or indelible pencil the name and address of the person to whom
such sale is made, and the date of such sale. (Ord. 614, 8-11-1987)
Chapter 11
DAYCARE FACILITIES
5-11-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the OROFINO DAYCARE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 767, 9-28-2010)
5-11-2: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
Idaho Code 39-1101 through 39-1120 entitled "basic day care license", along with all future
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 104/315
amendments, is hereby adopted as and for the Orofino daycare ordinance with like effect as if recited
at length. (Ord. 767, 9-28-2010)
5-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless the
context clearly requires otherwise. All other definitions identified in Idaho Code 39-1102 shall apply.
BOARD: The Idaho state board of health and welfare.
CHILD: A person less than thirteen (13) years of age.
DAYCARE: The care and supervision provided for compensation or as voluntary work during part of a
twenty four (24) hour day, for a child or children regardless of relationship to the person or persons
providing the care.
DAYCARE CENTER: A place or facility providing daycare where thirteen (13) or more children,
regardless of relationship to the person or persons providing the care, are in attendance.
DAYCARE PROVIDER: Includes any volunteer, individual, group of individuals, association,
partnership, limited liability company or corporation.
DEPARTMENT: The Idaho department of health and welfare.
EMPLOYEE: Any person working for compensation or volunteering in a facility that provides daycare.
FAMILY DAYCARE HOME: A home, place, or facility providing daycare where four (4) or fewer
children, excluding children of a family within the second degree of relationship regardless of
relationship to the person or persons providing the care, are regularly on the premises.
FOSTER CARE: Childcare by a person not related to the child, in lieu of parental care, in a foster
home.
FOSTER HOME: The private home of an individual or family licensed or approved as meeting the
standards for foster care and providing twenty four (24) hour substitute parental care to six (6) or
fewer children.
FOSTER PARENT: A person or persons residing in a private home under their direct control to whom
a foster care license or certification has been issued.
GROUP CARE: Foster care of a number of children for whom childcare in a family setting is not
available or appropriate, in a dormitory or cottage type setting, characterized by activities and
discipline of a more regimented and less formal nature than found in a family setting.
GROUP DAYCARE FACILITY: A home, place, or facility providing daycare where seven (7) to twelve
(12) children, regardless of relationship to the person or persons providing the care, are regularly on
the premises.
JUVENILE DETENTION: Defined in section 20-502(6), Idaho Code, of the juvenile correction act.
JUVENILE DETENTION CENTER: A facility established pursuant to sections 20-517 and 20-518,
Idaho Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 105/315
NONBUSINESS ACTIVITY: A "family daycare home" which cares for six (6) or less children regularly
on the premises regardless of relationship to the person or persons providing the care.
SECOND DEGREE OF RELATIONSHIP: Persons related consanguineously ("blood relative") and
affinially ("relative by marriage") and includes their spouses. The number of degrees between two (2)
relatives is calculated by summing the number of ties between each relative and the common
ancestor. (Ord. 767, 9-28-2010)
5-11-4: TYPES OF DAYCARE LICENSES:
Subject to meeting all requirements under this chapter, the following types of daycare facilities are
authorized to conduct business:
A. Daycare center: A state license is issued for a place or facility providing care and supervision to
thirteen (13) or more children, regardless of relationship to the person or persons providing the
care.
B. Group daycare facility: A state license is issued for a place or facility providing care and supervision
for compensation for five (5) to twelve (12) children, regardless of relationship to the person or
persons providing the care.
C. Family daycare home: A place or facility providing care or supervision for compensation for four (4)
or fewer children. (Ord. 767, 9-28-2010)
5-11-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSING:
The following facilities are exempt from licensing:
A. Family Daycare Home: A place or facility providing care or supervision for compensation where four
(4) or fewer children, regardless of relationship to the person or persons providing the care, are
regularly on the premises. However, a family daycare shall comply with the requirements of section
39-1105, Idaho Code, for a criminal history check and shall obtain a fire inspection certificate
establishing compliance with the standards provided in section 39-1109, Idaho Code. A family
daycare home is not required to be licensed. A family daycare home may voluntarily elect to
submit an application for a license to the department.
B. Foster Home: Under sections 39-1103 and 39-1211, Idaho Code, the occasional or irregular care of
a neighbor, relative, or friend's child or children by a person not ordinarily engaged in childcare is
exempt from licensure requirements for daycare and foster homes. Foster homes which have been
certified by a licensed children's agency are exempt from licensure requirements, provided the
standards for approval by such agency are at least as stringent as the rules and standards
established by the board and that such agency is maintained and operated in conformity with the
rules and standards of the board under section 39-1213(b), Idaho Code. (Ord. 767, 9-28-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 106/315
5-11-6: SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
All daycare providers who care for five (5) to twelve (12) children in an R-2 or R-3 residential zone are
required to secure a special use permit. All special use permits are subject to conditions limiting
daycare activities, the number of children being cared for, the time of operation, or any other
conditions that may impact a residential zone and serve in the best interest of the community or
neighborhood. (Ord. 767, 9-28-2010)
5-11-7: DAYCARE CENTERS:
Daycare centers of thirteen (13) or more children shall be prohibited from operating in an R-2 and R-3
residential zone unless specifically exempted under Idaho Code 39-1103. (Ord. 767, 9-28-2010)
5-11-8: CHILD-STAFF RATIOS AND MAXIMUM GROUP SIZES:
The following chart shall be used in determining the child-staff ratio for all daycares:
CHILD-STAFF RATIOS AND MAXIMUM GROUP SIZE
Based On Age Of Youngest Child
Ages And Counts Based
On Age Of Youngest Child Points
Maximum
Group Size
Children 0-24 months 2 6
Children 2 years to 3 years 1.5 8
Children 3 years to 4 years 1 10
All children over 4 years 1/2 12
No group of children shall exceed 12 children or 12 points per staff
(Ord. 767, 9-28-2010)
5-11-9: CITY BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
All daycare providers shall be subject to the requirements of the city business license ordinance, if
applicable. (Ord. 767, 9-28-2010)
5-11-10: NO LIABILITY TO STATE OR POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The issuance of a license or certificate pursuant to this chapter shall not constitute a representation of
affirmance to any person that the daycare center to which a license is issued or a group daycare
facility to which a certificate is issued is free from risk with regard to the standards in this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 107/315
Pursuant to Idaho Code 39-1117 the state and its political subdivisions or any employees or agents of
the state or its political subdivisions shall not be liable for nor shall a cause of action exist for any loss
or damage based upon the failure of any person to meet the standards contained in this chapter. (Ord.
767, 9-28-2010)
Title 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
6-1-1: ASSAULT:
An assault is:
A. An unlawful attempt, coupled with the apparent ability, to commit a violent injury on the person of
another; or
B. An intentional, unlawful threat by word or act to do violence to the person of another, coupled with
the apparent ability to do so, and doing some act which creates a well founded fear in such other
person that such violence is imminent.
A person who commits an assault is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-2: BATTERY:
A battery is any:
A. Wilful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of another; or
B. Actual, intentional and unlawful touching or striking of another person against the will of the other;
or
C. Unlawfully and intentionally causing bodily harm to an individual.
A person who commits a battery is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-3: DEPOSITS OF INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON THOROUGHFARES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or allow to remain in or upon any public
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 108/315
thoroughfare any material or substance injurious to person or property. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-4: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
Any person who violates the provisions below is guilty of a misdemeanor:
A. Occupying, lodging or sleeping in any building, structure or place, whether public or private, or in
any motor vehicle without the permission of the owner or person entitled to possession or in control
thereof;
B. Loitering, prowling or wandering upon the private property of another, without lawful business,
permission or invitation by the owner or the lawful occupants thereof; or
C. Loitering or remaining in or about school grounds or buildings, without having any reason or
relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a pupil or student, school authorized functions,
activities or use. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-5: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
Every person who maliciously and wilfully disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood, family or
person, by loud or unusual noise, or by tumultuous or offensive conduct, or by threatening, traducing,
quarreling, challenging to fight or fighting, or fires any gun or pistol, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord.
745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-6: ENCOURAGING DELINQUENCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, by any act or neglect, to encourage, aid or cause a child to either
act or omit to act in a manner so as to be subject to charges or to come within the purview of the
juvenile corrections act; and it shall likewise be unlawful for any person, after notice that a child is
unlicensed, or that the driver's license of any child has been suspended or revoked, to permit such
child to operate a motor vehicle. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-7: ESCAPES:
It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in lawful custody to escape or attempt to
escape from custody. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-8: EXPECTORATING ON SIDEWALK OR IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any sidewalk or upon the floor of any
public building or room used for public assemblies. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 109/315
6-1-9: FALSE PRETENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain food, drink, goods, wares, merchandise under false
pretenses, or to enter any public place and call for refreshments or other articles and receive and
refuse to pay for the same, or depart without paying for or satisfying the person from whom he
received the food, goods, wares and merchandise. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-10: FALSE REPRESENTATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to represent falsely himself to be an officer of the city or to attempt
to impersonate any such officer or, without authority to perform any official act therein on behalf of an
officer. For purposes of this section, an officer of the city is defined to include all peace officers
together with any other official of the city of Orofino charged with enforcement or inspection duties
relating to any business or activity of the city of Orofino. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-11: FRAUDULENTLY AVOIDING PAYMENT OF ADMISSION FEES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently enter, without payment of the proper admission fee,
any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other place where admission fees are charged; provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of
police officers engaged in the performance of police duties. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-12: GAMBLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deal, play or conduct, either as owner, employee or lessee,
whether or not for hire, any game played with cards, dice, or any other device for money, checks,
credit or other representative of value, except as permitted under article III, chapter 20 of the Idaho
constitution and title 67, chapter 74 of the Idaho Code. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-13: GENERAL OFFENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any requirement which is
prohibited or required by state law. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-14: GIVING ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful for any otherwise capable citizen eighteen (18) years age or older to refuse or
neglect to render assistance to any police officer when called upon for such assistance or aid in the
suppression of riot or other unlawful assemblage or in the arrest of any person who has committed an
offense. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-15: LUG WHEELS PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 110/315
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle or motorized equipment with wheels or tracks which are injurious to
pavement to be permitted upon the public thoroughfares unless the operator of such vehicle shall first
plank such streets. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-16: MALICIOUS INJURY TO PROPERTY:
Every person who maliciously injures or destroys any real or personal property not his own, or any
jointly owned property without permission of the joint owner, or any property belonging to the
community of the person's marriage without the permission of the community property holder, which
damage is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 745, 7-12-
2011)
6-1-17: WATER FLOWING UPON THE STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any water to flow into or upon any public street or sidewalk
which creates a hazard. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-18: WINDOWSILLS TO BE KEPT CLEAR:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any windowsill, porch or other projection above
the first story of any building abutting on any sidewalk, street or alley any article which might do injury
to persons or property by falling from said location, unless said article is securely fastened or
protected by screens. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-19: INTERFERENCE WITH RADIO RECEPTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain and operate in the city any electrical equipment or
appliance of whatsoever nature which causes interference with radio reception or to operate any such
appliance or equipment after the same is known to cause radio interference or to refuse permission to
the chief of police or his agent to make inspection of any appliance or equipment to determine if said
appliance or equipment interferes with radio reception or to repair or remove said appliance or
equipment when directed to do so when same is shown to cause radio interference. (Ord. 745, 7-12-
2011)
6-1-20: ELUDING, FLEEING FROM POLICE:
Any driver of a motor vehicle who wilfully fails or refuses to bring his vehicle to a stop, or who
otherwise flees or attempts to elude a pursuing police vehicle when given visual or audible signal, by
hand, voice, emergency light or siren to bring the vehicle to a stop shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-21: FAILURE TO DISPERSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 111/315
When two (2) or more people congregate in a public place and the acts of such persons create a
substantial risk of injury, alarm or serious inconvenience to any person or property, or hinder, or
obstruct the free passage of any person or vehicle upon a public right of way, a peace officer or other
public official in executing and enforcing the law may order the participants and others in the
immediate vicinity to disperse. A person who refuses a lawful order to disperse or a person who
knowingly and intentionally fails to obey such an order is guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. Exception: No such orders shall apply to a news reporter or other person observing or recording the
events on behalf of the public press or other news media, unless he is physically obstructing lawful
efforts by such officer to disperse the group.
Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably assembled for a lawful
purpose. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-22: USE OF TOBACCO BY MINORS, SALES TO MINORS:
Every person under eighteen (18) years of age who shall buy, accept, or have in his possession any
cigarette, cigar or tobacco in any form, or any cigarette paper or wrapper intended for the wrapping of
tobacco in the form of a cigarette, or compounds of tobacco used in the filling or makeup of cigarettes,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Every person who shall give, sell or furnish, directly or indirectly, any cigarettes, cigars, or tobacco in
any form or any cigarette paper or other paper or wrapper intended for the wrapping of tobacco in the
form of a cigarette, or any compound of tobacco used in the filling or makeup of cigarettes, to any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years, or shall permit such minor persons to frequent any
premises owned, held or managed by him for the purpose of indulging in the use of cigarettes, cigars
or tobacco in any form, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-23: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
Any person who is upon any public thoroughfare or other public place within the city of Orofino,
including any street, sidewalk, public or private parking lot, or any public or private property open to
the public and who is intoxicated or under the influence of intoxicating liquor at a level that presents a
danger to himself, herself, or others, or creates a disturbance of the peace shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. In addition to any penalties imposed by law, upon conviction, such person shall be
assessed restitution for all costs or expenses incurred by any public entity resulting from said person's
intoxication, including all costs or expenses relating to obtaining medical screening, medical review,
medical clearance or treatment. Said restitution order shall be entered in favor of the public entity
incurring such costs or expenses and shall be payable to the general fund of such entity. (Ord. 745, 7-
12-2011)
6-1-24: AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION; INTERFERENCE WITH PEDESTRIANS:
Any person who violates the following provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor: a) begs in a public place
with the intent to intimidate another into giving money or goods; or b) obstructs pedestrian or vehicular
traffic in a public place.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 112/315
A. Definitions:
BEG: To ask for money or goods as charity, whether by words, bodily gestures, signs, or other
means.
INTIMIDATE: To engage in conduct which would make a reasonable person fearful or compelled.
OBSTRUCT PEDESTRIAN OR VEHICULAR TRAFFIC: To render impassable or to render
passage unreasonably inconvenient or hazardous for another person or vehicle.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place which the general public has access and a right to stay upon for
business, entertainment or other lawful purpose and includes, but is not limited to, public streets,
highways, sidewalks, greenbelt, greenbelt areas, parks, school grounds, hospital grounds, as well
as the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, or other place of business.
(Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-25: DISORDERLY HOUSEHOLD OR PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to host a party, gathering or event on private property
within the city: a) which is disruptive to the public peace, health, safety, or welfare due to the
magnitude of the crowd, loud music or other noise, disturbances, unruly behavior by those attending
the party, excessive traffic or destruction of property; or b) where a person under the age of twenty
one (21) years is in possession of, is consuming or is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage
and the person or persons responsible for the party knew or reasonably should have known that the
person in possession of, consuming, or under the influence of an alcoholic beverage is under the age
of twenty one (21) years.
A. Definitions:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing alcohol, including liquor, spirits, beer, or wine.
HOUSEHOLD OR PREMISES: Any home, apartment, condominium, premises or other dwelling
unit or meeting room or hall, including the yard and curtilage of such household or premises which
are owned, rented, leased or under the control of the person or persons responsible for the party,
regardless of whether such premises are occupied on a permanent or temporary basis, or merely
occupied as a premises for a social function.
KNOWINGLY: Having a general knowledge of or reason to know which warrants further inquiry or
inspection.
MINOR: A person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
PARTY: A party gathering or event or other assembly of persons for a social occasion or activity.
PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR THE PARTY: 1. The person or persons in charge of the premises
where the party takes place; and/or
2. The person or persons authorizing the use of the premises for the party; and/or
3. The person or persons who organized the party.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 113/315
B. Restitution: The court may order restitution to be paid by the person or persons responsible for a
party or gathering that requires a subsequent law enforcement or emergency response. Such
restitution, if ordered, would include actual costs for law enforcement or other emergency services
incurred for the purpose of abating any of the conditions or violations described in this section.
C. Violation: Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 745, 7-12-
2011)
6-1-26: FIGHTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly fight with another person in
a public place unless such conduct is legally excused by virtue of self-defense or defense of another.
(Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-27: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
Every person who wilfully and lewdly, either: a) exposes his or her genitals in any public place, or in
any place where there is present another person or persons who are offended or annoyed; or b)
procures, counsels, or assists any person so to expose his or her genitals, where there is present
another person or persons who are offended or annoyed thereby is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord.
745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-28: FALSE REPORTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind:
A. To make or file, or cause to be made or filed, an accident report knowing the same to be false;
B. To knowingly give or cause to be given false information to any law enforcement officer or any state
or local government agency or personnel;
C. To intentionally make a false call or turn in false information regarding the need for police or
emergency assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such act. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-29: SUICIDE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to commit an act of suicide or threaten to commit an act
of suicide within the city of Orofino, Clearwater County, Idaho. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 114/315
6-1-30: POSSESSION OF AN OPEN CONTAINER OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN
PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage or to have in his or her
possession any open container of any alcoholic beverage in a public place within the city of Orofino,
including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, alleyway, park or other public place, or upon private
property open to the public without permission of property owner. The exceptions to this law shall be
the Orofino City Park, Champion Park and the Lewis Clark Park where an open container of alcoholic
beverage is allowed, unless otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance.
A. Definition:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing alcohol, including liquor, spirits, beer, or wine.
(Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-31: VOYEURISM:
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter another person's private property without permission and to
peer, peep or look through doors or windows of that property with the intent to intrude upon or interfere
with a person's privacy, or within a public place, to peer, peep or look into an area where a person has
a reasonable expectation of privacy and has taken steps to conceal themselves from the general
public, such as a restroom, locker room, or changing room, without that person's consent and with the
intent to invade that person's privacy. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-32: INTOXICATION BY INHALATION OF TOXICANTS OR SOLVENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to become or attempt to become intoxicated by inhaling the fumes
of gasoline, toluene or any other solvent or product containing any such solvent. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-33: PUBLIC URINATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to excrete human waste, including urine or feces, upon the ground,
into a body of water, or upon anything attached or setting upon said surfaces within the city of Orofino,
Clearwater County, Idaho, except for toilet facilities used as receptacles for human waste. (Ord. 745,
7-12-2011)
6-1-34: POSSESSION OF A FALSE IDENTIFICATION CARD:
It shall be unlawful for any person who is under twenty one (21) years of age to display or have in his
or her possession a driver's license, identification card, or any other written, printed or photographic
evidence of age and identity which is fraudulent, reproduced, altered or not actually his or her own.
(Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-35: FAILURE TO COME TO POLICE STATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 115/315
It is unlawful and shall be considered a separate offense under this chapter for any parent, guardian or
other adult person having the legal care and custody of such minor to refuse to come immediately to
the police station upon being notified to do so by the police and take charge of such minor. (Ord. 745,
7-12-2011)
6-1-36: TRESPASSING, CRIMINAL TRESPASS; DEFINITION AND PUNISHMENT:
A. Any person who, without consent of the owner or person in charge of any lands which are enclosed
by fences of any description sufficient to show the boundaries of the land enclosed, shall go upon
such lands and shall leave open any gates on or about said premises, or who shall tear down or
lay down any fencing, or who shall wilfully remove, mutilate, damage or destroy any "No
Trespassing" signs or markers, or who shall go through cultivated crops that have not been
harvested, or who shall damage any property thereon, or who without permission of the owner or
the owner's agent enters the real property of another person where such real property is posted
with "No Trespassing" signs or other notices of like meaning spaced at intervals of not less than
one notice per six hundred sixty feet (660') along such real property, is guilty of a misdemeanor
and on conviction thereof shall be punished by imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding six (6)
months or by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or by both such fine and imprisonment. Where the geographical configuration
of the real property is such that entry can reasonably be made only at certain points of access,
such property is posted sufficiently for all purposes of this section if said signs or notices are
posted at such points of access. As used in this subsection and in section 18-7008, Idaho Code:
"enters", "entry" and "entering" mean going upon or over real property either in person or by
causing any object, substance or force to go upon or over real property. Violation of the provisions
of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
B. No motor vehicle shall be wilfully or intentionally driven into, upon, over or through any private land
actively devoted to cultivated crops without the consent of the owner of the land or the tenant,
lessee or agent of the owner of the land actively devoted to cultivated crops. Violation of the
provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor. For the purpose of this subsection, motor
vehicle shall be defined as set forth in sections 49-114 and 49-123, Idaho Code. Land actively
devoted to cultivated crops shall be defined as land that is used to produce field crops including,
but not limited to, grains, feed crops, legumes, fruits and vegetables.
C. Any person without specific consent, approval or agreement who is found trespassing in the
Orofino City Park, Champion Park or the Lewis Clark Park between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
D. Every person, except under landlord-tenant relationship, who, being first notified verbally or in
writing by the owner or authorized agent of the owner of real property, to immediately depart from
the same and who refuses to so depart, or who, without permission or invitation, returns and enters
said property within a year, after being so notified shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 745, 7-
12-2011)
6-1-37: SKATEBOARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 116/315
A. Definitions: The city hereby adopts the following definitions for purposes of enforcement of this
chapter. Words and phrases defined for the purposes of this chapter shall have the meanings set
forth in this section, unless normal construction in context shall clearly indicate to the contrary.
NEGLIGENT MANEUVER: Any maneuver that may cause injury to a person, including the rider
and/or damage to property, and/or any maneuver that threatens such injury or damage.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Real estate in private ownership without regard to the manner in which it is
used.
PUBLIC PARK: The Orofino City Park; Champion Park; and the Lewis Clark Park all located within
the city limits of Orofino.
RIDING A SKATEBOARD: Standing with one or both feet touching the skateboard, crouching,
sitting or lying upon the skateboard while it is in motion and/or propelling a skateboard.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street or highway between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a
roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians.
SKATEBOARD: Has its ordinary meaning and includes a board of any material with wheels affixed
to the underside, designed to be ridden by a person. For the purposes of this chapter the term
"skateboard" shall include the terms "scooter" and "coaster". (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-38: PROHIBITING THE USE OF SKATEBOARDS IN CITY PARKS AND CITY
SIDEWALKS:
It is hereby unlawful for any person to ride, operate or utilize any skateboard in any city park or on any
city sidewalk. Individuals who violate this section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall pay a penalty
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each occurrence. Said penalty shall be paid within fourteen (14)
calendar days from the date of the citation. Payments shall be made at the Orofino City Hall located at
217 First Street or mailed to the city treasurer at P.O. Box 312, Orofino, ID 83544. (Ord. 745, 7-12-
2011)
6-1-39: PROHIBITING THE USE OF SKATEBOARDS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It is hereby unlawful for any person to ride, operate or utilize any skateboard on any private property
without first obtaining the permission of the property owner. Individuals who violate this section shall
be guilty of an infraction and shall pay a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each occurrence.
Said penalty shall be paid within fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of the citation. Payments
shall be made at the Orofino City Hall located at 217 First Street or mailed to the city treasurer at P.O.
Box 312, Orofino, ID 83544. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-40: CITY PARK TRESPASSING PENALTY:
Individuals who violate subsection 6-1-36C of this chapter shall be guilty of misdemeanor trespassing
and shall pay a fixed penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each occurrence. (Ord. 745, 7-12-
2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 117/315
6-1-41: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specified, a violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six (6)
months. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-42: SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE:
Whenever a law enforcement officer has witnessed or has probable cause to believe that a
skateboard was used or is intended to be used in violation of this chapter, such skateboard is subject
to seizure and forfeiture. The skateboard may be returned only after the penalty or fine, if applicable,
has been paid or a court order is issued. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
6-1-43: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES PRESERVED:
The issuance of a notice of violation shall not be the exclusive remedy for enforcing the ordinance
regulations of this chapter and all other lawful remedies are reserved, including prosecution by filing a
criminal complaint for either a misdemeanor or infraction violation. (Ord. 745, 7-12-2011)
Chapter 2
ANIMALS
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, each of the terms defined shall have the meaning given in this section unless
a different meaning is clearly required by the context. The word "shall" is mandatory, not directory.
ABUSE: Any case in which an animal has been the victim of intentional or negligent conduct resulting
in the animal's bruising, bleeding, malnutrition, dehydration, burns, fractures or breaks of any bones,
subdural hematoma, soft tissue swelling, or death.
ANIMAL: Any organism other than human beings needing food to maintain and sustain its life which
generally has mobility and a developed central nervous system.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of the owner or a member of his
immediate family either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise provided for in this chapter.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and entirely
separated on all sides from any other structure by space or any walls in which there are no
communicating doors, windows or openings, which is designed or intended for the society, enclosure
or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
CITY: The city of Orofino, Idaho.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city and designee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 118/315
DOG: Both male and female, whether neutered or spayed.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: An animal that is under the control of humans and is dependent on them for its
survival. It includes pets and livestock or any animal other than wild or exotic animals, customarily
confined or cultivated by humans for domestic or commercial purposes.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or causing containment
suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine an animal in conjunction with
other measures which may be taken by the owner such as tethering of the animal. Such enclosure
shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be
designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure.
HUMANE SOCIETY: The Clearwater County Humane Society is established for the impounding and
care of animals seized, kept or removed in conformity with the provisions of the code, which Humane
Society shall be under the jurisdiction of the city. The Clearwater County Humane Society,
incorporated, is hereby designated, subject to its acceptance in writing filed with the clerk, as the
agent of the city for the purpose of maintaining and operating the Humane Society and for the purpose
of impounding, keeping and disposing of any animal impounded according to the provisions of the
code; provided, that neither the society nor any employee employed at the Humane Society shall be
deemed to be city employees nor included within or under the provisions of the civil service
regulations.
IMPOUNDED: Taken into the custody of the Humane Society or city pound.
MISUSE: The intentional causing of an animal to perform a noncustomary task which could be
dangerous or harmful to the animal.
NONCOMMERCIAL KENNEL: Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which more than four (4)
dogs, cats or any combination thereof, are maintained, harbored, possessed, bred or cared for.
OWNER: Any person or persons keeping, harboring, possessing, caring for, or having any custodial
duties over any animal.
PERSON: Shall be intended to include all natural persons, firms, companies, corporations or
associations.
SENIOR CITIZENS: Any head of household who has attained the age of sixty five (65) or older.
SIGN: A sign is any structure which shall be used to attract attention to any object, place, activity,
person, animal, or business which shall display or include any letter, word, insignia, device or
representation used as, or which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or advertisement. For
the purposes of subsection 6-2-6A3 of this chapter, the sign shall be constructed of wood, metal or
other similar weatherproof material, at least twenty four inches by twenty four inches (24" x 24") in
size, with letters in indelible or fluorescent ink with the words in clear, capital letters as follows:
"VICIOUS ANIMAL ON PREMISES, VICIOUS DOG ON PROPERTY", or words of similar meaning;
and shall be posted at all visible entryways onto the owner's property.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which, when unprovoked in a vicious or terrorizing manner,
approaches any person in apparent attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks, any public grounds
or places, or private property not owned or possessed by the owner of the animal; or
A. Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause
injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 119/315
B. Any animal which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a human being or domestic
animal without provocation; or
C. Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting or any animal
trained for fighting.
Notwithstanding the definition of a vicious animal herein, no animal may be declared vicious if an
injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time of such injury or damage was
sustained, was committing a wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the
owner of the animal, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or was
committing or attempting to commit a crime.
No animals may be declared vicious if the injury or damage was sustained as a result of teasing,
tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal. No animal may be declared vicious if the animal
was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an
unjustified attack or assault. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-2: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a cruel manner to any animal within the city. The phrase
"cruel manner" shall include, but is not limited to, the following specific acts and omissions:
A. Failure To Provide: Any owner of an animal who fails to provide such animal with:
1. Sufficient water and wholesome food; or
2. Proper shelter and protection from the weather; or
3. Proper veterinary care to prevent suffering or disease; or
4. A clean and wholesome environment in which to live; or
5. Protection from the abuse of other persons.
B. Specific Acts: Any person who through act or omission does any of the following specific acts with
an animal:
1. Abuses or otherwise mistreats; or
2. Tortures; or
3. Misuses; or
4. Overloads or overrides; or
5. Abandons; or
6. Exposes to unreasonable danger to health or life.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 120/315
C. Penalties: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to three hundred dollars ($300.00), or six (6) months in
jail, or both. Each day such violation is committed, or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense. It shall be the duty of any police officer, animal control officer, or other
designated city employee to take possession of any animal for which he has probable cause to
believe falls under the preceding subsection and deliver such animal to the Humane Society. All
costs incurred for the maintenance of such animal will be paid by the person charged with the
offense. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-3: COMMANDING AN ANIMAL TO ATTACK; PROHIBITED:
Except where greater bodily harm or death is likely to immediately ensue, it shall be unlawful for any
person to command, encourage or aid by word or conduct, any animal to bite, chase, attack, or
attempt to bite, chase or attack, another person or animal. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-4: INTERFERING WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER IN THE
IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMAL UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or molest any law enforcement officer who may be
engaged in seizing, keeping or removing any animal in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-5: WILD ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, keep, maintain or possess within the city any of the
following animals:
A. Mammals:
1. All members of the family Felidae (cat family) except domesticated cats.
2. All members of the family Canidae (dog family) except domesticated dogs.
3. All nonhuman primates.
4. All members of the order Insectivora except hedgehogs.
5. All rodents except domestic rats, mice, guinea pigs, hamsters, gerbils, and squirrels not
otherwise restricted by federal law.
6. All marine mammals, including, but not limited to, whales, dolphins and seals.
7. All animals from the order Xenarthra, including giant anteaters, sloths, amanduas, armadillos,
and pangolins.
8. All members of the family Procyonidae, except the raccoon native to Idaho (Procyon lotor).
9. All members of the family Mustelidae except domestic ferrets (Mustela putorius).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 121/315
10. All civets, meerkats, and members of the family Viverridae.
11. All marsupials except Virginia opossum, sugar gliders, and bettongs.
12. All members of the family Hyaenidae, including, but not limited to, hyenas and aardwolves.
13. All members of the order of Tubulidentata (aardvarks).
14. All members of the order Hyracoidae (hyraxes).
15. All hoofed animals belong to the orders Perissodactyla and Artiodactyla including domesticated
farm or pack animals.
B. Birds:
1. Ostriches.
2. Cassowaries.
3. Penguins of any kind.
4. Cranes of any kind.
5. Flamingos.
6. Hornbills.
7. Herons and their relatives from the order Ciconiiformes.
8. All birds of prey from the order Falconiformes.
9. All owls from the order Strigiformes.
10. Emus.
11. Peacocks.
C. Reptiles:
1. Sea turtles of any kind.
2. Aldabra or Galapagos tortoises.
3. Komodo dragons.
4. All members of the order Crocodilia.
5. Wild caught Gila monsters and bearded lizards.
6. Elapids (family of venomous snakes) except North American species, such as coral snakes, that
are housed under state guidelines.
7. Viperids (family of venomous snakes) except North American species, including, but not limited
to, rattlesnakes, cottonmouths, and copperheads, that are housed under state guidelines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 122/315
8. Tuataras.
9. Anacondas.
D. Insects:
1. All insects listed as agricultural pests by the USDA and Idaho department of agriculture.
E. Threatened Or Endangered Animals: All animals listed as threatened or endangered on either a
state or federal level and all illegally imported animals shall be prohibited in the same manner as
those listed above.
The provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to the keeping of such
animals by any bona fide licensed veterinary hospital for treatment, bona fide educational or
medical institution, museums, or by rehabilitators, breeders, or exhibitors who are properly
licensed or permitted by the city, the Idaho department of agriculture, the U.S. fish and wildlife
service, or U.S. department of agriculture. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-6: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A. Requirements For Registration: No vicious animal shall be licensed by the city for any licensing
period commencing after the passage of this chapter unless the owner or keeper of such vicious
animal shall meet the following requirements:
1. The owner shall present the city clerk or other licensing authority, proof that the owner or keeper
has procured liability insurance in the amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00), covering any damage or injury which may be caused by such vicious animal
during the twelve (12) month period for which licensing is sought, which policy shall contain a
provision requiring the city to be named as additional insured for the sole purpose of the city
clerk or other licensing authority where such animal is licensed to be notified by the insurance
company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy.
2. The owner shall, at his own expense, have the licensing number assigned to such vicious
animal, or such other identification number as the city clerk or other licensing authority shall
determine, tattooed upon such vicious animal by a licensed veterinarian or person trained as a
tattooist and authorized as such by any state, city or police department. The tattoo shall be
placed either on the upper inner lip, inside ear or inside rear thigh of the vicious animal. Said
number shall be noted on the city licensing files for such vicious animal, if it is different from the
license number of such vicious animal. For the purposes of this section, "tattoo" shall be defined
as any permanent numbering of a vicious animal by means of indelible or permanent ink with the
number designated by the licensing authority, or any other permanent, acceptable method of
tattooing.
3. The owner shall display a sign in conformance with section 6-2-1 of this chapter on his or her
premises warning that there is a vicious animal on the premises. Said sign shall be visible and
capable of being read from the sidewalk or driveway to the premises.
4. The owner shall sign a statement attesting that:
a. The owner shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance required by this
section during the twelve (12) month period for which licensing is sought, unless the owner
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 123/315
shall cease to own or keep the vicious animal prior to the expiration of such license.
b. The owner shall, on or prior to the effective date of such license for which application is being
made, have an enclosure for the vicious animal on the property where the vicious animal will
be kept or maintained.
c. The owner shall notify the police department within twenty four (24) hours if a vicious animal is
on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked another animal or has attacked a human being, or
has died or has been sold or given away. If the vicious animal has been sold or given away,
the owner shall also provide the licensing authority with the name, address, and telephone
number of the new owner of the vicious animal.
B. Seizure Of Vicious Animals: The chief of police, code enforcement officer, or their designee is
hereby empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, and is hereby empowered to seize and impound any vicious animal
whose owner fails to comply with the provisions hereof.
In the event that the owner of the animal refuses to surrender the animal, a search warrant may be
sought from a magistrate of the district court to seize the animal upon execution of the warrant.
(Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-7: CONTROL OF VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A. All vicious animals shall be confined in an enclosure. It shall be unlawful for any owner to maintain
a vicious animal on any premises which does not have a locked enclosure.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow any vicious animal to be in the dwelling of the owner or
outside the enclosure of the vicious animal unless it is necessary for the owner to obtain veterinary
care for the animal or to sell or give away the vicious animal or to comply with commands or
directions of the chief of police or designee with respect to the vicious animal. In such event, the
vicious animal shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile
strength of three hundred (300) pounds and not exceeding three feet (3') in length, and shall be
under the direct control and supervision of the owner of the vicious animal at all times. (Ord. 746,
7-12-2011)
6-2-8: PURPOSE OR INTENT; HARBORING:
No person shall own or harbor any animal for the purpose of animal fighting, or train, torment, badger,
bait or use any animal for the purpose of causing or encouraging said animal to unprovoked attacks
upon human beings or domestic animals. No person shall possess with intent to sell, or offer for sale,
breed, or buy or attempt to buy any vicious animal within the city. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-9: ACTION FOR DAMAGES; DESTRUCTION OF OFFENDING VICIOUS
ANIMAL; CIVIL PENALTY:
If any vicious animal shall, when unprovoked, kill or wound, or assist in killing or wounding any sheep,
lamb, cattle, horse, hog, swine, fowl or other domestic animal, belonging to or in the possession of any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 124/315
person, or shall, when unprovoked, assault, bite or otherwise injure any human being or assist in
attacking, assaulting, biting or otherwise injuring any human being while out of or within the enclosure
of the owner or keeper of such vicious animal, or while otherwise on or off the property of the owner
whether or not such vicious animal was on a leash and securely muzzled or whether the vicious
animal escaped without fault of the owner or keeper, the owner or keeper of such animal shall be
liable to the person aggrieved as aforesaid, for all damage sustained, to be recovered in a civil action,
with costs of suit. It is rebuttably presumed as a matter of law that the owning, keeping or harboring of
a vicious animal in violation of this chapter is a nuisance. It shall not be necessary, in order to sustain
any such action, to prove that the owner of such vicious animal knew that such vicious animal
possessed the propensity to cause such damage or that the vicious animal had a vicious nature. Upon
such attack or assault, the police department is hereby empowered to confiscate and destroy such
vicious animal, if the conduct of such vicious animal or its owner constituted a violation of the
provisions of this chapter, punishable by the confiscation and destruction of the animal. (Ord. 746, 7-
12-2011)
6-2-10: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Sections 6-2-7 to 6-2-9 inclusive of this chapter shall not apply to kennels licensed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to K-9 or other animals owned by any police
department or any law enforcement officer which are used in performance of law enforcement
police work. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-11: DETERMINATION OF A VICIOUS ANIMAL:
A. In the event that law enforcement has probable cause to believe that an animal is vicious, the chief
of police or designee shall be empowered to convene a hearing for the purpose of determining
whether or not the animal in question should be declared vicious. The chief of police shall conduct
or cause to be conducted an investigation and shall notify the owner of the animal that a hearing
will be held, at which time he or she may have the opportunity to present evidence why the animal
should not be declared vicious. The hearing shall be held promptly within no less than five (5) nor
more than ten (10) days after service of notice upon the owner of the animal. The hearing shall be
informal and shall be open to the public.
After the hearing, the owner of the animal shall be notified in writing of the determination. If a
determination is made that the animal is vicious, the owner shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter in accordance with a time schedule established by the chief of police, but in no case more
than thirty (30) days to the date of the determination. If the owner of the animal contests the
determination, he or she may, within five (5) days of such determination, bring a petition in the
magistrate court in the second judicial district of the state of Idaho, in and for the county of
Clearwater, wherein the animal is owned, praying that the court conduct its own hearing on
whether or not the animal should be declared vicious. The court shall conduct a hearing de novo
and make its own determination as to viciousness. The issue shall be decided upon the
preponderance of the evidence. If the court rules the animal to be vicious, the court may establish
a time schedule to ensure compliance with this chapter, but in no case more than thirty (30) days
subsequent to the date of the court's determination.
The court may decide all issues for or against the owner of the animal regardless of the fact that
said owner fails to appear at said hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 125/315
The determination of the magistrate court shall be final and conclusive upon all parties thereto.
However, any law enforcement officer shall have the right to declare an animal to be vicious for
any subsequent actions of the animal.
In the event that a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that the animal in
question is vicious and may pose a threat of serious harm to human beings or other domestic
animals, the officer may seize and impound the animal pending aforesaid hearings. The owner of
the animal shall be liable to the city for the costs and expenses of impoundment of such animal.
B. If the owner of an impounded animal for an alleged violation of sections 6-2-6 to 6-2-9 inclusive of
this chapter, shall believe that there shall not have been a violation of such sections hereof, such
owner may petition the magistrate court of the second judicial district of the state of Idaho, in and
for the county of Clearwater, praying that the impounded animal not be destroyed.
The impounded animal shall not be destroyed pending resolution of such owner's petition if the
petition shall have been filed within five (5) days of the impoundment of such animal. A hearing
shall be conducted and the decision of the magistrate court may be appealed to the district court
by any aggrieved party within forty two (42) days of the decision. The animal shall remain
impounded pending the appeal. If the court finds that there shall not have been a violation of
sections 6-2-6 to 6-2-9 inclusive of this chapter, such animal may be released to the custody of the
owner upon payment to the city of Orofino of the expense of keeping such animal. The schedule of
costs as provided for by the city of Orofino fee schedule shall be paid in full or upon the signing of
a promissory note to the city. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-12: LIABILITY OF PARENTS FOR DAMAGES CAUSED BY ANIMAL OWNED BY
MINOR:
In the event that the owner of the animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be
liable for all injuries, property damage, fines and impoundment fees caused or incurred by said animal.
(Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-13: DOGS, SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Licenses; Application; Fees: All dog licenses are valid through December 31 of each year and are
renewable January 1 of each year, with the exception of the lifetime license which is purchased
only once. The owner, or person having charge, of any dog over the age of sixteen (16) weeks
within the city shall make application to the Orofino police department, or other designated agent
established by the Orofino city council, and pay the required licensing fees established in the city
of Orofino fee schedule. (No dog will be licensed as spayed or neutered without proof such surgery
was performed. Dog owners may choose to purchase a license each year, or pay 1 fee for a
lifetime license.)
1. Licenses: Upon receipt of such application and payment of fees, the person issuing the license
shall issue a receipt designating the owner's name and the number of the license, the sex (or
status of spayed or neutered) of the dog and the amount paid by him together with a metal tag
bearing the number corresponding to that upon receipt. If a license is lost, the city clerk or other
designated agent shall, upon application and payment, of a fee for replacement of such tag to be
established by the most current city clerk license fee schedule, issue a duplicate tag. Licenses
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 126/315
for the following year may be purchased within ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date.
Upon renewal, a new tag shall not be issued unless requested. If a dog is licensed as
nonspayed or nonneutered, and is spayed or neutered within the licensed period, the clerk shall,
upon presentation of a veterinarian's statement of spaying or neutering, refund the difference in
license fee.
2. Waiver Of Fees: License fees shall be waived for any guide dog that has been properly trained
for use by a legally blind person and for any guide dog puppy-in-training authorized by a certified
guide dog school. License fees shall also be waived for any hearing ear dog that has been
properly trained for use by a person with impaired hearing or any other severely disabled person
who requires an assistance dog.
3. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep or possess a dog
over the age of sixteen (16) weeks within the city without first procuring a license therefor as
provided by this chapter; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
any person visiting in the city for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and owning or
possessing a dog currently licensed and bearing the license issued by another municipality or
other licensing authority.
B. Imitation License Tags: It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any dog owned, kept or harbored
by him to wear a license tag received on account of a former licensee or to wear any imitation of
the license tag issued by the city for that year.
C. Training And Exercise Grounds: The Orofino city council may designate such areas of the public
park or other public grounds of the city which may be used, subject to the rules and regulations as
may be prescribed, for the training or exercise of dogs. Dogs within such area so designated need
not be controlled by leash, but shall be under the control of a responsible person and controlled by
whistle, voice, or other effective command.
D. Collar; Tag: Every dog shall at all times wear a substantial, durable collar, to which shall be
securely attached the required license tag.
E. Running At Large Prohibited: Except as provided by subsection C of this section, any person who
owns, harbors or has in his or her control an animal, whether the animal is licensed or not, which
animal is found at large upon streets or alleys of the city, or in any public place in the city or upon
any other premises without the consent of the person in possession of such premises, is
responsible for such animal being at large and is in violation of this section; except:
1. When such animal is controlled by a leash.
2. When such animal is confined in a motor vehicle.
F. City Citations: In order to eliminate burdening the court system with violations of dog licensing and
running at large ordinances, and as a convenience to the public, a city citation may be issued in
lieu of a state uniform citation for a violation of this section. The named defendant on the city
citation shall pay the fixed penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of
the issuance of the city citation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 127/315
G. Payment Of Fees: In addition to the fixed penalty, any of the required fees listed in section 6-2-27
of this chapter shall be paid in full prior to the animal being released to the owner.
H. State Uniform Citation: In the event payment is not made in accordance with the administrative
procedure set out herein, a state of Idaho uniform citation alleging an ordinance violation shall be
filed in the magistrate court of the second judicial district. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-14: POULTRY AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any chickens, turkeys, geese or other fowl owned by him to
run at large upon the streets, alleys or other public places of the city, or upon the property of any
person without the consent of owner. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-15: ANIMALS IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, allow, keep or carry any animal in, upon or within a public
transportation facility, or any other public building or facility, particularly a building or facility in which
food or drink is prepared or stored, except that a blind person shall not be denied the use of any
common carrier or public transportation facility or admittance to any other public building or place
within the city of Orofino by reason of his being accompanied by a seeing eye or guide dog specially
trained for such purpose. It is the intent of this chapter to permit and authorize a blind person to have
a seeing eye or guide dog with him or her in such places and while using such facilities without being
required to pay any additional charges for his seeing eye or guide dog, but such blind person shall be
liable for any damage or disturbance caused by such seeing eye or guide dog. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-16: DRIVING OR RIDING ANIMALS/HERDING WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
No person shall lead, drive or ride any horse, pig, sheep, goat, mule, cow or other animal over, across
or upon any sidewalk, parkway or public parking area, or over or across any public park except upon
roadways, trails or areas designated for such use. No person shall herd, hold, pasture or detain any
sheep, horse, goat or cow, or any other animals not expressly authorized within this chapter within the
corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-17: NONCOMMERCIAL KENNEL LICENSE:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, harbor, or possess upon the premises of
any one household more than four (4) dogs or cats, or any combination of such animals unless the
owner or person in charge shall have obtained a noncommercial kennel license.
B. Application For License: Application for a noncommercial kennel license shall be made to the clerk
and must be accompanied by written consent to such kennel by at least seventy five percent (75%)
of all persons in possession of premises within a radius of one hundred feet (100') of the premises
upon which such noncommercial kennel is to be maintained. The application shall be accompanied
by the required application fees which are identified in the current city of Orofino fee schedule.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 128/315
C. Application Contents: The application shall state the name and address of the owner, where the
noncommercial kennel is to be located and the number of dogs or cats.
D. Expiration; Fee: Noncommercial kennel licenses shall not be transferable, and shall expire
December 31 of the year in which issued. Whenever additions are made to the number of dogs for
which a noncommercial kennel license has been issued, the licensee shall within three (3) days
report to the clerk and pay the required license fee; provided, however, that whenever puppies or
kittens are born, such puppies or kittens shall not be counted in computing the license fee until
three (3) months old.
E. Noncommercial License: The issuance of a noncommercial kennel license shall not obviate the
necessity of obtaining an individual dog license, nor shall any of the provisions of this chapter be
deemed to vary or alter any of the zoning regulations of the city.
F. Renewal Of License: Noncommercial kennel licenses may be renewed upon expiration by filing an
application and paying required fee.
G. Violation; Revocation Of License: Any licensee who shall:
1. Violate any provision of this chapter or fail to comply with any of the conditions under which any
license shall be issued; or
2. Violate any statute or ordinance regarding the operation of the noncommercial kennel shall be
subject to have his license suspended or revoked.
3. The code enforcement officer shall have authority for license revocation. Such revocation shall
be made in writing to the licensee via certified mail to the address listed on the application. The
licensee shall have fourteen (14) days from the date of the certified mailing to come into full
compliance of this chapter.
H. Inspections: It shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer, chief of police, or designee, to
inspect, or cause to be inspected, noncommercial kennel facilities for which licenses under this
chapter have been issued as often as it may be necessary for the adequate control and
supervision of such facilities. The code enforcement officer, chief of police, or designee, shall have
the right to enter all facilities at any reasonable time for the purpose of making necessary
investigations and inspections, and shall be charged with the responsibility of enforcing and
administering the provisions of this section. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-18: RABIES, DISEASES AND QUARANTINE:
A. Vaccination:
1. The owner or person having charge of any dog or cat over sixteen (16) weeks of age within the
city shall be required to have them vaccinated for rabies and to keep such vaccinations current.
2. Waiver of rabies vaccination requirement shall only be obtained by providing a written statement
from a licensed veterinarian stating the medical reason for waiver.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 129/315
B. Ownership Of Animals With Rabies: It shall be unlawful for a person other than a veterinarian, or
the Humane Society, to own, keep or harbor any animal afflicted with rabies.
C. Disposition: The chief of police, his designee, the Humane Society director, or the owner shall
secure disposition of any animal afflicted with rabies.
D. Surrender Of Animal: It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal showing symptoms of rabies,
or which has bitten any person causing an abrasion of the skin, to surrender the animal for
confinement and isolation at the Humane Society or to a licensed veterinarian for a period not to
exceed fifteen (15) days. If such animal shall be determined free of rabies, it shall be returned to
the owner upon payment of the regular fee for keeping such animal impounded. If such fee is not
paid, the animal shall be subject to disposal as provided in this chapter. At the discretion of either
the chief of police, the Humane Society director or the health department, the quarantine of an
animal may be upon the premises of the animal owner, or the person in charge of such animal, if
the animal is securely confined, kept from contact with other animals and is submitted to a
veterinarian for examination at the owner's expense to determine whether the animal is rabid.
E. Contagious Diseased Animals At Large: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any
animal with a contagious or infectious disease to run at large upon the public streets, or to be
within and upon any public transportation, or any other public building or place within the city, or to
expose such animal in any public building or place, whereby the health, safety and well being of
the public, or any member or members thereof, may be affected; nor shall such animal be shipped
or removed from premises of the owner of such animal except under the supervision of the chief of
police or designee or the director of the Humane Society. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-19: NUISANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to exercise proper care and control of his animal to prevent it
from becoming a public nuisance. Every person shall be guilty of allowing an animal to become a
nuisance, which shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
A. Excessive, continuous or untimely barking, or noise;
B. Molesting passersby or chasing vehicles;
C. Habitually attacking other animals;
D. Trespassing upon public or private property in such a manner as to damage the property; or
E. Allowing the excessive accumulation of animal feces in such a manner as to affect the health and
quiet enjoyment of private property, or of the use or enjoyment of public property. (Ord. 746, 7-12-
2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 130/315
6-2-20: RECORDS:
The police department shall keep a record of all animals impounded, which record shall contain a
description of the animal, the place where, and the date when taken into custody or when delivered to
the Humane Society. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-21: REDEMPTION; IMPOUNDED ANIMAL:
A. Any animal impounded because it was found running at large, or without a license, may be
redeemed by the owner prior to the sale or destruction of such animal, by paying all charges
against the same, as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-22: FEES; IMPOUNDING:
The city of Orofino or the Humane Society shall be entitled to charge a fee for the keeping and selling
of any animal. The fees which may be charged by the Humane Society for impounding, keeping and
selling any animal, to be paid upon redemption or sale of such animal, shall be determined by the
Humane Society director. The fees that may be charged by the city of Orofino for impounding, keeping
and selling any animal, to be paid upon redemption or sale of such animal, shall be established by the
city council periodically, as may be required, by separate resolution and shall be identified in the city of
Orofino fee schedule. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-23: SALE; NOTICE:
A. At any time after any horse, mule, any kind of cow, hog, or any stock animal, shall have been
impounded, the city of Orofino or Humane Society, shall give notice of sale by posting a notice in
the newspaper, describing the animal impounded, and notifying the owner to pay the charges
thereon and remove same prior to the time fixed for the sale thereof; and that, otherwise, the
animal will be sold at a public sale at a time and place named in said notice, which time shall be
not less than five (5) days from the date of the posting of such notices.
B. The police department or the director of the Humane Society shall have the authority to adopt out
animals unclaimed by owner after five (5) days of impoundment.
C. If the animal is claimed following the notice of sale, the owner shall pay the cost of the notice of
sale in full prior to the release of the animal. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-24: IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Any law enforcement officer, the Humane Society or any other person may seize and impound all
dogs at large. All animals seized must be immediately delivered to the Humane Society or the city
pound for impoundment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 131/315
B. The owner of any animal taken up and impounded may recover possession of such animal upon
payment to the impounding agency of such animal for the required storage and license fee. If the
owner or representative of the owner of any animal taken up and impounded shall fail to pay the
license fees and costs and fees for the impoundment within twenty four (24) hours after actual
notice to the owner or representative of the owner, or within five (5) days after reasonable and
diligent effort to notify the owner or representative of the owner, or within five (5) days after notice
has first been posted pursuant to section 6-2-23 of this chapter, the police department or Humane
Society may dispose of an animal either through adoption, provided the new owner pay the license
fee and the costs and fees as herein provided, or through euthanasia. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-25: DISEASED ANIMALS; DESTRUCTION:
Any animal impounded hereunder and suffering from serious injury or disease, may be euthanized at
the discretion of the police department or the Humane Society. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-26: FEES RECEIVED BY HUMANE SOCIETY:
The Humane Society shall be entitled to and shall receive the following fees and compensation for the
services herein provided for animals impounded by the Humane Society:
A. All monies received for keeping and adopting any animal including dogs.
B. All monies received by way of reimbursement for actual veterinary and hospital expenses. (Ord.
746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-27: FEES RECEIVED BY CITY:
The city of Orofino may collect the license and storage fees prescribed by this chapter for animals
within the city limits, which are impounded by the city of Orofino or stored in the city pound. (Ord. 746,
7-12-2011)
6-2-28: EXPENSES; PAYMENT:
The Humane Society shall employ, and shall pay at its own expense, suitable and necessary persons
to perform the duties herein prescribed. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-29: LIABILITY OF CITY:
The city shall not in any manner be liable by reason of any act done by the Humane Society, or of its
officers or employees, whether in the performance of the duties prescribed by this chapter, or
otherwise. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 132/315
6-2-30: REVOCATION OF RIGHTS BY CITY:
All privileges conferred upon the Humane Society, under the provisions of this chapter are subject to
cancellation and revocation by the Orofino city council at any time upon its own motion and without
cause shown, which revocation and cancellation shall be declared by the passage of an ordinance
repealing this chapter or parts hereof, and all rights and privileges conferred hereunder shall cease
and terminate sixty (60) days after the passage of such repealing or modified ordinance. (Ord. 746, 7-
12-2011)
6-2-31: ANIMAL TRAPS:
The police department or the Humane Society is hereby authorized to place humane animal traps on
public property or private property upon request and permission of the owner. Such traps shall be
checked daily by the agency responsible for the traps. No person shall disturb or injure such trap or
animal confined therein. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-32: PENALTIES FOR VICIOUS ANIMAL VIOLATION:
A. A violation of section 6-2-6 or 6-2-7 of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a two hundred
fifty dollar ($250.00) fine or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six (6) months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
B. Any vicious animal:
1. Which does not have a valid license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or
2. Which is not maintained on property with an enclosure; or
3. Which shall be outside of either the dwelling of the owner, or an enclosure except as provided in
section 6-2-7 of this chapter; or
4. Which is not tattooed, shall be confiscated by the police department and destroyed in an
expeditious and humane manner after expiration of a five (5) day waiting period exclusive of
Sundays and holidays.
C. If any vicious animal shall, when unprovoked, kill, wound, or worry or assist in killing or wounding
any animal or human being described in section 6-2-9 of this chapter, the owner of said animal
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by a three hundred dollar ($300.00) fine or
imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, and the police department is empowered to confiscate and, after the expiration of a
five (5) day waiting period exclusive of Sundays and holidays, destroy said vicious animal.
D. No fine and/or tattooing requirement shall be suspended by any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
6-2-33: OTHER VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 133/315
A. Violation of section 6-2-3 or 6-2-4 of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a three hundred
dollar ($300.00) fine or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. Regardless of the form of judgment, the court shall impose a
minimum mandatory ten (10) days' jail.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter for which a fixed penalty had not been
designated is guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred
dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 746, 7-12-2011)
Chapter 3
ANIMALS AND FOWL AT LARGE
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS OF TERMS:
As used in this chapter:
ANIMAL: Any and all types of animals, both domesticated and wild, male and female, singular and
plural, with the exception of domesticated dogs and domesticated cats.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner or custodian of the animal or fowl and not under the
immediate control of the owner or custodian.
FOWL: Any and all fowl, domesticated and wild, male and female, singular and plural. (Ord. 747, 7-12-
2011)
6-3-2: ANIMALS AND FOWL NOT TO BE PERMITTED AT LARGE:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, company, corporation or association owning or
having in his or their custody animals or fowl to permit the same to go at large to the injury or
annoyance of others, nor shall such animals or fowl be permitted at large upon the streets or other
public ways of the city.
B. In order to eliminate burdening the court system with violations of fowl and other animals running at
large ordinances, and as a convenience to the public, a city citation may be issued in lieu of a state
uniform citation for a violation of this section. The named defendant on the city citation shall pay
the fixed penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of
the city citation. In addition to the fixed penalty, any of the required fees listed in section 6-3-7 of
this chapter shall be paid in full prior to the animal or fowl being released to the owner. In the event
payment is not made in accordance with the administrative procedure set out herein, a state of
Idaho uniform citation alleging a misdemeanor ordinance violation shall be filed in the magistrate
court of the second judicial district.
6-3-3: NUISANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 134/315
For any person, company, corporation or association to permit animals or fowl to go at large upon the
public streets or other public ways of the city or to go at large to the injury or annoyance of others is
hereby declared to be a "nuisance", which by this chapter is defined to be injurious and dangerous to
public health and safety, an obstruction to the free use of property and an interference with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property. (Ord. 747, 7-12-2011)
6-3-4: PROPERTY OWNER MAY IMPOUND:
Any person finding any animal or fowl upon his property to his injury or annoyance may take up same
and, as soon as possible, notify the Orofino police department or Humane Society of his custody,
giving a description of the animal or fowl and the name of the owner, if known. (Ord. 747, 7-12-2011)
6-3-5: POUND TO TAKE POSSESSION:
The police department, as soon as possible after receiving notice from the property owner taking up
and impounding an animal or fowl, will dispatch a police officer, the Humane Society or other suitable
employee to the premises of the said property owner and take possession of the animal or fowl. (Ord.
747, 7-12-2011)
6-3-6: OFFICER MAY IMPOUND:
Any police officer, Humane Society or city employee designated by the police department for such
purpose is authorized to capture and impound any animal or fowl found at large, impounding to be in
accordance with the procedure provided and authorized by chapter 2 of this title. (Ord. 747, 7-12-
2011)
6-3-7: NOTIFICATION TO OWNER:
The Orofino police department or Humane Society shall notify the owner or custodian of the animal or
fowl that such animal or fowl has been impounded, and the owner or custodian may redeem the
animal or fowl so impounded from the city by paying all related fees and penalties as determined by
resolution of the city council. If the police department or Humane Society, after reasonable diligence,
is unable to find who owns or has custody of the animal or fowl, or if the owner or custodian of an
animal or fowl after notification has not redeemed said animal or fowl within twenty four (24) hours
after such notification, the police department or Humane Society may dispose of the animal or fowl or
sell said animal or fowl in accordance with the manner and procedure provided by the applicable
provisions of chapter 2 of this title. (Ord. 747, 7-12-2011)
6-3-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter for which a fixed penalty has not been
designated is guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars
($50.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 747, 7-12-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 135/315
Chapter 4
LOST OR ABANDONED PROPERTY
6-4-1: CUSTODY OF LOST OR ABANDONED PROPERTY:
All lost or abandoned property found upon property within the city of Orofino shall be deposited with,
and transferred to the custodial possession of the police department. All property, lost or abandoned,
turned in to the police department shall become the property of the city until the true owner is
ascertained and claims the property or the procedure for disposal of such property set forth in this
chapter has been followed. The city of Orofino shall not be responsible nor liable for any damage,
injury or loss to such abandoned property incurred prior to or subsequent to possession of such
property by the city. (Ord. 748, 7-26-2011)
6-4-2: DISPOSITION OF LOST OR ABANDONED PROPERTY:
All lost or abandoned property in the possession of the Orofino police department shall be disposed of
in accordance with the provisions of section 55-403 of the Idaho Code. (Ord. 748, 7-26-2011)
Chapter 5
FIREARMS; WEAPONS
6-5-1: DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful to discharge:
A. Any firearm except at a regularly established shooting gallery licensed and authorized to do so by
this code; provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from
discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty nor to any citizen from discharging a firearm or
other dangerous or deadly weapon when lawfully defending person or property.
B. Any air gun, arrow or any other object or dangerous or deadly weapon projecting lead, steel or any
missile within the city limits of Orofino. (Ord. 749, 7-26-2011)
6-5-2: CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry concealed upon or about his person any firearm, gun, knife,
dirk, dagger, or other deadly or dangerous weapon.
A. Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
1. Police or peace officers or any person exempted under Idaho Code section 18-3302(12); or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 136/315
2. Any individual who possesses a valid permit to carry a concealed weapon. (Ord. 749, 7-26-
2011)
6-5-3: RESTRICTED USE:
It shall be lawful for any person upon premises owned and/or occupied by him to use, possess and
discharge firearms, air or spring guns, and bows or crossbows upon and within a specially designed
and constructed bunker, firing range or other similar structure specifically designed and constructed
for safe discharge of such firearms and air guns. The council shall reserve the right to approve or
disapprove or revoke and terminate the use and maintenance of such bunker, range or similar
structure which tends to create a hazard or would be otherwise detrimental to the public safety or
convenience. (Ord. 749, 7-26-2011)
6-5-4: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or
incarcerated for a period not exceeding six (6) months or be both so fined and imprisoned. (Ord. 749,
7-26-2011)
Chapter 6
MINORS
6-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen circumstance or combination of circumstances that requires immediate
action to safeguard life, limb, or property. Emergencies shall include, but shall not be limited to, fires,
natural disasters, automobile crashes, or other similar circumstances.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is
invited, including, but not limited to, places for amusement or entertainment. The operator of an
establishment shall include the person(s) authorized with management responsibilities who is on the
premises of the establishment at the time in which a minor is located on the premises, the person with
overall authority for the establishment, and the person(s) or entity who owns the establishment.
GUARDIAN: A person who has been judicially appointed as the legal guardian, or a person over the
age of eighteen (18) who has been authorized by the legal guardian or parent to assume care, control
and responsibility for the minor for a definitive period of time.
MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18).
PARENT: A minor's biological, adoptive or step parent.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access,
including, but not limited to, streets, highways, thoroughfares, sidewalks, alleys, parking lots, parks,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 137/315
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment complexes, office buildings, transportation
facilities, entertainment facilities, and shops.
REMAIN: To stay or linger at or upon a place; or to fail to depart when requested to do so by a police
officer or a person with authority to act in the interest of the establishment or public place at which the
minor is located. (Ord. 750, 7-26-2011)
6-6-2: REGULATIONS:
A. Regulation Of Minors: It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain in or upon any public place, to
remain in any motor vehicle operating or parked in or upon a public place or establishment, or to
remain in or upon the premises of any establishment, between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., unless their presence is explained by one of the enumerated
exceptions.
B. Exceptions To The Regulation Of Minors:
1. The minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian.
2. An emergency situation exists.
3. The minor is engaged in an employment activity, or is going to or returning home from such
activity without detour or stop, except for purposes of obtaining fuel for transportation.
4. The minor is on a sidewalk directly abutting the place in which they reside; or within three
hundred feet (300') of their residence and the neighboring residents have not issued a complaint
about the minor's presence.
5. The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious, or civic organization, by a
public organization or entity, or by another similar organization or entity, which activity is
supervised by adults; or is going to or returning from such activity without detour or stop, except
for purposes of obtaining fuel for transportation.
6. The minor is on an errand and has in their possession written parental authorization for the
errand to include the destination(s) of the errand, time allotted for the errand, and a contact
telephone number to verify parental authorization.
7. The minor is involved in interstate travel through, or beginning, or terminating in the city of
Orofino.
8. The minor is exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States constitution, as
the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly.
C. Parental And/Or Adult Responsibility:
1. It is the responsibility of the parent or legal guardian to ensure that a minor complies with this
chapter. It shall be unlawful for a parent or legal guardian to knowingly permit, allow, or
encourage a violation of this chapter.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person by any act or neglect to encourage, aid, or cause any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years to come within the purview of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 138/315
D. Operator Of Establishment: It shall be unlawful for any operator of an "establishment", as defined
within this chapter, to knowingly permit, allow or encourage a minor to remain at or upon the
premises of the establishment in violation of this chapter. It shall be a defense to this violation that
the operator or an employee of the establishment promptly notifies police that a minor was present
at the establishment and refused to leave when requested.
E. Operator Or Owner Of A Motor Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a motor
vehicle to knowingly permit, allow or encourage a violation of this chapter.
F. Required Information: Every person suspected of a curfew violation shall provide their name and
age to a police officer upon request. Any person who refuses to provide such information, or who
knowingly gives false information regarding their name or age, or knowingly gives another person's
name or age to any police officer conducting an investigation under this chapter shall be in
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 750, 7-26-2011)
6-6-3: ENFORCEMENT:
Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a police officer shall investigate whether the
minor's presence in a public place, motor vehicle, or establishment falls within one of the enumerated
exceptions to minor regulations. If the officer cannot reasonably determine the existence of one of the
enumerated exceptions, and probable cause otherwise exists, the officer may take appropriate
enforcement action. (Ord. 750, 7-26-2011)
6-6-4: RUNAWAY, BEYOND CONTROL OF PARENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years living or found in the city of
Orofino to be or to remain a person who has run away from his parents, guardian, or other legal
custodian, or who commits or has committed any act or acts placing him beyond the control of his
parents, guardian, or other legal custodian, or to become or attempt to become intoxicated by inhaling
the fumes of gasoline, toluene, or any other solvent or product containing any such solvent. (Ord. 750,
7-26-2011)
6-6-5: PENALTIES:
Any person found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine no greater than three hundred
dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for no more than six (6) months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 750, 7-26-2011)
Chapter 7
NUISANCES
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 139/315
For the purpose of this chapter the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them:
ABANDONED: To leave a motor vehicle on private property without the permission of the person
having rights to the possession of the property, or on a public street or other property open to the
public for the purposes of vehicular traffic or parking, or upon or within the right of way of any road or
highway, for forty eight (48) hours or longer.
AUTOMOTIVE HOBBY PROJECT: A noncommercial accessory use involving the restoration,
maintenance, and/or preservation of motor vehicles taking place exclusively on residential private
property within the city limits of the city of Orofino.
AUTOMOTIVE HOBBY SITE: Any privately owned real property upon which the resident is restoring,
maintaining, and/or preserving one or more motor vehicles.
CONTAINER: A garbage can, dumpster, or any other kind of storage device customarily sold, rented,
constructed, or utilized for use as for temporary storage of waste matter, and lawfully located on the
property in question.
FRONT YARD: All property, including driveways and entranceways extending between side lot lines
across the frontage of a lot adjoining a public street other than an alley, and from any side of the
principal building.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: a) Any "hazardous waste" as defined by the resource conservation and
recovery act of 1976 (42 USC section 6901 et seq.), as amended from time to time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder; b) any "hazardous substance" as defined by the comprehensive
environmental response, compensation and liability act of 1980 (42 USC section 9601 et seq.), as
amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder; c) radon and material quantities
of petroleum products; d) any substance the presence of which on the property is regulated by any
federal, state or local law relating to the protection of the environment or public health; and e) any
other substance which by law requires special handling in its collection, storage, treatment or disposal.
HIGHWAY: A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking. Highway includes street or alley. Highway does not include
those portions of said way or place which are not utilized for vehicular travel, such as those portions of
aprons, setbacks, easements, rights of way, or property owned by the public which extend beyond the
surface area normally utilized for vehicular travel or parking. Said areas are to be considered public
property for purposes of this chapter.
INOPERATIVE: A vehicle that is incapable of being propelled under its own power or operation.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: All property owned by the public. Public property does not include a highway.
REAR YARD: A yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of a lot opposite the side(s) of a
building which fronts upon a public street and from the rear lot line to the principal building.
VEHICLE: A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn, whether or
not utilized solely upon a highway, except a device moved solely by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks, whether or not in a condition capable of operation or use.
WASTE MATTER: Any kind of liquid or solid waste, hazardous waste, manufactured goods, appliance,
fixture, furniture, machinery, vehicle, personal property or any other thing or part thereof, whether of
value or valueless, that is demolished, discarded, dismantled, partially dismantled, dilapidated, or so
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 140/315
worn, deteriorated, or in such a condition as to be generally unusable and or inoperable in its existing
state. This shall include, by way of illustration only and without limitation: trash or refuse of any kind,
litter, commercial waste, industrial or construction or demolition debris of any kind, such as rubble,
broken asphalt and concrete, crates, cartons, metal, glass, appliances or appliance shells, boat bodies
and parts, used tires, vehicle bodies and parts, commercial or industrial equipment bodies and parts,
snowmobile bodies and parts, trailers and parts, recreational vehicle bodies and parts, mobile home
and manufactured home bodies and parts, and inoperable or damaged vehicles of any kind, and any
castoff tangible personal property or fixtures. (Ord. 704, 9-24-2001)
6-7-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Pursuant to the authority granted by Idaho Code section 50-334 and correlated other provisions, the
city council makes the following findings and declarations:
A. Findings: The accumulation and storage of waste matter on private or public property is found to
create a condition tending to reduce the value of surrounding private property, to promote blight
and deterioration, and to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive
nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents
and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare of entire neighborhoods
and/or a significant number of persons.
B. Prohibited Acts: The presence of the following on private or public property, unless expressly
permitted herein, is declared to constitute a public nuisance and are prohibited, and may be abated
as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter:
1. An unlicensed, abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on
private or public property except as expressly hereinafter permitted. However abandoned
vehicles shall be dealt with as prescribed by Idaho Code section 49-1801 et seq.
2. An uncovered container holding waste matter; or such a container with a cover which is not
secure against dogs, unless said container of a type that is not normally covered, such as
compost bins, or sludge drying bins;
3. Waste matter not in a container;
4. Waste matter stored in such fashion that it or any of it may enter the waters of a stream or river,
directly or indirectly, or come to be on contact with such waters;
5. Waste matter or dry or dead vegetative matter so located as to constitute a fire hazard to
buildings or lands, and vegetative matter which will in the ordinary course become such a
hazard, but not hay or other agricultural product stored in a fashion customary on farms in the
community and in accord with the applicable fire codes adopted by the city of Orofino.
6. Waste matter or one or more containers which by reason of its or their location and character is
unsightly and interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of adjacent or nearby property. (Ord.
704, 9-24-2001)
6-7-3: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 141/315
In addition to the above, the following conduct is hereby prohibited:
A. To wilfully cause or permit any vehicle to be used for the transportation of waste to be so loaded or
in such condition or so uncovered that waste matter escapes from the vehicle while being driven;
B. To wilfully discharge waste matter onto the surface of the earth other than into a container, or
beneath the surface of the earth, or into any stream, river, or other water body; or
C. To wilfully cause or allow a nuisance or permit a nuisance to continue, on property in the
possession of the offender, or on any abutting street, sidewalk or right of way. Any entity or person
who, upon receiving notice of the existence of a nuisance as described in the abatement
procedure set forth herein, who fails to remedy the same within the time established in said
abatement procedure, shall be deemed to have wilfully allowed or permitted a nuisance to
continue.
D. To wilfully violate any other provision or requirement of this chapter, or to fail to comply with any
order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 704, 9-24-2001)
6-7-4: SPECIFIC ACTS REGULATED:
6-7-4-1: AUTOMOTIVE HOBBY PROJECTS:
A. Intent Of Section: It is the intent of this section to provide standards for the restoration,
maintenance, and/or preservation of personal motor vehicles conducted as a hobby, and
conducted at a person's residence or upon private property.
B. Required Standards:
1. Automotive hobby projects may only be conducted on residential property, and only as a
noncommercial project. No commercial, retail or wholesale sales of automobiles, or automotive
parts or supplies shall be conducted upon a site claiming lawful use as an automotive hobby
project. No restoration, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles shall be conducted upon any
residential site for which monetary compensation is received.
2. All automotive hobby sites shall be maintained in a safe and orderly manner so as not to create
a public nuisance, an unsightly condition, an undesirable condition, a health or fire hazard.
3. No automotive hobby sites may contain more than four (4) inoperable, dismantled, or
unregistered vehicles which constitute an automotive hobby project. No automotive hobby
projects may be stored in the front yard of any lot. All automotive hobby sites must be located in
the rear yard of any lot. If any automotive hobby site contains more than two (2) automotive
hobby projects, said projects must be screened from view so that it or they are not visible at a
distance of six feet (6') observed from the property lines of adjacent properties, by a sightobscuring
fence of not less than, nor more than six feet (6') in height, or a hedge of not less than
six feet (6') in height.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 142/315
4. The restrictions set forth in this chapter do not apply to those automobiles stored inside of a fully
enclosed building. Further, the restrictions set forth in this chapter do not apply to duly registered
and licensed vehicles which are inoperable but upon which repair is being conducted, but only
so long as said repair is conducted and completed within sixty (60) days of the vehicle becoming
inoperable. Automobiles being repaired may only be stored or parked in improved parking areas
or driveways, and shall not be stored or parked in any front yard of a residential site.
5. Any motor vehicle restoration, preservation, maintenance, or repair hobby operation involving
welding, painting or use of flammable liquids shall be conduced in a safe, prudent and lawful
manner. (Ord. 704, 9-24-2001)
6-7-5: COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISES:
No person or entity operating any commercial enterprise within the city of Orofino shall cause, allow,
or permit waste matter to be present upon the property being utilized unless within a fully enclosed
structure. (Ord. 704, 9-24-2001)
6-7-6: ENFORCEMENT, RIGHT OF ENTRY:
It shall be the right of the chief of police or the fire chief to inspect properties, investigate complaints,
and determine whether or not a nuisance exists in accordance with the terms of this chapter. The chief
of police, the fire chief, or his or her designated agent, shall be authorized to enter upon private
property or public property to investigate, remove, or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof
declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 704, 9-24-2001)
6-7-7: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
The below described procedure shall apply for the abatement of public nuisances other than
dangerous buildings1. Regardless of the exercise of any enforcement remedy contained in this
chapter, the city of Orofino shall have the right of abatement with respect to any public nuisance. The
exercise of the right of abatement or any procedures described below shall not be a prerequisite to
exercise of any other remedies or enforcement of the criminal provisions contained in this chapter.
A. Abandoned Vehicles: The procedures and requirements of Idaho Code section 49-1801 et seq., or
its successor provisions, shall apply to all abandoned vehicles or vehicles which constitute waste
matter, or vehicles being kept, maintained, or stored in violation of the provisions of this chapter,
whether located upon highways, public property, or private property.
B. Other Nuisances: The following procedures in section 6-7-8 of this chapter shall apply to all other
nuisances. (Ord. 704, 9-24-2001)
6-7-8: DECLARATION OF A PUBLIC NUISANCE; NOTICE:
A nuisance may be declared by the chief of police, or the fire chief, who upon identification of a
nuisance shall cause a written declaration to be issued, by mailing the same to the last registered
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 143/315
owner(s) of the real property upon which he determines a nuisance is present, as reflected on the tax
assessment roles of Clearwater County, Idaho, and by posting the same in a conspicuous place on
the real property on which the nuisance is located. Each notice that is mailed shall be provided by
certified mail, return receipt requested. Notice shall be deemed to have been provided upon mailing.
Every person entitled to notice of the declaration of nuisance shall have thirty (30) days to remove or
remedy the condition creating the nuisance, or to request a public hearing as described below.
A. Every notice of declaration of nuisance shall contain the following:
1. A descriptive statement of the nuisance which is declared to exist;
2. Its location;
3. The name of the person or persons thought to be responsible;
4. A statement of a date, not less than thirty (30) days after the mailing of such notice, which shall
be the last date on which the addressee or other claimant of the affected property or offending
objects can demand a hearing, or cause removal or remedy of the nuisance described;
5. A statement that such hearing would be for the purpose of determining anew whether the
nuisance exists;
6. Directions for the mailing of such a demand for hearing to the city clerk; and
7. A statement that if no hearing is demanded, or if the result of the hearing is to the effect that a
nuisance exists, the owner or other addressee will have thirty (30) days to commence and
thereafter diligently to pursue and complete the abatement and assess back the costs thereof
against the property in like fashion as for tax assessments.
B. Failure to request a public hearing within the time required shall be deemed conclusive as to the
existence of the nuisance as described in the declaration posted and mailed.
C. Upon receipt of a request for a public hearing, the mayor shall establish a date for a public hearing,
to be held no less than ten (10) days, nor more than thirty (30) days from receipt of said report.
The public hearing shall be to determine if a nuisance exists, and assessment of administrative
costs, and directions for removal or remedy.
1. Notice of said hearing shall be provided by certified mail to any person or entity requesting a
public hearing, to the last registered owner of the real property upon which the chief of police or
the fire chief has determined a nuisance is present. Notice shall be deemed completed upon
mailing.
2. The city council shall hear all facts and testimony deemed pertinent. The facts and testimony
may include testimony on the condition of the property, vehicles, waste matter, or any other
evidence regarding the existence of a nuisance. The city council shall not be limited by the
technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the alleged nuisance is located may
appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at the
hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the nuisance with his or her reasons for
such denial.
3. The city council, upon a finding that a public nuisance exists, may impose such conditions and
take such action as deemed appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 144/315
chapter, including delaying the time for removal or remedy of the nuisance or part thereof, if, in
its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council
must make written findings of fact and conclusions of law, and may order the nuisance remedied
or removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and
determine the administrative costs to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on
which the nuisance is located. The order requiring removal shall include:
a. A description of the nuisance or part thereof and the correct identification number and license
number of any vehicle constituting a part or all of the nuisance, if available, at the site;
b. A statement that the nuisance must be removed or remedied within thirty (30) days of
adoption of the order, unless some other time period is specified by the city council.
4. If an interested party makes a written presentation to the city council but does not appear, he
shall be notified in writing of the decision.
D. Upon the expiration of thirty (30) days after mailing of a declaration of nuisance if no hearing is
requested, or the later of thirty (30) days after adoption of the order declaring a condition to be a
public nuisance, or thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision to an
interested person who makes a written presentation if such notice is required by this section, or the
date specified in the order if a date is specified, if the nuisance remains in whole or in part, the
chief of police or fire chief shall take steps to cause the abatement of the nuisance by removal of
the offending materials, whether by fire suppression exercise, by use of city employees, or by
letting an appropriate contract in accord with the contracting procedures of the city of Orofino. The
waste matter which constitutes the public nuisance may be disposed of by removal to a garbage
transfer station, dump, scrap yard, or automobile dismantler's yard, or to any other similar facility.
(Ord. 704, 9-24-2001)
6-7-9: REMOVAL COST ASSESSMENT:
The cost of abatement, together with the administrative costs, shall be calculated, and if not paid
within thirty (30) days of the date of abatement, shall become a lien upon the property pursuant to
Idaho Code sections 50-334 and 50-1008, and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection.
The assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. The city shall also be entitled to
recover said costs in a civil action brought by the city, and assess the same as additional penalties in
a misdemeanor prosecution. (Ord. 704, 9-24-2001)
6-7-10: ALTERNATIVE PROVISIONS:
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of public nuisances, abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory
codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other
legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 704, 9-24-2001)
6-7-11: BOUNDARIES:
The abatement of nuisances under the provisions of this chapter shall apply only to the corporate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 145/315
boundaries of the city of Orofino. The city shall not extend their authority under Idaho Code 50-334
beyond the boundaries of the city limits. (Ord. 704, 9-24-2001)
6-7-12: PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter is a general misdemeanor, and is also subject to abatement action.
Enforcement may be by the chief of police, the fire chief, or his or her designated agents. (Ord. 704, 9-
24-2001)
Chapter 8
LITTERING PUBLIC OR PRIVATE FACILITIES
6-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivatives shall have the
meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
LITTER: Garbage, refuse and rubbish as herein defined and junk and all other waste or discarded
materials and substances including, but not excluding by enumeration, paper, bottles, glass, nails,
tacks, hoops, cans, wire (barbed or otherwise), building materials (lumber, boards, plasterboard,
mortar, insulation, sheet metal, plumbing materials and fixtures, electrical materials and fixtures, water
and gas materials and fixtures, sand and gravel, and roofing and siding materials), automobile bodies
including the parts and components thereof, and tires.
PUBLIC PARKING FACILITY: Any place or grounds where the parking of motor vehicles is permitted
by the payment of a fee or rental for such purpose, or any other area used or maintained for the
parking of motor vehicles by the public. (Ord. 751, 8-9-2011)
6-8-2: INSTALL NO LITTER SIGN:
Persons owning, operating, or conducting a public parking facility shall place in conspicuous places at
said facility, signs on which are written in legible English, in letters at least two inches (2") in height on
contrasting background words or phrases requesting patrons to refrain from throwing of any waste
material upon the parking area, sidewalk, street, roadway, gutter or adjoining property. (Ord. 751, 8-9-
2011)
6-8-3: LITTERING PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PARKING FACILITIES PROHIBITED:
No person shall place, throw, or deposit any waste upon the parking area of a public or private parking
facility or on any street or alley, except in adequate receptacles provided for that purpose. (Ord. 751,
8-9-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 146/315
6-8-4: OBLIGATION OF OPERATOR:
The owner or his agent or operator shall keep the premises whereon the public parking facility is
located, together with the parking area and that portion of any street or alley adjoining such facility free
from waste material. The owner or his agent or operator shall provide the public parking facility with a
sufficient number of adequate refuse containers. (Ord. 751, 8-9-2011)
6-8-5: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars
($300.00) and imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 751, 8-9-2011)
Chapter 9
LITTERING
6-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivatives shall have the
meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
DEBRIS: The remains, fragments, pieces or parts of something broken down, damaged or destroyed.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish" as herein defined and junk and all other waste or
discarded materials and substances including, but not excluding by enumeration, paper, bottles, glass,
nails, tacks, hoops, cans, wire (barbed or otherwise), building materials (lumber, boards, bricks,
blocks, plasterboard, mortar, insulation, sheet metal, plumbing materials and fixtures, electrical
materials and fixtures, water and gas materials and fixtures, sand and gravel, and roofing and siding
materials), automobile bodies including the parts and components thereof, and tires.
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other public area in the city owned or
used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES: Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used wholly or in
part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, or mailbox belonging or
pertinent to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 147/315
all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, easements and buildings.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body waste), including garbage,
rubbish, trash, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, junk, and solid market
and industrial waste.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste,
such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery, and other similar materials.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a street, except devices moved solely by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 752, 8-9-2011)
6-9-2: LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his agent, employee or servant, to cast, throw,
sweep, sift, deposit, place, leave or dump in any manner any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and
refuse, or cause, permit, or allow such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse to be carried, blown,
scattered or deposited by the elements, in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, river,
canal, public water, drain, sewer or receiving basin within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 752, 8-
9-2011)
6-9-3: PLACEMENT IN RECEPTACLE TO PREVENT SCATTERING:
Persons placing debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being blown, carried, scattered or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
(Ord. 752, 8-9-2011)
6-9-4: SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by agent, employee or servant, to sweep into or
deposit or place in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of debris,
garbage, litter, or refuse from any building or lot or any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons
owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free from such debris,
garbage, litter or rubbish. (Ord. 752, 8-9-2011)
6-9-5: MERCHANT'S DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS CLEAN:
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into, or deposit or place in, any
gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of such debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish and refuse. Sidewalks shall remain free of paint, chalk, graffiti or other artwork. (Ord. 752, 8-9-
2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 148/315
6-9-6: LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, to throw, cast, deposit or
place or permit or cause such to be cast, thrown, deposited or placed, any debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish or refuse upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. Each
owner of a vehicle shall be liable and responsible for the actions and conduct of driver or passengers
in a vehicle from which vehicle debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse is thrown, cast, deposited, or
placed. The operation of a vehicle by any person other than the owner and the actions and conduct of
such driver or operator of, and the passengers in, such vehicle shall be imputed to the owner for all
purposes of this section. (Ord. 752, 8-9-2011)
6-9-7: TRUCKLOADS CAUSING LITTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his or its agent, employee or servant, to operate,
drive, move or use any truck or other vehicle within the city to haul or transport any kind of debris,
litter, garbage, rubbish or refuse unless such truck or vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent
any of the load or contents thereof or any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse thereon from spilling
or dropping, or from being carried, scattered or blown by the elements, or in any other way deposited,
placed or dumped, upon any street, alley or other public place. (Ord. 752, 8-9-2011)
6-9-8: LITTER IN PARKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, leave, deposit, dump or place debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish or trash in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that such
debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse will be prevented from being scattered, carried, blown or
deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place.
Where public receptacles are not provided, all such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse shall be
carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly dispose of such in
the manner provided elsewhere by this code. (Ord. 752, 8-9-2011)
6-9-9: LITTER IN LAKES AND FOUNTAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or place litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
canal, river or any other body of water in any park or elsewhere within the city. (Ord. 752, 8-9-2011)
6-9-10: DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT:
It shall be unlawful for any person in an aircraft to throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter,
handbill or any other object or substance. (Ord. 752, 8-9-2011)
6-9-11: LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, place, leave or dump debris, garbage, litter,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 149/315
rubbish or refuse on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or
not, or cause, permit or allow such debris, garbage, litter or refuse to be carried, blown, scattered or
deposited by the elements upon any private property, except that the owner or person in control of
private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for the collection and storage in such a
manner that such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse will be prevented from being carried, blown,
scattered or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any
private property. (Ord. 752, 8-9-2011)
6-9-12: OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER:
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of
debris, garbage, litter, and refuse; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of
debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse as provided elsewhere in this code. (Ord. 752, 8-9-2011)
6-9-13: LITTER ON VACANT LOTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, place or leave any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish
or refuse on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not.
(Ord. 752, 8-9-2011)
6-9-14: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars
($300.00) and imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 752, 8-9-2011)
Chapter 10
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY
6-10-1: OFFENSES TO PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Maliciously injure or destroy any real or personal property not his own in cases other than as
specified in this chapter.
B. Wilfully or carelessly set on fire, or cause to be set on fire, public or private property.
C. Build a campfire in any public park and leave the same without totally extinguishing such fire.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 150/315
D. Injure, damage, cut, destroy, or sever from the freehold any produce, crops, vegetables and fruit, or
trees, shrubbery, plants and flowers, or any kind of wood or timber belonging to another standing
or cultivated and growing upon the lands of another.
E. Dig, take or carry away from any lot, parcel or tract of land, without the license or consent of the
owner or legal occupant thereof, any earth, soil or stone.
F. Dig, take or carry away from any land dedicated or laid down on a map or plat or a recorded
subdivision, or otherwise recognized or established, as a street, alley, avenue or park, without the
license or consent of the proper authorities, any earth, soil or stone.
G. Tear down or otherwise destroy any fence on the enclosed land of another, or open any gate, bar
or fence of another and leave it open without the consent of the owner or legal occupant thereof.
H. Cover up or encumber in any manner the land of another without written permission from the owner
or legal occupant thereof. Use, or procure, encourage or assist to use, any force or violence in
entering upon or detaining any lands or possessions of another.
I. Use, or procure, encourage or assist to use, any force or violence in entering upon or detaining any
lands or possessions of another.
J. Refuse to depart from any real property after having been first notified in writing, or verbally, by the
owner or authorized agent of the owner to immediately depart from such property.
K. Break, dig or injure any pipe, main, line or cable for conducting gas, water or sewer for the
transmission of communications and electricity, or any appurtenances connected therewith.
L. Desecrate or molest in any way any portion of any grave, cemetery, headstone, grave marker,
mausoleum, crypt or other place of burial, whether whole bodies or ashes, or other evidence of
remains of a deceased human body.
M. Place, paint or cause to be placed or painted, election posters or literature or other promotional or
sales materials upon public or private property, real or personal unless such person has first
obtained permission and consent in writing from the owner or owners of such property. (Ord. 753,
8-9-2011)
6-10-2: OFFENSES AGAINST STREETS; MONUMENTS, ORNAMENTS AND
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS; IRRIGATION WORKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Move or remove any monument erected for the purpose of designating any point in the boundary of
any lot, tract or parcel of land, or move, remove, deface, mar or destroy any other type of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 151/315
monument, surveyor's stake or stone erected or placed for the purpose of designating any point in
the boundary of any lot, tract or parcel of land.
B. Tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove any sign, milepost or guidepost erected upon, within
or adjacent to any street, alley or public way, or any notice, marker, fire alarm box, fireplug or any
work of art, landmark or historic structure, or any other personal property, erected, placed or
maintained and operated by lawful authority.
C. Without written consent, move, cut, break, mutilate or otherwise injure, damage or interfere with
any street, sidewalk, curb, culvert, drain, waterway, embankment, ditch, retaining wall, bridge,
grade separation structure, or roadside improvement appurtenant to or on the right of way of any
street, alley or public way, or cut, mar, disfigure, break, mutilate or remove, or otherwise injure or
damage any tree, plant, shrub, ornamental plant or other useful or ornamental improvements upon
the right of way of any street, alley or public way where the same have been landscaped or
beautified by the city or with the approval and consent of lawful authority. For the purposes of this
subsection, the terms "street", "alley" and "public way" shall be construed to include the entire right
of way of such street, alley or public way.
D. Cut down, remove, destroy, mar, disfigure or uproot any flowering or ornamental tree, shrub,
perennial or annual plant in any park.
E. Obstruct, encroach, injure or damage any public road, street, sidewalk, alley or public way, or ride
or drive horses, cattle or motor vehicles upon a sidewalk.
F. Run, or cause to run, suffer, permit or allow any water used for the purpose of irrigation, or for any
other purpose, to flow into, across or upon any public highway, road, street, alley or public way in
any other manner than that authorized by law.
G. Take or divert water from any canal, ditch, flume or reservoir used for the purpose of holding or
conveying water for beneficial uses and purposes or without authority, raise, lower, open, close,
change or otherwise disturb or interfere with any gate, headgate, water box, weir or valve, or
measuring or regulating device or other appurtenances used for the control or measurement of
water, or empty or place, or cause to be emptied or placed, into any canal, ditch, flume or reservoir,
any rubbish, trash, garbage or other substances and matter obstructing the free flow of water.
H. Wastewater for irrigation, or any waters of any stream, the waters of which is used for irrigation, or
diverts the same for an unnecessary use or purpose, or allow such water to waste so that the
same cannot be used for a beneficial use or purpose. (Ord. 753, 8-9-2011)
6-10-3: LARCENY OF PROPERTY:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Steal, take and carry away the personal property of another, when the property taken, stolen or
carried away has a value of less than fifty dollars ($50.00);
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 152/315
2. Find lost property under circumstances which give knowledge of, or of inquiry as to, the true
owner, and appropriate such property to his own use or to the use of another person not entitled
thereto, without first making a reasonable and just effort to find and restore the property to the
owner.
3. Conceal the goods, wares or merchandise of any store or merchant, while still upon the
premises of such store or merchant. Goods, wares or merchandise found concealed upon the
person shall be prima facie evidence of a wilful concealment.
B. If the thing stolen, taken or carried away consists of any evidence of debt, or represents security for
an indebtedness remaining unsatisfied; the value of the thing stolen, taken or carried away is the
money due thereon.
C. The provisions of this section shall apply where the thing taken is any fixture or part of the realty
and is severed at the time of taking, in the manner as if the thing had been severed by another
person at some previous time. (Ord. 753, 8-9-2011)
6-10-4: COMMUNICATIONS AND FACILITIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Without lawful authority, wilfully and wrongfully open, remove or damage any parking meter, coin
telephone or other vending machine dispensing goods or services, or a part thereof; or possess a
key or device specifically designed to open or break any parking meter, coin telephone or other
vending machine dispensing goods or services; or possess a drawing, print or mold of a key or
device specifically designed to open or break any parking meter, coin telephone or other vending
machine dispensing goods or services.
B. Cut down or burn or otherwise materially injure, any electric light pole, or so as to materially injure
any insulator, or knock said insulator loose from the pole to which it is attached, or otherwise
materially injure such insulator, or shoot any electric light wire, thereby breaking said wire, or
otherwise cut, break or injure such wire.
C. Fail or refuse to relinquish the use of a telephone line upon the request of another person or to use
such line for an emergency message (any person requesting that another person using a
telephone line relinquish the use of such line for the purpose of an emergency message shall
inform such person of the nature of the emergency and their name and telephone number upon
request); providing, that emergency telephone calls for the purpose of this subsection are calls for
police, medical and fire aid.
D. Procure use of a telephone line for a nonexisting emergency. (Ord. 753, 8-9-2011)
6-10-5: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN:
The parent, parents or legal guardian or the divorced parent having legal custody, or in the event of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 153/315
separation the parent having actual physical custody of any child under the age of eighteen (18) years
shall be responsible and liable for the cost of and restitution for the damage to or destruction of any
public or private property caused from the unlawful acts of the child and resulting in unlawful damage,
injury, defacement, alteration, removal or destruction of any such public or private property, unless the
parent or legal guardian, or the person having actual physical custody of the child was, at the time of
the malicious, wilful or unlawful acts of the child, exercising due diligence in the supervision of the
activities of the child. Any person, including parent or guardian who, by any act or neglect, encourages
a child to wilfully, maliciously or unlawfully damage, injure, mar, deface, or remove or otherwise
destroy public or private property shall also be liable for the cost of restoration and restitution for the
damages to such public or private property. (Ord. 753, 8-9-2011)
6-10-6: PROHIBITED ACTS ON THE CLEARWATER RIVER:
This chapter is intended to address certain acts on or about the Clearwater River. Through regulation
of those acts, this chapter seeks to preserve the natural habitat of the Clearwater River and ensure
the protection of life and property. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public property
surrounding the river for a distance of seventy feet (70') horizontally landward from the ordinary high
water mark into and including the river itself. In the above delimited area it shall be unlawful to:
A. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove, without a permit from the supervisor of urban forestry,
any tree, shrub or plant or to strip any bark, pick any flowers or collect any seeds from any such
tree, shrub or plant. Nor shall any person:
1. Use any rope, wire or other such similar object attached to any tree or plant.
2. Dig or disturb any natural habitat area or in any other way disturb, impair or injure the natural
habitat of the area.
B. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, annoy, shoot, or throw objects at any animal,
reptile or bird within the habitat area. City staff, representatives of Idaho state fish and game, may
in the performance of their duties with the concurrence and approval of the city do such acts
necessary to protect life or property or improve the wildlife habitat. Nor shall any person collect any
nests or eggs from any wild bird or reptile. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit
lawful fishing activities on or in the Clearwater River.
C. Operate or park any motor vehicles. This section specifically excludes watercraft, emergency
vehicles, motorized wheelchairs or other similar vehicles used by the physically or mentally
challenged or those vehicles authorized by the city.
D. Fire or discharge any firearms of any description, or any air rifles, spring guns, bow and arrows,
slings or any other form of nonfirearm weapon potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to
human safety, except law enforcement personnel certified by Idaho department of police officer
standards and training in the course and scope of their employment as law enforcement officials.
Nor shall any person use any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any
kind of trapping device.
E. Possess, transport or carry any air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other
nonfirearm weapon potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 154/315
F. Have in one's possession, any fireworks.
G. Set up any tents, shacks or other temporary shelter for the purpose of camping. No person shall be
permitted to camp or otherwise remain in the proscribed area overnight.
H. Use, carry, or be in the possession of any beverage container made of glass.
I. Deposit or discard any trash, rubbish or refuse as defined by this code, except in refuse containers.
J. It shall be unlawful for any person to jump from, throw or drop any object or another from, any
bridge except as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 753, 8-9-2011)
6-10-7: PENALTIES:
A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars
($300.00) and imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 753, 8-9-2011)
Chapter 11
ASSEMBLAGES
6-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When
not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The
word shall is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ASSEMBLY: A group of persons gathered together at any one time for any purpose.
LOAD: The total number of persons that may occupy a building, or a portion thereof, at any one time;
or the total number of persons that can be accommodated by the seating arrangements of a building,
structure, arena, stadium, bleacher, or grandstand, or parts thereof; or the maximum seating or live
load capacity of said building, structure, arena, stadium, bleacher, grandstand, or parts thereof.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any
kind. (Ord. 754, 8-23-2011)
6-11-2: EXCESSIVE OCCUPANT LOAD UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 155/315
A. To sell tickets, and/or admit persons without consideration, for any event or for any purpose in
excess of the occupant load of a building, structure, arena, stadium, bleacher or grandstand, or
parts thereof;
B. To permit, maintain, conduct or promote an assembly of persons in excess of the occupant load of
a building, structure, arena, stadium, bleachers, and grandstands, or parts thereof; and
C. To permit any person, except ushers or other employees, to remain standing in any aisles, corridors
or exits during an assembly of persons, it being the duty of the person permitting, maintaining,
conducting or promoting an assembly of persons to provide adequate unobstructed exits to permit
rapid egress of all persons attending. (Ord. 754, 8-23-2011)
6-11-3: EXAMINATION OF PREMISES:
It shall be the duty of the person permitting, maintaining, conducting or promoting an assembly of
persons to comply with all provisions of this code relating to the health and safety of people, and in
particular, ordinances, rules and regulations relating to building, electrical, fire, safety and health. No
such assembly for any purpose shall be held or presented unless premises upon or within which that
assembly shall be held have been examined by the fire chief, building inspector, and the chief of
police not less than three (3) days before the date of such assembly and found to be free from any
hazard and suitable for the purpose of the assembly. (Ord. 754, 8-23-2011)
6-11-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding three hundred dollars
($300.00) or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, or be both so
fined and imprisoned. (Ord. 754, 8-23-2011)
Chapter 12
FALSE SECURITY ALARMS
6-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words, and derivations thereof,
shall have the meaning given herein. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory.
ALARM INSTALLATION COMPANY: A person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining,
servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an alarm system in a business or
residence.
ALARM MONITORING BUSINESS: Any person, firm or corporation who is engaged in the monitoring
of security alarm systems and the summoning of police response to activations thereof. This includes
both businesses that are engaged in alarm monitoring for profit and businesses that have specialized
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 156/315
units or subsidiaries that monitor only their own alarm systems.
ALARM OFFICER: The chief of the Orofino police department or his designee.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanical, electrical or other device which is designed or used for the
detection of a trespass, burglary, or robbery within a building, structure, or facility, or for alerting others
to a hazard or to the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure, or facility, or which
emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated and which is designed to elicit a
response from the police department. Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, direct dial
telephone devices, audible alarms and proprietor alarms. Devices which are not designed or used to
register alarms but are audible, visible, or perceptible outside the protected building, structure or
facility is not included with this definition. An alarm system includes all the necessary equipment
designed and installed for the detection of a trespass, burglary, robbery or other hazard in a single
building, structure, or facility, or for alerting others to the commission of an unlawful act within a
building, structure or facility.
ALARM USER: Any person who purchases, leases, contracts for, or otherwise obtains a security
alarm system or contracts for the servicing or maintenance of a security alarm system.
AUDIBLE ALARM: A device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry or presence on certain
premises which generates an audible sound or signal on such premises when it is activated.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: An alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone
lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the
existence of an emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
EMERGENCY: Any condition for which the alarm was designed and installed, and which results in a
response of police personnel.
ENHANCED CALL VERIFICATION: An independent method whereby the alarm monitoring company
attempts to determine that a signal from an automatic alarm system reflects a need for immediate
police assistance or investigation. This verification process will be conducted by the alarm system
monitoring personnel and shall consist of making two (2) phone calls to the responsible party or
parties and shall not take more than five (5) minutes from the time the alarm signal has been accepted
by the alarm system monitoring company. At least one of the two (2) phone calls must be made to a
party off the premises upon which the alarm system is installed.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal, message, transmittal, or communication which is activated from an
alarm system and which is responded to by personnel of the police department for which no
emergency situation exists or existed as determined by the responding police personnel. False alarms
shall not include alarms caused by natural occurrences such as hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes,
or other extraordinary circumstances determined by the alarm officer to be clearly beyond the control
of the alarm user.
HOLDUP ALARM (Also DURESS ALARM, ROBBERY ALARM OR PANIC ALARM): An alarm signal
generated by the manual or automatic activation of a device, or any system, device or mechanism on
or near the premises intended to signal that a robbery or other crime is in progress, and that one or
more persons are in need of immediate police assistance in order to avoid injury, serious bodily harm
or death at the hands of the perpetrator of the robbery or other crime.
ONE PLUS DURESS ALARM: A security alarm system which permits the manual activation of an
alarm signal by entering on a keypad a code that either adds the value of one to the last digit of a
normal arm/disarm code (e.g., the normal arm/disarm code "1234" if entered as "1235" automatically
activates the duress alarm feature) or that involves entering any incorrect final digit to a normal
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 157/315
arm/disarm code.
PENALTY STATUS: That status achieved by more than one false alarm within the calendar year
beginning January 1 and ending December 31.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, or organization of any kind, or any
governmental entity or political subdivision thereof.
SIA CONTROL PANEL STANDARD CP-01: The ANSI _ American National Standard Institute
approved Security Industry Association _ SIA CP-01 control panel standard, as may be updated from
time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their
associated arming and disarming devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control panels built
and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or other nationally recognized testing
organizations, will be marked to state:
Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm
Reduction.
(Ord. 755, 8-23-2011)
6-12-2: DUTIES OF ALARM INSTALLATION AND MONITORING COMPANIES:
A. The alarm installation company shall provide written and oral instructions to each of its alarm users
in the proper use and operation of their alarm systems. Such instructions will specifically include all
instructions necessary to turn the alarm system on and off and to avoid false alarms.
B. After the effective date hereof, alarm installation companies shall not program alarm systems so
that they are capable of sending one plus duress alarms. Monitoring companies may continue to
report one plus duress alarms received from alarm systems programmed with one plus duress
alarms prior to enactment of this chapter. However, upon the effective date hereof, when a
takeover or conversion occurs or if an alarm user requests an alarm system inspection or
modification, the alarm installation company must remove the one plus duress alarm capability
from such alarm system.
C. After the effective date hereof, alarm installation companies shall not install a device to activate a
holdup alarm which consists of a single action and nonrecessed button.
D. An alarm installation or monitoring company shall not install or use automatic dialing devices.
E. Enhanced call verification is required. After the effective date hereof, every alarm monitoring
company shall verify every security alarm signal prior to requesting a police dispatch by making
two (2) phone calls to the responsible party or parties not more than five (5) minutes from the time
the alarm signal has been accepted by the alarm system monitoring company. At least one of the
two (2) phone calls must be made to a party off the premises upon which the alarm system is
installed.
F. Upon notification that an alarm system is activated, the alarm monitoring company shall
immediately proceed to silence the alarm or ensure that the alarm is silenced. The silencing of the
alarm must be completed within fifteen (15) minutes after notification of activation when the alarm
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 158/315
system is protecting a residential structure or within thirty (30) minutes when the alarm system is
protecting a commercial or industrial structure. (Ord. 755, 8-23-2011)
6-12-3: RESPONSIBILITIES OF ALARM USERS:
A. Each alarm user shall maintain each alarm system in good working order, and provide the
necessary service to prevent malfunctions.
B. Each alarm user is responsible for assuring that his/her/their alarm system is used properly and in
accordance with the manufacturer's directions and the law. Inherent in this responsibility is
assuring that all persons with access to the alarm system are properly trained on correct use of the
system and are authorized to cancel accidental activations, and assuring that procedures and
practices are followed that minimize the risk of false alarms.
C. Upon notification that an alarm system is activated, the alarm user shall immediately proceed to
silence the alarm or ensure that the alarm is silenced. The silencing of the alarm must be
completed within fifteen (15) minutes after notification of activation when the alarm system is
protecting a residential structure or within thirty (30) minutes when the alarm system is protecting a
commercial or industrial structure.
D. Each alarm user is responsible for paying service fees when it is determined that the alarm user
has maintained a public nuisance alarm. (Ord. 755, 8-23-2011)
6-12-4: MAINTAINING A PUBLIC NUISANCE ALARM:
A. Limit On False Alarms: No person shall maintain, operate, use or attempt to use an alarm system
which generates more than three (3) false alarms in a calendar year.
B. Service Fees: Any alarm system maintained, operated, used, or attempted to be used in violation of
this section shall be deemed a public nuisance alarm. In addition to reimbursement or any other
remedy available to the city, the city may impose a service fee for each and every false alarm after
three (3) within the calendar year as determined by following the schedule below:
Within Calendar Year Fee
Fourth false alarm $ 50.00
Fifth false alarm 75.00
Sixth false alarm 100.00
Seventh and subsequent false alarm 200.00
C. Written Notice: Where the alarm system is deemed a public nuisance as provided in this section,
the alarm officer shall provide the alarm user written notice informing the alarm user of the penalty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 159/315
status and the finding of public nuisance.
D. Review By Alarm Officer:
1. The alarm user may request the alarm officer to review and reconsider the determination of
public nuisance by submitting a written request to the alarm officer within ten (10) days upon
receipt of the notice of penalty status and nuisance. Failure to submit a written request in
compliance with this section is deemed a waiver of any and all rights to appeal.
2. The alarm officer shall review the determination and send to the alarm user his findings as to
whether the alarm system is a public nuisance. This shall be done in writing by certified mailing
within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the request for reconsideration.
E. Appeal To City Council: The alarm user may request a hearing before the city council after filing a
written notice of appeal to the city clerk no later than ten (10) days after mailing of the alarm
officer's finding of public nuisance. (Ord. 755, 8-23-2011)
6-12-5: COMPLIANCE:
A. An alarm user who has notice of his/her alarm system being deemed a public nuisance shall be
assessed a service fee in accordance with section 6-12-4 of this chapter.
B. An alarm user who has notice of the assessed penalty or any amount due in reimbursement shall
remit within fifteen (15) days the amounts due to the city of Orofino. (Ord. 755, 8-23-2011)
6-12-6: PROHIBITED ALARM SYSTEMS:
A. No person shall use or operate an automatic dialing device or any device programmed to initiate
and deliver a message or signal to any telephone number belonging to the city of Orofino or to any
law enforcement dispatch service.
B. No system shall have an entry or exit delay of less than forty five (45) seconds. (Ord. 755, 8-23-
2011)
6-12-7: VIOLATIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain any "alarm system" as herein defined in this chapter for
any purpose other than reporting such trespasses, burglaries, robberies, or other crimes involving
potential serious bodily injury or death.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a public safety alarm system for any purpose
other than that for which it is installed, or for any purpose other than detecting and reporting a
trespass, burglary, robbery or other permitted purpose.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 160/315
C. It shall be unlawful for any alarm user or other person to install, operate or use any "alarm system"
as herein defined in this chapter which malfunctions due to improper installation or operation and
that results in the generation of false alarms. (Ord. 755, 8-23-2011)
6-12-8: ENFORCEMENT OF THIS CHAPTER AND PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail not to exceed six (6) months, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
or by both. (Ord. 755, 8-23-2011)
Chapter 13
NOISE
6-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of
Orofino. It is determined that sound can and does constitute a hazard to the health, safety, welfare,
and quality of life of residents of the city. The mayor and council, by way of Idaho Code section 50-308
are empowered to impose reasonable limitations and regulations upon the production of sound to
reduce the harmful effects thereof. Now, therefore, it is hereafter the policy of this city to prevent and
regulate sound generated by loud amplification devices wherever it is deemed to be harmful to the
health, safety, welfare, or quality of life of the citizens of the city, and this chapter shall be liberally
construed to effectuate that purpose. (Ord. 756, 8-23-2011)
6-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CITY: Orofino, Idaho, or the area within the city limits of Orofino, Idaho.
COMMON AREAS: The area(s) of a facility, complex, apartment unit, hotel, motel or the like that is
open either to the general public or persons with the permission of the owner or his/her agent. This
definition would include, but not be limited to, the following: swimming pools, restaurants, patios, hot
tubs, saunas, laundry rooms, meeting rooms, lobbies, lounges, bars and other areas within the facility
that are either constructed or designed for use in this manner.
EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma
or property damage demanding attention.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: A motor vehicle belonging to a fire department, firefighting association, or
fire district, an ambulance, or a motor vehicle belonging to a federal, state, county, or municipal law
enforcement agency.
LOUD AMPLIFICATION DEVICE: Any equipment designed or used for sound production,
reproduction, or amplification, including, but not limited to, any radio, television, phonograph, musical
instrument, stereo, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker, public address (PA) system, sound
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 161/315
amplifier, or comparable sound broadcasting device.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, or entity having a legally recognized existence,
whether public or private.
PLACE OF RESIDENCE: Any building or portion thereof adapted or used and intended for the
overnight accommodation of persons. In the event the building is used for multiple individual units (i.e.,
apartment, condominium, hotel, motel, duplex, triplex, etc.) each individual unit shall be considered a
separate residence for the purposes of this chapter.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Sound for which the information content is clearly communicated to the listener,
including, but not limited to, understandable spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is
raised or normal, comprehensible musical rhythms, melody, or instrumentation, and the source of
which is identifiable to the listener. (Ord. 756, 8-23-2011)
6-13-3: NOISE PROHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation of any loud amplification device in
such a manner that the sound therefrom:
A. Is plainly audible within any place of residence not the source of the sound, or
B. Is plainly audible upon a public right of way or street at a distance of one hundred feet (100') or
more from the source of such sound. (Ord. 756, 8-23-2011)
6-13-4: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Peace Officer Citation: Any Orofino peace officer or person empowered to enforce this provision of
this code is authorized to issue a uniform citation upon his own observation of a violation without
the necessity of a citizen complainant's signature on said citation. By signing the citation the officer
or person is certifying that he has reasonable grounds to believe that the person cited committed
the offense contrary to law.
B. Citizen Citation: A uniform citation may also be signed by any citizen in whose presence an alleged
violation of this chapter occurred and be witnessed by an Orofino city police officer or person
empowered to enforce this provision of this code whose name shall be endorsed on the citation.
(Ord. 756, 8-23-2011)
6-13-5: CHAPTER ADDITIONAL TO OTHER LAW:
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and nonexclusive and shall not affect any other
claim, cause of action, or remedy; nor, unless specifically provided, shall it be deemed to repeal,
amend, or modify any law, ordinance, or regulation relating to noise or sound, but shall be deemed
additional to existing legislation and common law on such subject. (Ord. 756, 8-23-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 162/315
6-13-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The following sounds are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Sounds caused by any emergency vehicle or personnel when responding to an emergency call or
acting in time of emergency.
B. Sounds caused by activities upon any outdoor municipal, school, religious, sporting field or complex
or publicly owned property or facility, provided that such activities have been authorized by the
owner of such property or facility or its agent.
C. Sounds caused by parades, fireworks displays, or any other event for which a permit for that type
of activity is required and have been obtained from the authorized governmental entity within such
hours as may be imposed as a condition for the issuance of said permit.
D. Sounds caused by locomotives or other railroad equipment.
E. Sounds caused by burglar alarms that are not in violation of this code.
F. Sounds caused by safety warning devices required by law.
G. Sounds caused by devices approved for use within the confines of the particular zoning
designation that the device is located or pursuant to a conditional use permit (i.e., drive-through
window speakers, car lot PA systems).
H. Sounds emanating from devices used within the common areas of a multi-unit facility whose use
has been approved by the owners or management of the facility. Said use must be in compliance
with any regulations imposed by the owners or management of the facility to be exempt under this
chapter. This exemption only applies in relation to other units within the same facility. (Ord. 756, 8-
23-2011)
6-13-7: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) excluding court costs
and fees. There is no right to a trial by jury of a citation or complaint for an infraction and such trials
shall be before the court without a jury. (Ord. 756, 8-23-2011)
Chapter 14
PUBLIC NUDITY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 163/315
6-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
NUDITY: Showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully
opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part
of nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal region or pubic hair region; or the
exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which
device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.
PUBLIC PLACE: Includes all outdoor places owned by or open to the general public, and all buildings
and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public, including such places of entertainment,
taverns, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquets halls, party rooms or halls limited to
specific members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether or not an admission
charge is levied. (Ord. 757, 8-23-2011)
6-14-2: VIOLATION:
It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly and intentionally, in a public place, appear in a state of
nudity. (Ord. 757, 8-23-2011)
6-14-3: EXCLUSIONS:
A. This prohibition shall not apply to any child under the age of ten (10) years of age, or any person
exposing a breast in the process of breast feeding.
B. This prohibition shall not apply to persons engaged in dance, ballet, music or dramatic
performances, or artistic displays which are of serious artistic merit and are offered on premises in
which the predominant business or attraction is not the offering to customers of entertainment
which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification. (Ord. 757, 8-23-2011)
6-14-4: CONSTRUCTION AND SEVERABILITY:
It is the intention of the city of Orofino that the provisions of this chapter be construed, enforced and
interpreted in such a manner as will cause the least possible infringement of the constitutional rights of
free speech, free expression, due process, equal protection or other fundamental rights consistent
with the purposes of this chapter. Should a court of competent jurisdiction determine that any part of
this chapter, or any application or enforcement of it is excessively restrictive of such rights or liberties,
then such portion of this chapter, or specific application of this chapter, shall be severed from the
remainder, which shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 757, 8-23-2011)
6-14-5: PENALTY:
Violation of the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to three
hundred dollars ($300.00) and/or six (6) months in jail, or both. (Ord. 757, 8-23-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 164/315
Chapter 15
ANIMALS ON PROPERTY
6-15-1: RESTRICTION OF DOGS IN CITY PARKS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person to allow or permit any dog, whether licensed or not, to be
or to remain within any restricted areas of the city parks where official signs are posted. (Ord. 769, 8-
9-2011)
6-15-2: EXCEPTIONS FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT ANIMALS AND SANCTIONED
EVENTS INVOLVING ANIMALS:
This chapter shall not apply to any law enforcement officers and their animals during the performance
of their official duties. Any special event involving animals that is sanctioned by an official permit or
agreement with the city is exempt from the provisions of this chapter. However, any law enforcement
officers or organizers of a special event shall comply with section 6-15-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 769, 8-
9-2011)
6-15-3: NUISANCE BY ANIMALS:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any owner, keeper, controller or harborer of any animal to allow
or let his or her animal to discharge such animal's solid excrement upon public property or private
property other than the property of the owner, keeper, controller or harborer. However if such owner,
keeper, controller or harborer does immediately thereafter remove and clean up such animal's solid
excrement from the property, the nuisance shall be deemed remedied. (Ord. 769, 8-9-2011)
6-15-4: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter for which a fixed penalty has not been
designated is guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00)
or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 769, 8-9-2011)
6-15-5: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES PRESERVED:
The issuance of a notice of violation shall not be the exclusive remedy for enforcing the ordinance
regulations of this chapter and all other lawful remedies are reserved. (Ord. 769, 8-9-2011)
Title 7
FIRE REGULATIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 165/315
Chapter 1
FIRE CODE
7-1-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of
Orofino, being marked and designated as the international fire code, 2003 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the fire code of the city of Orofino, in the
state of Idaho regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion
hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices,
and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said fire
code on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Orofino are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in section 7-1-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 729, 1-10-2006)
7-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
A. The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 -These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the city of Orofino, herein
referred to as "this code".
Section 109.3 Violation Penalties - Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail
to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in
violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30)
days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 111.4 Failure To Comply - Any person who shall continue any work after having been
served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than three hundred dollars
($300.00).
B. The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2003 international fire code are hereby
established as follows:
Section 3204.3.1.1 - The limits referred to in the international fire code herein adopted in which
storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited are hereby established to
be the entire limits of the city; that this prohibition shall not apply to storage tanks which do not
exceed five (5) gallons in capacity; and provided further, that this prohibition shall not apply to bulk
plants, which shall be governed by chapter 3406.4 of said code.
Section 3404.2.9.5.1- The limits referred to in the international fire code herein adopted in which
the geographic limits is prohibited for the storage of class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks
outside of buildings is the entire city limits and pursuant to existing zoning laws adopted by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 166/315
Orofino city council.
Section 3406.2.4.4 - The limits referred to in the international fire code herein adopted in which the
geographic limits is prohibited for the storage of class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks is the
entire city limits and pursuant to existing zoning laws adopted by the Orofino city council.
Section 3804.2 - The limits referred to in the international fire code herein adopted in which the
geographic limits in which storage of liquefied gas is restricted for the protection of heavily
populated or congested areas is the entire city limits and pursuant to existing zoning laws adopted
by the Orofino city council.
(Ord. 729, 1-10-2006)
Chapter 2
FIREWORKS
7-2-1: STATE FIREWORKS LAW ADOPTED:
The City does adopt, by reference, as a part of this City Code, the Idaho State Fireworks Law,
compiled as sections 39-2601 through 39-2614, Idaho Code, as amended. (Ord. 445, 6-7-1971)
7-2-2: RIGHT TO CONFISCATE:
The Police Department and the Fire Department shall have the right and power to confiscate and
destroy all fireworks being used, sold or displayed or in the possession of any person in violation of
this Chapter. (Ord. 271, 8-12-1949)
Chapter 3
CLASS 1 FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings given herein:
CLASS 1 FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS: Liquids with a flash point below twenty five degrees Fahrenheit
(25°F) (minimum 4 degrees centigrade) closed cup tester.
TRUCK, TANK TRUCK OR TANK VEHICLE: Any vehicle used for the transportation of Class 1
flammable liquids and shall include trailers and semitrailers. (Ord. 319, 7-13-1953)
7-3-2: TRANSPORTATION:
A. Certification Required; Exception: All trucks used for the transportation of Class 1 flammable liquids
in bulk quantity exceeding one hundred (100) gallons shall be inspected by the Fire Chief, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 167/315
unless certified by him as to their compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, they shall not be
operated on the streets of the City; provided, that this certification shall not be required for trucks
bearing the license or approval of the State Highway Department; or the license and approval of
the Interstate Commerce Commission; or to trucks transporting Class 1 flammable liquids in
drums, cans or other containers of less than sixty (60) gallons' individual capacity.
B. Driver's Absence From Truck: No truck transporting Class 1 flammable liquids in bulk shall be left
unattended on any street, highway, avenue or alley; provided, that this will not prevent a driver
from the necessary absence from the truck in connection with the delivery of his load, except
during actual discharge of the liquid when some responsible person must be present at the vehicle;
nor shall it include stops for meals during the day or at night if the street is well lighted at the point
of parking.
C. Parking: Trucks containing Class 1 flammable liquids may be parked in open parking lots or on
private property, but they shall not be parked or garaged in buildings other than those specifically
approved for such storage by the Fire Chief. (Ord. 319, 7-13-1953)
7-3-3: REQUIREMENTS OF TANK VEHICLES:
All tank vehicles transporting Class 1 flammable liquids within the City shall be constructed in
accordance with applicable United States Department of Transportation regulations as they may be
amended from time to time. (Ord. 527, 3-28-1978)
Chapter 4
FIRE LIMITS
7-4-1: SINGLE FIRE DISTRICT:
The City is hereby declared to be and is established as a single fire district; said fire district shall be
divided into three (3) fire zones known and designated as Fire Zone No. 1, Fire Zone No. 2, and Fire
Zone No. 3; said fire zones shall include such territory or portions of the City as more particularly set
forth in Sections 7-4-2 through 7-4-5 of this Chapter. (Ord. 510, 4-25-1977)
7-4-2: FIRE ZONE NO. 1 BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of Fire Zone No. 1 are hereby declared to be and established as that territory or
portion of the City within the "C-3 Central Business" and "C-4 Commercial, Industrial and
Manufacturing Districts", as defined by Sections 11-2-7 and 11-2-8 of this Code and as shown on the
Official Zoning Map of the City. (Ord. 510, 4-25-1977; amd. Ord. 684, 5-11-1998)
7-4-3: FIRE ZONE NO. 2 BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of Fire Zone No. 2 are hereby declared to be and are established as that territory or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 168/315
portion of the City within the "C-2 Sales and Service" and "Special Public" Districts, as defined by
Sections 11-2-6 and 11-2-9 of this Code and as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City. (Ord.
510, 4-25-1977; amd. Ord. 684, 5-11-1998)
7-4-4: FIRE ZONE NO. 3 BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of Fire Zone No. 3 are hereby declared to be and are established as that territory or
portion of the City within the "R-2 Single-Family Dwelling" and the "R-3 Multiple-Family Dwelling"
Districts, as defined by Sections 11-2-4 and 11-2-5 of this Code and is shown on the Official Zoning
Map of the City. (Ord. 510, 4-25-1977; amd. Ord. 684, 5-11-1998)
7-4-5: CHANGES AND ADDITIONS:
Changes and additions to the Official Zoning Map of the City shall correspondingly alter the
boundaries of Fire Zone No. 1. Fire Zone No. 2 and Fire Zone No. 3 as set forth in this Chapter from
and after the effective date of the change to the Official Zoning Map of the City. (Ord. 510, 4-25-1977)
Chapter 5
OUTDOOR BURNING
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, except as otherwise specifically provided herein and except where the
context indicates otherwise, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
Chapter:
AIR CONTAMINANT: Any solid, liquid or gas, except uncombined water, discharged into the outdoor
atmosphere.
AIR POLLUTION: The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or more contaminants or
combinations thereof in such quantities and of such duration that they are or may tend to be injurious
to human, plant or animal life, or property, or that interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property or the conduct of business.
CONTROL OFFICER: The Fire Chief of the City of Orofino, Idaho, or his designated representative.
OUTDOOR BURNING: The burning of any matter in such manner that the products of combustion
resulting from the burning are discharged directly into the open atmosphere without passing through a
stack, duct or chimney. (Ord. 483, 1975; amd. Ord. 626, 12-27-1988)
7-5-2: OUTDOOR BURNING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Permit Required; Fee: No person shall dispose of refuse by outdoor burning or allow or permit
outdoor burning of refuse unless such person shall first obtain a permit to so dispose of refuse.
Such person shall apply for such permit on application forms provided by the Control Officer; such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 169/315
application forms and any changes therein shall be approved by the City Council; the permittee
shall pay the Control Officer the sum of one dollar ($1.00) for each permit issued.
B. Salvage Operations; Permit Required; Fee: No person shall conduct or cause or permit the conduct
of salvage operations, including the burning of grass or weeds, by outdoor burning, unless such
person shall first obtain a permit to so dispose of refuse. Such person shall apply for such permit
on application forms provided by the Control Officer. The permittee shall pay to the Control Officer
a sum to be set by the Control Officer depending on the nature of the burning applied for, not to
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each permit issued. (Ord. 483, 1975)
7-5-3: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as repealing or amending in any way any safety provisions
of the Fire Prevention Code heretofore adopted by the City. All safety requirements therein prescribed
for outdoor burning, bonfires or rubbish fires may be required of permittees holding permits under the
provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 483, 1975)
7-5-4: EXCEPTION, HOME BARBECUE:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the use of an indoor or outdoor home barbecue for
any purpose other than commercial business use, or to the use of a fireplace in any residence. (Ord.
483, 1975)
7-5-5: VIOLATION:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or wilfully refusing to comply with any proper
requirements of the Control Officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day a violation of the
provisions of this Chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 483, 1975)
Title 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have
the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in
the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined herein shall be given the meanings
ordinarily applied to such words.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 170/315
COLLECTOR: Wherever herein used, shall mean the person holding a license or contract with the
City, or employed by the City, and thereby authorized and designated by the City to collect, handle,
transport and dispose of refuse and wastes.
DEBRIS: The remains, fragments, pieces or parts of something broken down, damaged or destroyed.
GARBAGE: Includes all putrescible waste, except sewage and body waste, including waste
accumulated of animal food or vegetable matter, and including waste that attends the preparation,
use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit and vegetables, and shall include all of such
wastes or accumulations of vegetable matter of residences, restaurants, hotels and places where food
is prepared for human consumption.
The term "garbage" shall not include recognized industrial byproducts.
INSPECTOR: The authorized employee of the City or some individual designated by the Council as
having the duty of the enforcement of this Chapter.
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish" as herein defined and junk and all other waste or
discarded materials and substances including, but not limited to, paper, bottles, glass, nails, tacks,
hoops, cans, wire (barbed or otherwise), building materials and fixtures, electrical materials and
fixtures, sand and gravel and roofing and siding materials, automobile parts and components and
tires.
OWNER AND OCCUPANT: Wherever herein used, may be used interchangeably, and shall mean
every person in possession, charge or in control of any dwelling, flat, rooming house, or any eating
place, shop, place of business, manufacturing or business establishment where garbage or other
refuse is created or accumulated.
PARK: A park, playground, recreation center or any other public area in the City owned or used by the
City and devoted to recreation.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any
kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES: Any nonpublicly-owned property, whether used for residential, commercial,
industrial or professional purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or mailbox belonging or
appurtenant to such property.
PUBLIC PLACE: Streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and public parks,
squares, spaces, grounds, easements and buildings.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body waste), including garbage,
rubbish, trash, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, junk and solid market
and industrial waste.
RUBBISH: A nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste,
such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and other similar materials.
The term "rubbish" shall not include recognized industrial byproducts.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 171/315
drawn upon a street, except devices moved solely by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
WASTE: Unwanted solid, liquid or gaseous materials. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-2: RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY:
The Chief of Police or such other persons as may be appointed by the Mayor and Council shall be
responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter, and other duties as the Council may
prescribe, and there shall be designated as a member of the Police Department, a Sanitary Inspector,
who shall enforce the same under the supervision of the Chief of Police. (Ord. 363, 6-29-1961)
8-1-3: COMPULSORY USE OF SYSTEM:
A. Use Of System Required: Every owner and occupant of a premises within the prescribed limits of
the City must use the refuse collection and disposal system herein provided, and shall deposit or
cause to be deposited in accordance with this regulation all rubbish and garbage that is of such
nature that it is perishable, or may decompose, or may be scattered by wind or otherwise.
B. Special Permit Granted: Provided, however, that in sparsely populated areas of the City where the
collection of garbage and refuse on the schedules hereinafter set forth would be impracticable, the
Council may issue a special permit altering the time and content of collection.
C. Variance Allowed: Provided, further, that when a premises is vacant for an extended period and
water/sewer services are not discontinued, the City Council may, in case of hardship, grant a
variance to the above provisions of this Section. (Ord. 604, 9-24-1985)
8-1-4: REFUSE COLLECTION:
There is hereby established a system of refuse collection, transportation and disposal. It shall be
unlawful for any person to engage in the business of collecting, transporting, hauling or conveying any
refuse over the streets or alleys, or to dump or dispose of the same, unless and until such person is
licensed therefor, over the streets or alleys, or to dump or dispose of the same, unless and until such
person is licensed therefor, or has a contract therefor as an authorized representative of the City. (Ord.
363, 6-29-1961)
8-1-5: BURNING; DUMPING:
No person shall burn, incinerate, bury, dump, collect, remove or in any other manner dispose of
rubbish or garbage except as hereinafter provided:
A. Interior Incinerator: Any person may use an incinerator in the interior of a building between the
hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.; provided, such incinerator meets
the requirements of the Building Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 172/315
B. Exterior Incinerator:
1. Burning of rubbish will be allowed in exterior incinerators between the hours of nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. Such incinerators shall be built of noncombustible
material and shall have a minimum ten foot (10') stack covered by one inch (1") wire mesh
screen.
2. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the use of outdoor fireplaces, barbecue
pits, or grills in preparing food or for recreational purposes.
C. Open Burning: Burning of rubbish may be done in vacant lots by the owner thereof upon obtaining
a permit from the Fire Department for such burning. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-6: REFUSE CONTAINERS:
It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any place where garbage or rubbish is created or
accumulated to at all times keep or cause to be kept portable approved metal containers for the
deposit therein of rubbish and garbage and except as otherwise provided, to deposit or cause to be
deposited all rubbish and garbage therein. All garbage shall, before deposit in such can, be wrapped
in paper or other material so as to prevent the escape of liquids therefrom. All such containers shall be
watertight and not easily corrodible, rodent and flyproof, shall be equipped with handles and a closefitted
lid. Such containers shall be not less than ten (10) gallons' capacity, nor more than thirty two (32)
gallons' capacity, and limited to seventy five (75) pounds in weight. The containers shall be of not less
than twenty eight (28) gauge metal or the equivalent, and be hot-dipped after fabrication to assure
nonleaking cans, or a can that is guaranteed by the manufacturer and so labeled to be leakproof
regardless of manufacturing processes. Such lid shall not be removed except when necessary to
place garbage and rubbish in such container or to take the same therefrom. Whenever garbage or
rubbish is placed therein or taken therefrom, such lid shall be replaced by the person placing therein
or taking therefrom such garbage or rubbish. Such containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition,
with the inside and outside thereof washed at such times as to keep the same free and clean of all
accumulating grease and decomposing material and so that no odor nuisance shall exist. All garbage
or refuse cans shall be placed in a place accessible to the collector; provided, that in case of isolated
dwellings or places of business or where reasonable access cannot be had by a truck, the cans may
be kept in such places as may be agreed upon by the owner and collector, or at such place as may be
designated by the Inspector. Where there is no alley entrance, such cans shall be placed on the street
curb on collection days. (Ord. 363, 6-29-1961)
8-1-7: COLLECTION PERIOD:
Collectors shall collect rubbish and garbage from each customer at least once each week, or as may
otherwise be provided by the rules and regulations of the Council. (Ord. 363, 6-29-1961)
8-1-8: RUBBISH; SPECIAL HAULING:
Rubbish consisting only of cardboard, or wooden boxes, brush, leaves, weeds and cuttings from trees,
lawns, shrubs and gardens may be kept separately without depositing in such containers; provided,
that bulk materials, such as leaves, shall be in a can, box, sack or receptacle for ease of loading, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 173/315
that brush, or any bulky material, shall be tied in bundles not to exceed four feet (4') in length and not
to exceed seventy five (75) pounds in weight. Compost piles may be maintained for fertilization
purposes, and matter used for fertilization purposes only may be transported, kept and used;
provided, that the same shall not constitute a nuisance. Nothing in this Section shall be construed so
as to permit the violation of any rule or regulation of the Fire Department. (Ord. 363, 6-29-1961)
8-1-9: COLLECTION; BUSINESS HOUSES:
Large accumulations of garbage on any premises may be declared a nuisance and designated to be a
separate class of premises for the collection and disposal of garbage and rubbish. The Inspector shall
designate such premises wherein large accumulations of garbage occur and shall notify the owner of
such premises of such designation. From and after such notification by the Inspector, all rubbish and
garbage accumulated upon said premises shall be deposited separately, in containers for garbage as
approved by the Council. (Ord. 363, 6-29-1961)
8-1-10: COLLECTION FEES:
A. Fees Set By Council Action: Fees and rates for collection of garbage and refuse shall be set by
action of the Council duly recorded in the minutes.
B. Collections Limited: For the fees hereby established, the collector shall collect a maximum of two
(2) cans and two (2) bundles, boxes or other containers on each haul. For excess hauling, the
collector may charge and receive a reasonable fee.
C. Hardship; Special Permit: Provided, however, that where the enforcement of the provisions of this
Chapter will work a financial hardship, or where the amount of refuse and garbage is of such small
amount as not to warrant the collection of the full charges as herein provided, the Mayor and
Council may issue a special permit altering the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 542, 11-13-1979)
8-1-11: METHOD OF COLLECTION OF FEES:
Fees shall be carried on the water and sewer bill, and the same shall be paid with the water and
sewer bill; and the Water and Sewer Department is authorized to discontinue service to any premises
if the entire water, sewer and garbage bill shall not be paid, said charges to become delinquent as
provided for water charges, and to be subject to the same penalties provided for in the case of water
and sewer collections. (Ord. 363, 6-29-1961)
8-1-12: SANITARY FUND:
The proceeds from the collection of fees and charges herein provided shall be placed in a special fund
to be known as the Sanitary Service Revenue Fund, and all expenses of the City in the operation of
the sanitary collection and disposal system shall be paid out of such Fund, and any surplus remaining
therein at the end of each fiscal year may be transferred by the Council to the General Fund of the
City. (Ord. 363, 6-29-1961)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 174/315
8-1-13: DISPOSAL SITE:
For the purpose of the protection and preservation of the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the
City, there is hereby established at such places and locations as the Council may from time to time
designate by motion or order, a place for the dumping and depositing of rubbish and garbage, and any
such place or location shall be known as the City disposal site. The Inspector shall have the authority
of a police officer to enforce all rules and regulations governing the City disposal site. The City
disposal site shall be chosen with regard to drainage and topography for the operation of a sanitary
landfill. All rubbish and garbage deposited at the City disposal site shall be covered with alternate
layers of earth. The exact method of earth fill, and the amount and depth of the layers of earth, and
the regulations for rodent and pest control shall be prescribed by the Inspector. (Ord. 363, 6-29-1961)
8-1-14: INSPECTION:
The Chief of Police, or such person as may be designated as Sanitary Inspector, or any other person
concerned with the enforcement of laws shall have the right of ingress and egress to any premises for
the purpose of inspecting all places and containers where rubbish or garbage is accumulated or kept.
(Ord. 363, 6-29-1961)
8-1-15: LICENSING AND CONTRACTING; BOND:
The Mayor and Council shall be the sole authority to license, contract or perform all services
pertaining to sanitary collection and disposal, and to establish reasonable fees for licenses, and is
hereby authorized to enter into contracts with one or more contractors, and establish reasonable rules
and regulations governing the conduct and operation of such licensees or contractors. The Council
may require of any such collector or contractor a bond in a reasonable amount, the condition of which
shall be the satisfactory performance of the contract. (Ord. 363, 6-29-1961)
8-1-16: MATERIALS NOT ACCEPTABLE FOR COLLECTION:
Dirt or earth debris from construction or lawn renovation, rocks, stones, automobile bodies and parts,
dead animals, building materials such as masonry, plaster, scrap lumber and wood shavings are not
acceptable for collection, and such items shall be collected and disposed of by the building contractor,
owner or occupant of the premises. (Ord. 363, 6-29-1961)
8-1-17: LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his agent, employee or servant, to cast, throw,
sweep, sift, deposit, place, leave or dump in any manner any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse,
or cause, permit or allow such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse to be carried, blown, scattered
or deposited by the elements, in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place, river, canal, public
water, drain, sewer, or receiving basin within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-18: PLACEMENT IN RECEPTACLE TO PREVENT SCATTERING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 175/315
Persons placing debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse in public receptacles as required by the
provisions of Sections 8-1-6 and 8-1-9 of this Chapter, or in authorized private receptacles shall do so
in such a manner as to prevent it from being blown, carried, scattered or deposited by the elements
upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-19: SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his agent, employee or servant, to sweep into or
deposit or place in any gutter, street or other public place within the City the accumulation of debris,
garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free
from such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-20: MERCHANT'S DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS CLEAN:
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into, or deposit or place in, any
gutter, street or other public place within the City the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the City shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of such debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish and refuse. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-21: LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, to throw, cast, deposit,
place, permit, or cause such to be cast, thrown, deposited or placed, any debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish or refuse upon any street or other public place within the City, or upon private property. Each
owner of a vehicle shall be liable and responsible for the actions and conduct of the driver or
passengers in a vehicle from which vehicle debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse is thrown, cast,
deposited or placed. The operation of a vehicle by any person other than the owner and the actions
and conduct of such driver or operator of, and the passengers in, such vehicle shall be imputed to the
owner for all purposes of this Section. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-22: VEHICLE LOADS CAUSING LITTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his or its agent, employee or servant, to operate,
drive, move or use any truck, pickup, trailer or other vehicle within the City to haul or transport any
kind of debris, litter, garbage, rubbish or refuse unless such truck or vehicle is so designed,
constructed, or properly loaded or tied, as to prevent any of the load or contents thereof or any debris,
garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse thereon from spilling or dropping, or from being carried, scattered or
blown by the elements, or in any other way deposited, placed or dumped upon any street, alley or
other public place. The spilling, dropping, scattering or blowing of any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or
refuse from any such vehicle shall be deemed prima facie evidence of improper loading or tieing
within the meaning of this Section. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-23: LITTER IN PARKS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 176/315
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, leave, deposit, dump or place debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish or trash in any park within the City except in public receptacles and in such a manner that
such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse will be prevented from being scattered, carried, blown or
deposited by elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where
public receptacles are not provided, all such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse shall be carried
away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly dispose of such in the
manner provided elsewhere by this Code. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-24: LITTER IN LAKES AND FOUNTAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or place litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
canal, river or any other body of water in any park or elsewhere within the City. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-25: DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT:
It shall be unlawful for any person in any aircraft to throw out, drop or deposit within the City any litter,
handbill or any other object or substance. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-26: LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, place, leave or dump debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish or refuse on any occupied private property within the City, whether owned by such person or
not, or cause, permit or allow such debris, garbage, litter or refuse to be carried, blown, scattered or
deposited by the elements upon any private property, except that the owner or person in control of
private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for the collection and storage in such a
manner that such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse will be prevented from being carried, blown,
scattered or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any
private property. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-27: OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER:
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of
debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse; provided, however, that this Section shall not prohibit the
storage of such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse as provided elsewhere in this Code. (Ord.
476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-28: LITTER ON VACANT LOTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, place, leave or dump any debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish or refuse on any open or vacant private property within the City whether owned by such
person or not. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-29: CLEARING OF LITTER FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY BY CITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 177/315
A. Notice To Remove: The Sanitary Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner
of any private property within the City, including the sidewalks, alleys and parking within the
curbing, if such exists, abutting such private property, or the agent of such owner, to promptly
remove any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse from such property. Such notice shall be by
certified mail, addressed to said owner at his last known address.
B. Action Upon Noncompliance: Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified
to properly dispose and remove such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse within fifteen (15)
days after receipt of written notice provided for in subsection A of this Section or within fifteen (15)
days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the City undelivered,
provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner, or agent, the
Sanitary Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to remove such debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish or refuse.
C. Charges For Removal Or Disposal Constitute Special Assessment: When the City has effected the
disposal or removal of such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse, or has paid for the disposal or
removal of such, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of not more than eight
percent (8%) per annum from the date of the completion of such disposal or removal, shall be
chargeable and assessable to the owner of such property. All such charges and special
assessments, if not paid within thirty (30) days to the City Treasurer, shall be declared delinquent
and may be certified to the tax collector of Clearwater County by the City Clerk and collected in the
manner provided by Idaho Code section 50-1008. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-30: UNLAWFUL REMOVAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or move any receptacle for the placing of debris,
garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse from any private or public property in the City. This Section shall not
apply to any authorized City employee or agent, or to the person owning the property or placing the
receptacle thereon. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-31: UNLAWFUL POSTING:
No person shall promiscuously throw or place any kind of advertising matter in or upon the streets of
the City or so fasten large quantities of advertising matter in such a manner that a passerby might tear
down, throw or scatter such matter along the streets. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-32: UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING ON CARS:
No person shall place advertising circulars underneath the windshield wipers or upon the windshields
of any motor vehicle. (Ord. 476, 10-16-1974)
8-1-33: SANITATION SERVICES REQUEST; APPLICATION FOR ANNEXATION:
All non-City resident property owners who request City sanitation services must first submit an official
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 178/315
City application for annexation of the property into the City limits. The completion, submission and
approval of the application for annexation shall be prerequisite to any sanitation services being
provided to any nonresident property owners unless annexation requirements are waived by the
Mayor and City Council as provided in subsection 9-12-43A of this Code. (Ord. 641, 9-25-1990)
8-1-34: PENALTIES:
The violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be a misdemeanor. The penalty for a first offense
under this Chapter shall be a fine not to exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00). The penalty for a second
offense under this Chapter shall be a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). The penalty for a third
offense under this Chapter shall be a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 476,
10-16-1974)
Chapter 2
SEWER REGULATIONS; RATES AND CHARGES
8-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and improve the public health and general welfare of the city;
to require mandatory connection of homes or other facilities within the city to the public sewer system;
to make and place into effect certain rules and regulations to provide efficient service of the public
storm sewer and sanitary sewer systems of the city; to collect such rates, fees, tolls or charges
necessary to provide for the repayment of city indebtedness for the construction and installation of the
system and for its efficient maintenance and operation; and in establishing such rates and charges the
city has taken into account the cost and value of the system, operation and maintenance expenses,
possible delinquencies, proper allowance for depreciation, contingencies, and any amounts necessary
to retire all bonds payable from net revenues and the reserves therefor. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings herein given to them:
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The water/wastewater superintendent of the city or his or her duly
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (Abbreviated As BOD): The quantity of oxygen, expressed in
parts per million by weight, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory determinations made in accordance with procedures set forth in standard methods.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the
discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and convey it to
the side sewer which begins outside the outer face of the building wall.
CITY: The City of Orofino, Idaho.
CHLORINE REQUIREMENT: The amount of chlorine, in parts per million by weight, which must be
added to the sewage to produce a specified residual chlorine content, or to meet the requirements of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 179/315
some other objective, in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
COMMERCIAL BUILDING OR UNIT: Any structure or part of a structure used for the purpose of
providing goods or services to the public through one facility including, but not limited to, stores,
service stations, schools, hospitals, rest homes, State, County or Federal offices or buildings or any
structure used for the manufacture of goods. Commercial building or units also include any property
requiring water service to provide goods or services to the public that has no structure on the property
including, but not limited to, parks and rock crushing sites or for any type of business or enterprise not
otherwise described or covered under definition of Dwellings.
COMMERCIAL USER: All persons not specifically classified as domestic or as an industrial waste
contributor.
DWELLINGS:
Multi-Facility Dwelling Or Unit: Any building, apartment, office complex, mobile home court,
business complex or other structure, or any combination thereof, owned by one person or entity
and occupied by two (2) or more separate families, businesses, offices, persons, or entities, or
combination thereof, which shall include townhouses or condominiums.
Single-Family Dwelling Or Unit: Any building, home, trailer house, mobile home, or structure
used as a residence occupied exclusively by one family for living or sleeping purposes, and
having one kitchen or set of cooking facilities.
GARBAGE: The residue from the preparation and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage
and sale of food products and produce.
GROUND GARBAGE: The residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has
been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any
dimension.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any flow discharged to the wastewater treatment system identified in the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, U.S. Office of Management and Budget, and
amended and supplemented under the following divisions:
A. Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing
B. Division B - Mining
C. Division D - Manufacturing
D. Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitation Services
E. Division L - Services
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 180/315
MG: Million gallons.
MGD: Million gallons per day.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond or ditch, lake, or other body of surface or
ground water developed by naturally occurring process of nature.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in moles
per liter and is a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution. It shall be determined by one of the
procedures outlined in Standard Methods.
PARTS PER MILLION: A weight-to-weight ratio: the parts per million value multiplied by the factor
8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society or group, or other entity.
PRIVATE SEWER: A sewer serving two (2) or more buildings, residences or properties, constructed
by private contract outside of the public right of way and remaining under private ownership and
jurisdiction and which shall be maintained by said private owners. Private sewers shall be designed,
constructed and maintained by said private owners to the same design, construction and maintenance
standards as are public sewers.
PUBLIC SEWERS: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the City. It shall also include
sewers within or outside the City boundaries which serve one or more persons and ultimately
discharge into the City sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with City funds. All public sewers shall be located in dedicated public rights of way or
easements and shall have a manhole or lamp well on the end for inspection and maintenance by the
City. Public sewers shall be at least eight inches (8") in diameter unless the Superintendent deems
otherwise.
REPLACEMENT: Any expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or
appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain the
capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation
and maintenance" includes replacement.
SANITARY SEWAGE: Wastes that are derived principally from dwellings, business buildings,
institutions and the like, exclusive of storm and surface waters and industrial waste.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which conveys sanitary sewage or industrial wastes, or the combination
of the two (2) and into which storm, surface and ground waters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not
intentionally admitted.
SERVICE CHARGE: The charge levied on all users of the sewage system for the purpose of
repayment of City indebtedness for the construction and installation of the system and for its efficient
maintenance and operation, and in establishing such rates and charges the City has taken into
account the cost and value of the system, operation and maintenance expenses, possible
delinquencies, proper allowance for depreciation, contingencies and any amounts necessary to retire
all bonds payable from net revenues and the reserve required for these.
SERVICE CONNECTION: A sewer line connected to the sewer main.
SEWAGE: Wastewater.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Wastewater treatment plant or other like facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 181/315
SEWER: Any pipe or conduit used for conveying wastewater or any other waste liquids, including
storm, surface and ground water drainage.
SEWER MAIN: Pipe laid in a street, road, alley or easement for the collection of wastewater from the
customers, and which is owned, operated and maintained manhole to manhole or lamp well by the
City.
SIDE SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer and is sometimes referred to
as the sewer connection or the sewer service line.
STANDARD SEWER: Sewage and acceptable wastes that are within specifications regarding pH,
BOD, dissolved oxygen, suspended solids and grease.
STORM DRAIN: Any pipe or conduit conveying storm, surface and ground water drainage, but
excluding sewage and industrial wastes.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: That portion of rainfall that is drained into the storm sewer system.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (Abbreviated As SS): Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste and which are removable by a laboratory filtration
device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be in accordance with procedures set
forth in Standard Methods.
SUPERINTENDENT: The Water/Wastewater Superintendent of the City of Orofino.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Any water or liquid containing none of the following: free or emulsified grease
or oil; acids or alkalis; substances that may impart taste, odor and color characteristics; toxic or
poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; odorous or otherwise obnoxious
gasses. It shall contain not more than thirty (30) parts per million each of SS or BOD. Analytical
determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
WASTEWATER: The water-carried human, animal or household wastes in a public or private sewer,
but excluding ground water infiltration, surface drainage and industrial wastes.
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM (Also Termed Sewage Collection And
Treatment System): All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of domestic,
commercial and industrial waste, and includes sewers as well as the wastewater treatment plant.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT: An assemblage of devices, structures and equipment for
treating domestic, commercial and industrial wastes.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-3: CONNECTION TO SANITARY SEWER REQUIRED; COSTS ASSESSED:
Every parcel of land or premises within two hundred feet (200') of a City sewer main, and physically
capable of receiving service within the boundaries of the City, improved for occupancy and occupied
or used by any person or persons, or as a commercial business, shall be connected to the public
sanitary sewer system. The owner or person in charge of such land shall make or cause to be made
such connection within sixty (60) days after receiving official notice from the City to so connect. All
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 182/315
connections of said sanitary sewer heretofore constructed and made shall be maintained in a sanitary,
permanent and watertight condition. All connections made hereafter shall be made in a permanent,
sanitary and watertight manner and shall be sufficient to carry all the sewage and waste fluids of every
kind from the building into said sanitary system, and each toilet, stationary washstand, and other piece
or type of equipment having waste fluids shall be connected with said system; that where the building
or structure has not been completed before publication of such notice, connection shall be made on or
before the completion of such building or structure and before any occupancy or use thereof. All
charges associated with the laying of pipe from the home or facilities to be served to the City's mains
and all other costs incurred in connecting to said mains shall be borne by the property owner. If any
connection or any needed repair to an existing condition shall not be made within the time herein
provided, the City Council is hereby authorized and directed to cause the same to be made and to file
a statement of the costs thereof with the Clerk, and thereupon a warrant shall be issued under the
direction of the City Council by the Treasurer and against the Water/Sewer Revenue Special Fund for
the payment of such cost, the amount of such cost, together with a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus
interest at eight percent (8%) per annum upon the total amount of such costs and penalty shall be
assessed against the property upon which said building or structure is situated and shall become a
lien thereon as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-4: UNPOLLUTED WATER PROHIBITED FROM SANITARY SEWER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, ground
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or other unpolluted water to any sanitary sewer
without having received written permission from the Superintendent to take such action. (Ord. 655, 9-
27-1994)
8-2-5: UNPOLLUTED WATER DISCHARGED TO STORM DRAIN:
Storm water shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm drains, or to a
natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water
may be discharged upon approval of the Superintendent to a storm drain or natural outlet. (Ord. 655,
9-27-1994)
8-2-6: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described water or waste to any public sewer:
A. Any solids, liquids or gases which may, by themselves or by interaction with other substances,
cause fire or explosive hazards or in any other way be injurious to persons, property or the
operation of the wastewater collection and treatment system.
B. Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, or gases which either singly or by interaction with other
substances are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry into
sewers for their maintenance and repair.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 183/315
C. Any solids, greases, waxes or viscous material of such character or in such quantity that it, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, may cause an obstruction to the flow in the sewer, or otherwise
interfere with the proper functioning of the wastewater collection and treatment system.
D. Any toxic substance, chemical element, or compounds in quantities sufficient to impair the
operation or efficiency of the wastewater treatment facilities, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, or cause the effluent thereof to exceed Idaho State Board of Health water requirements
for the receiving stream.
E. Any liquids having a pH lower than five and five-tenths (5.5) or higher than nine (9), or having any
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to structures, equipment or personnel of
the wastewater collection and treatment system.
F. Any radioactive isotopes without obtaining a special permit from the Superintendent.
G. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F).
H. Any garbage that has not been properly ground.
I. Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred (100) parts per million by weight, of
fat, oil or grease.
J. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood,
paunch manure, hair or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater collection and
treatment system. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-7: APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR WASTEWATER DISCHARGE:
Review and acceptance of the Superintendent shall be obtained prior to the discharge into the public
sewer of any water or wastes having any of the following:
A. A total of more than thirty (30) pounds of SS in any one day.
B. A total of more than thirty (30) pounds of BOD in any one day.
C. An average flow of 0.01 mgd or more. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-8: REFUSAL OF USE OF SEWER SYSTEM:
The Superintendent may prohibit the discharge into the public sewer of sewage that does not comply
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 184/315
with the limitations set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-9: INDEPENDENT SEWER SERVICE LINE REQUIRED:
The sewer service line(s) shall be so arranged that there is a separate and independent sewer service
line to each individual building, place of business or tract of land, unless otherwise specified in Section
8-2-19 of this Chapter. A separate and independent side sewer (building service line) shall be
provided for every new building connecting to the sanitary sewer system of Orofino. Separate side
sewers are not required for each trailer space in overnight trailer courts, nor for each cabin in cabin
courts; however, separate side sewers (sewer service lines) are required for trailer houses on
individual lots or for long-term trailer rental units in mobile home courts. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-10: EXISTING BRANCH SERVICE LINES:
Where sewer service is now provided through one sewer service line to several customers (branch
service line), the City, by resolution of its Council, may decline to continue to accept sewage from said
premises until separate sewer service lines are provided at the owner's expense. Where more than
one dwelling is served from one such service line, the established rate shall be charged for each
customer in the same manner as if each did, in fact, have individual sewer service lines. (Ord. 655, 9-
27-1994)
8-2-11: SEWER SERVICE LINE MAINTENANCE:
All sewer users shall keep their individual sewer service lines in good repair and shall keep them in
such good condition that they shall not allow excessive amounts of ground water to enter into the
sewer system. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-12: INJURY TO OR TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful to disturb, destroy, damage, adjust, molest, meddle, or otherwise interfere with any
portion of the City sewage collection and treatment system or its appurtenances, located on either
public or private property. Should any damage result, either intentionally or unintentionally, from
handling prohibited discharges or otherwise tampering with or plugging said sewer lines, the violator
shall pay for all costs incurred in connection with the repairs of said system and/or for any damages
that may result from the tampering with prohibited discharges or plugging of said sewer system. It
shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any substance which may tend to obstruct the flow or
damage said sewer in any sewer opening. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-13: GREASE TRAPS REQUIRED:
In all cases where a building is used as a hotel, boarding house, restaurant, service station, garage,
etc., the owner or occupant shall provide a properly constructed grease trap through which all wastes
of a greasy nature shall be drained. The Superintendent shall have the authority, and he/she is hereby
authorized and directed to compel any person to provide and use a grease trap as aforesaid
whenever, in his or her judgment, the same is necessary. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 185/315
8-2-14: INTERCEPTOR OR REMOVAL FACILITIES REQUIRED:
Grease, oil and sand interceptors or other necessary removal facilities shall be installed on the
premises when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, high concentrations of blood, fruit, vegetables,
grain liquors, milk wastes, flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients. All interceptors or
removal facilities shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Where installed, all grease, oil, and
sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner or occupant, at his expense, in continuously
efficient operation at all times. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-15: DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT REGARDING SIDE SEWERS:
The Superintendent of the City is hereby empowered, and it is hereby made his or her duty, in all
cases where there is a public sanitary sewer within two hundred feet (200') to notify every owner or
person in charge of land or premises requiring a sanitary sewer building connection as specified in
Section 8-2-3 of this Chapter to comply with the provisions of that Section of this Chapter within sixty
(60) days or cease to use or occupy the land. A lessee on land shall be deemed to be in charge. (Ord.
655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-16: CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to install or alter any sanitary sewer within the City, or to tap into or connect to any
sanitary sewer main line without first having obtained from the City a permit therefor. An application for
a connection to the City sewer system shall be made at the office of City Hall and no connection shall
be made to any sewer main without a valid permit, and the sewer tap at the main shall be made by the
City. It shall be unlawful for any person to uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use,
alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-17: EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED:
No permission shall be granted to do sewer work in any street, alley, road or public easement until the
applicant has first obtained an excavation permit as required by the City. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-18: SIDE SEWER EXTENSION OR REPAIR PERMIT REQUIRED:
When any sewer service line (side sewer) or private sewer connected to any public sewer becomes
obstructed, broken or out of order, the owner, agent, or tenant of such premises shall repair the same
at his or her own expense. No person shall construct, re-lay, repair, or extend any side sewer until the
person doing said work has obtained the appropriate sewer permit for same. It shall be unlawful for
any person to extend any private sewer or side sewer beyond the limits of the building or property for
which a permit has been given without obtaining a new permit for the desired extension. The
existence of a sewer permit shall in no way be construed as making permissible any work for which an
excavation permit may be required by the City. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 186/315
8-2-19: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SEWER SERVICE LINE:
When a permit for a sewer service line (side sewer) has been granted, the sewer tap at the sewer
main will be furnished and installed by the City. All excavation, fill material, compacting, pavement
repair, piping, and materials to and including exposing the sewer main is at the expense of the person
or firm desiring sewer service. The size and slope of the service line shall be subject to approval of the
Superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches (4"). The slopes of such
four inch (4") service line shall be not less than one-eighth inch (1/8") per foot, except when specifically
otherwise approved by the Superintendent. Whenever two (2) or more residences discharge into a
sewer, diameter of service sewer shall not be less than six inches (6"). The materials and installation
shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Superintendent. All sewer service lines (side
sewers) in any new subdivisions may be installed as part of the construction of the new sewer
collection system within said subdivision when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, it is in the City's
best interests to have or allow said sewer service lines to be installed. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-20: RIGHT TO REVOKE PERMISSION:
Permission given to connect sewers and drains shall be upon the express condition that the
Superintendent may for good cause revoke the same and the person making such connection, or his
or her successor(s) in interest, shall have no right to claim any damage in consequence of such
permission being revoked. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-21: SEWER CONSTRUCTION PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS AND INSPECTION:
All construction or reconstruction of public, private and side sewers shall be in accordance with
standard drawings and standard specifications and subject to inspection by the City. Plan and profile
drawings shall be prepared for all new sewer mains (whether public or private) and for all sanitary
sewer extensions, reconstructions, or renovations; and shall be reviewed and approved by the City
and, when necessary, by the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare before any construction work
on said sewer lines is started. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-22: RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES FOR INSPECTION:
The Superintendent shall have the right to enter upon any premises connected with any public sewer
at all reasonable hours to determine that there is compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. If
conflict is noted, the owner of said premises or his or her agent shall be directed to alter, repair or
reconstruct said sewer facilities within fifteen (15) days. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-23: INDUSTRIAL WASTES:
Each person or firm desiring to make a connection to the public sewer for the purpose of discharging
industrial wastes thereto shall prepare and file with the City a report which shall include actual or
predicted data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the waste to be discharged. Private
treatment facilities may be authorized by the City; provided, that all Federal, State, and local laws and
regulations are fully complied with. Industrial waste charges may be based upon the amount of flow,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 187/315
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), and suspended solids (SS) or any combination thereof as may
be recommended by the Superintendent or this Chapter. The sewage collection and treatment
charges for industrial waste shall completely pay for all collection and treatment costs associated with
said wastes. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-24: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this Chapter shall be construed as prohibiting any special agreement or
arrangement between the City and any person(s) or organization whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be admitted to the wastewater collection and treatment system
either before or after pretreatment; provided, that there is no impairment of the functioning of the
wastewater treatment system by reason of the admission of such wastes, and no extra costs are
incurred by the City, without recompense by said person(s) or organization. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-25: EXTENSION OF SEWER MAINS WITHIN CITY SERVICE AREA:
The Superintendent shall be authorized to construct, or cause to be constructed, extensions to the
sewer system if one of the following conditions exist:
A. Annual Anticipated Revenue: The annual anticipated revenue made available to the City from the
customers to be immediately served by such an extension is not less than one-tenth (1/10) of the
actual cost to the City for the construction of said extension.
B. Declaration By Superintendent: The Superintendent declares that the sewer main extension is
needed for the overall benefit and improvement of the entire sewage collection system.
C. Approval By Council: The City Council approves a contract for construction of the extension with a
party or parties desiring sewer service. Provided, however, that subdividers within or adjacent to
the City service area shall construct at their own expense all sewer mains within their subdivisions
or developments, except that the City will be responsible for those sewer line costs set forth in
Section 8-2-38 of this Chapter. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-26: EXTENSION OF SEWER SERVICE IN CONTIGUOUS AREAS:
In areas contiguous to the City service area that may be annexed to the City, the City may require
such areas to be annexed before sewer service is provided. All non-City resident property owners who
request City sewer service must first submit an official City application for annexation of the property
into the City limits. The completion, submission and approval of the application for annexation shall be
prerequisite to any sewer service being provided to any nonresident property owners unless
annexation requirements are waived by the Mayor and City Council as provided in subsection 9-12-
43A of this Code. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-27: EXTENSION OF SEWER LINES OUTSIDE CITY SERVICE AREA:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 188/315
Sewer lines shall not, without the City Council's approval, be extended outside the City service area;
however, when in the opinion of the Superintendent, there will be special benefit and improvement to
the City by reason of an extension outside the City service area, special arrangements may be made
with the Council to allow said extension. Provided, however, that the area to be serviced outside of the
City service area shall not benefit to a greater extent than like areas provided with sewer service
within the City service area, and provided further, that no such arrangements shall be made unless
adequate sewer line capacity and sewage treatment capacity is available for such sewer service.
(Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-28: SYSTEM OF CHARGES:
All systems of charges and fees to users within and without the City service area shall assure that
each recipient of wastewater collection and treatment services will pay its proportionate share of the
costs of operation and maintenance (including equipment replacement) of any waste collection and
treatment services provided by the City. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-29: SEWER CONNECTION FEES:
Before any sewer connection permit is issued for the installation of any sewer service connection (side
sewer), the person making the application therefor shall pay to the City both an "equity buy in" fee and
a sewer connection charge as herein set forth:
A. Equity Buy In Fees: An "equity buy in" fee shall be paid for each connection made to the sewer
system, for wastewater collection lines and for wastewater treatment plant based on water meter
hook-up size, in accordance with the following schedule:
WASTEWATER COLLECTION LINES
FEE SCHEDULE
Single-family $ 231.00
Multi-facility family (per unit) 231.00
Commercial
3/4 inch service 231.00
1 inch service 324.00
11/2 inch service 416.00
2 inch service 670.00
3 inch service 2,540.00
Greater than 3 inches Negotiated
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 189/315
Commercial customers with meter size greater than 3 inch are to be considered on a case-by-case
basis due to the variability in water usage.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT
FEE SCHEDULE
Single-family $ 403.00
Multifacility family (per unit) 403.00
Commercial
3/4 inch service 403.00
1 inch service 564.00
11/2 inch service 725.00
2 inch service 1,168.00
3 inch service 4,430.00
Greater than 3 inches Negotiated
Commercial customers with meter size greater than three inch (3") are to be considered on a case by
case basis due to the variability in water usage.
B. Connection And Inspection Charge: A connection and inspection charge shall be paid for each
connection to be made to the sewer system, except for connections made in areas where sewer
mains were installed by local improvement district assessment, in accordance with the following
schedule:
1. Single-family dwelling or unit, each sewer connection: Three hundred dollars ($300.00).
2. Multifacility dwelling or unit, each sewer connection: Three hundred dollars ($300.00), plus the
following:
a. Mobile home courts or mobile subdivisions: Three hundred dollars ($300.00) per each trailer
space in excess of one.
b. Motels, motor hotels, cabin courts, travel trailer courts: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per room, cabin
or trailer space.
c. Apartment houses, duplexes and similar multiple living units (for each building): Two hundred
dollars ($200.00) per living unit in excess of one.
d. Condominiums and townhouses: Three hundred dollars ($300.00) per living unit in excess of
one.
e. Commercial buildings and others not specifically covered above: Ten dollars ($10.00) per
plumbing fixture in excess of six (6) per premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 190/315
f. Industrial facilities: As may be established by the city council.
C. When Payment Required: All "equity buy in" and service connection charges shall be paid at the
time the service connection is requested.
D. Failure To Pay: Failure to pay the connection and inspection charge shall result in a
connection/inspection charge of two (2) times the regular charge and may result in a nonissuance
by the city of the occupancy permit.
E. Exceptions: The above "equity buy in" fees and sewer connection charge will not apply to or be
charged against the reconstruction of any existing sewer service line serving any existing dwelling,
building, etc. It is intended that both the "equity buy in" fee and a sewer connection charge be
charged only where a new building is being constructed upon previously undeveloped property.
These fees may be changed from time to time, by resolution of the city council, as such charges
are deemed necessary. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-30: SERVICE CALL CHARGE:
The superintendent may require a service charge in an amount not to exceed the actual cost to the
city for service calls which are only for the convenience and benefit of the customer. (Ord. 655, 9-27-
1994)
8-2-31: FLOW CHARGE VARIATIONS:
The monthly flow charge for residential sewer charges shall be the average water usage (metered
water) for the months of November, December, January and February. This average shall be used to
calculate sewer flow charges throughout the twelve (12) months of the year and shall be recalculated
each year for a new average. Households who have not established a true winter average for the four
(4) months mentioned above shall be assigned an average based on the number of individuals who
reside in the house. This average shall be computed at fifty (50) gallons of metered water per day per
individual. Commercial businesses will be based upon actual water usage (metered water). (Res. 337,
5-10-2004, eff. retroactive to 5-1-2004)
8-2-32: MONTHLY SCHEDULE OF RATES:
A sewer charge shall be levied on all users of the sewage collection and treatment facilities to cover
the actual or estimated cost of operation, maintenance, replacement and financing of the facilities. The
user charge system shall distribute these costs to each user or user class in approximate portion to
such user's contribution to the total wastewater load of such facilities as follows:
A. Single-Family And/Or Commercial Units: Owners of a "single-family" and/or "commercial unit", as
defined in section 8-2-2 of this chapter, shall pay monthly the basic rate plus the usage rate per
gallon, as set by resolution, and as determined by metered water usage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 191/315
B. Multifacility Units: Owners of "multifacility units", as defined in section 8-2-2 of this chapter, shall
pay monthly the basic rate for one facility and two-thirds (2/3) of the basic rate for each additional
facility, plus the usage rate based upon metered water.
C. Single-Family Unit Or Commercial Unit Not Receiving Metered Water: Owners of a single-family
unit and/or commercial unit, not receiving metered water from the city, shall pay a monthly basic
rate as set by resolution. In addition to the basic rate, owners of the commercial unit may be
required to install an approved flow monitoring device, or the city may establish a user charge rate
based upon an equivalent user schedule.
D. Multifacility Units Not Receiving Metered Water Service: Owners of multifacility units, not receiving
metered water service from the city, shall pay the monthly basic rate as set by resolution for each
facility.
E. High Strength Users: For high strength users, wastewater loading contributions will be based upon
the same flow charge per unit volume plus a surcharge on excess BOD and SS based upon
industrial recovery requirements as set forth in 40 CFR 35.925-11, 35.925-12, 35.935-13 and
35.928.
F. Notification Of Change In Rates: The council shall review the sewer use rate biannually and based
upon the actual costs of operation, maintenance, replacement and financing of wastewater
collection and treatment services, shall revise the sewer use rates accordingly. The city shall notify
each user of any changes in the sewer use charges attributable to the collection and treatment
services. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-33: METER SERVICE:
Whenever the council deems it appropriate and in the best interest of the city and its citizens to
require a user to have the sewer service to his or her facilities metered to more appropriately
determine the amount of service provided such user by the system, the council may, by resolution,
require the said user to install a meter and/or meters which will accurately measure the service
provided. And the council may further establish by resolution the rates to be charged for such service
as will properly pay the fair share of the services provided such user. The cost of the meter and its
installation shall be borne by the user. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-34: DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS; DISCONTINUANCE AND RESTORATION FEE:
When bills are not paid within thirty (30) days from the past due date, the superintendent shall issue
an order to shut off and discontinue water service to such delinquent customers. In case service is
discontinued for delinquency, it shall not be restored until the delinquency is paid, or until
arrangements for payment satisfactory to the city clerk have been made, together with a fee of ten
dollars ($10.00) for discontinuing and restoring service. The fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be
payable whenever a service trip is made for the purpose of discontinuing service because of
nonpayment, even though an actual shutoff may not actually have occurred. In the event that a
delinquent customer fails to pay his or her bill within the time set forth above, the city may discontinue
city water service or remove or close sewer connections, and enter upon the property for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 192/315
accomplishing such purposes. The expense of digging up and plugging the sewer service line, as well
as the expense of restoring said sewer service line back to an operable condition is a debt due to the
city and may be recovered by legal action against the sewer user, in addition to the ten dollar ($10.00)
fee set forth above. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-35: SEWER SYSTEM MATERIALS AND INSTALLATIONS:
A. Compliance: All sanitary sewer main line and storm drain main line materials, manholes, etc., and
their installation shall be in accordance with city standard specifications for the construction of
sanitary sewers and storm sewers and the applicable standard drawings depicting various sewer
line installation details.
B. Acceptable Materials: All sewer system materials shall be of the class, strength, thickness, etc.,
necessary to accommodate or provide for the depth of cover over the pipe, the type of material and
bedding around the pipe, and the type, magnitude and extent of the external loads being applied to
the pipe.
C. Approval By City: All materials must be approved by the City. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-36: SEWER SYSTEM DESIGN:
A. Plans: The plans for all sewer lines, sewage lift stations, sewage treatment facilities, etc., shall be
designed, signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State, as the
City deems necessary.
B. State Health Department Requirements: All sewer lines, lift stations, sewage treatment facilities,
etc., shall be designed and approved in accordance with State Health Department requirements.
C. Minimum Size: Minimum sanitary main size shall be eight inch (8") diameter, unless a special
design is approved by the City where the sewer line may be reduced. Minimum storm drain size
shall be eight inches (8") in diameter. Larger sizes shall be required by the City's overall sewer
system master plan or as needed to provide adequate sewage-carrying capacity for the area (and
surrounding developable area) being developed and/or annexed to the City. Minimum building
service line (side sewer) size shall be four inches (4") in diameter.
D. Generally: In general, sewers shall be sufficiently deep so as to receive sewage from basements
and to prevent freezing. Sewer lines shall have at least three feet (3') of cover (from the top of the
sewer line pipe to the ground or street surface) unless a special design is approved by the City
whereby the sewer line is protected from freezing by special means or methods and the sewer is
protected from "heaving" by installation of crushed gravel backfill material under, around and over
the pipe.
E. Design And Construction: All sewer mains shall be designed and constructed to provide mean
velocities, when flowing full of not less than two feet (2') per second. All sewer service lines (side
sewers) shall be designed and constructed to provide mean velocities, when flowing full, of not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 193/315
less than three feet (3') per second. The following are minimum slopes which should be provided;
however, slopes greater than these are desirable:
Sewer Size
Minimum Slope In Feet
Per 100 Feet
4 inch 2.00
6 inch 1.00
8 inch 0.40
10 inch 0.28
12 inch 0.22
15 inch 0.15
18 inch 0.12
21 inch 0.10
24 inch 0.08
27 inch 0.067
30 inch 0.058
36 inch 0.046
Under special conditions, if detailed justifiable reasons are given, slopes slightly less than those
required above (i.e., to provide 2.0 or 3.0 fsp velocity when flowing full) may be permitted. Such
decreased slopes will only be considered where the depth of flow will be 0.3 of the diameter or
greater for the design average flow. Whenever such decreased slopes are proposed, the design
engineer must furnish with his or her report his or her computations of the depths of flow, in such
pipes at the minimum and average rates of flow for a typical day.
Sewers shall be laid with uniform slopes between manholes (i.e., a manhole shall be constructed
at each point where the sewer line slope or grade changes).
F. Manholes: Manholes shall be located no more than four hundred feet (400') apart on lines fifteen
inches (15") in diameter or smaller. Manholes may be located up to six hundred feet (600') apart on
lines larger than fifteen inches (15") in diameter. Manholes shall be installed at all locations where
sewer lines eight inches (8") in diameter or larger intersect, join together or make a bend. All deadend
sewer lines shall have a manhole installed on the end thereof or a lamp well where approved
by the Superintendent.
G. Sewer Mainline Drop Through Manholes: The flow line of the main sewer line as it enters and
leaves any manhole shall be dropped as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 194/315
Mainline Bend Of Drop Of
0 - 10 degrees Regular pipe slope
10 - 45 degrees 0.05 feet
45 - 90 degrees 0.10 feet
H. Lateral Sewer Line Connections At Manholes: Lateral sanitary sewer lines shall not enter a
manhole at an elevation appreciably higher than the sewer mainline. The flow line(s) of any lateral
line(s) shall be positioned within the manhole as follows:
1. The flow line of the main sewer line shall be at least 0.05 foot below the flow line on any of the
lateral sewer lines entering the manhole.
2. Where the diameter of the main line and the lateral line differ by less than 0.5 foot, the top of the
lateral line shall be positioned even with the top of the main line on its highest (inlet) side.
3. Where the diameter of the main and lateral differ by 0.5 foot or more, the two (2) sewer line
inverts shall be positioned at the same elevation.
4. Where a lateral sewer line would enter a manhole at an elevation of three feet (3') or more
above the main sewer line, "drop manhole" construction shall be utilized to locate or position the
flow line of the lateral line (in relation to that of the main line) as indicated above.
5. Where a lateral line would enter a manhole at an elevation of less than three feet (3') above the
main sewer line, the grade or slope of the lateral shall be adjusted so that its flow line is located
(in relation to that of the main line) as indicated above.
Individual building service lines may not enter manholes; except that no more than two (2)
individual building service lines may enter a "dead-end" manhole (a manhole on the upstream
and permanent end of a sewer line); and provided further, that the individual building service
lines must enter the manhole at such elevation that the top of the service line is level with the top
of the sewer main line and that the poured-in-place concrete floor of the manhole brings the flow
lines of the service lines into the flow line of the main line in a smooth continuous manner.
I. Location Of Sewer And Water Lines: Sanitary sewer lines and water lines shall, wherever possible,
be located on opposite sides of the street, a ten foot (10') (out-to-out) horizontal separation
between water line facilities and sewer line facilities (either sanitary or storm) and an eighteen inch
(18") (out-to-out) vertical separation between said line facilities shall always be maintained, unless
a specific variance to this requirement is obtained from the City. The applicable separation
requirements of the Idaho Health Department shall also be complied with.
J. Drawings: All drawings shall be on linen or mylar in pencil or ink and of such quality that they clearly
show the dimensions, location, sizes, etc., of all facilities represented thereon. All sewer line
manholes, inlet boxes, building service lines, etc., shall be clearly shown and identified by name
and station or other means of horizontal location. Sewer lines shall be shown both plan and profile
unless the length of said sewer line or sewer line extension is so short that the City waives this
requirement. If a profile of the sewer line is not provided, it shall be located in the vertical plane by
elevations on the flow line of the pipe at all manholes, inlet boxes, etc., and at other such locations
and intervals as the City may require. Drawings shall be drawn on a scale of one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100') unless the amount of detail, topography, etc., necessitates their being
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 195/315
drawn on a larger scale (i.e., 1" = 40') to provide the clarity and completeness needed on the
drawings.
K. Approval Of City: The design of all sewer lines and all sewer system plans must be approved by the
City. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-37: AS-BUILT DRAWINGS AND ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATION:
A. As-Built Or Record Drawings: As-built or record drawings of sewer line plans shall be prepared by a
professional engineer and the "corrected" original drawing or a duplicate mylar copy of the
"corrected" original drawing(s) shall be provided to the City.
B. Certification Required: As-built plans shall include a certification thereon signed by the registered
professional engineer in charge of the work that the as-built drawings are true and correct and that
he/she (the registered professional engineer) has inspected the construction of the sewer line
installation and that the materials and installation of same were all done in conformity with the
standard specifications for the construction of sanitary sewers and storm sewers. (Ord. 655, 9-27-
1994)
8-2-38: RESPONSIBILITY FOR SEWER LINES:
A. Construction Of Sewer Line: The owner or developer of any piece of property or tract of land is
responsible for the construction of the sewer line (or for the sewer line costs) along any property
sides or frontages of the property along which a sewer line is needed for the overall completeness
and continuity of the city's sewer main system. If it is a large tract of land, the owner or developer
shall also be responsible for the necessary and required system of sewer lines within the interior of
the tract of land. The owner or developer of any piece of property shall construct all needed sewer
lines of the approved size within and along all sides or frontages of any piece of property prior to
the time any building construction thereon is occupied or utilized unless "phased" construction of
the sewer main system is specifically allowed or provided for in the annexation or development
agreement.
B. Costs: The owner or developer of any property or subdivision will normally be responsible only for
the cost of up to an eight inch (8") diameter sanitary sewer line. The additional cost of providing a
sanitary sewer line of a size greater than eight inches (8") will normally be a city responsibility. The
city will reimburse the developer for the extra cost of the additional sanitary sewer line size (over
the 8 inch diameter size referenced above) as set forth in the annexation or development
agreement between the developer and the city. Provided further, however, that if any proposed
subdivision or development is of such size or magnitude that it requires or necessitates a sewer
size larger than an eight inch (8") diameter line or if the type of development is such as to produce
a wastewater flow in excess of the capacity of an eight inch (8") diameter sewer line, then the
owner or developer of said subdivision shall be responsible for the entire cost to whatever size of
sewer line is needed to accommodate his or her development. The additional cost of providing any
extra sewer line depth required by the city (over and above the sewer line depth required to
adequately serve the owner or developer's property when assuming at least a 12 foot sewer line
depth at the uppermost end of the sewer line extended through or along said property) will be a
city responsibility and the city will reimburse the owner or developer for the cost of said extra depth
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 196/315
of sewer line as agreed upon and as set forth in the annexation or development agreement
between the developer and the city. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-39: RESPONSIBILITY FOR SEWAGE LIFT STATIONS:
Sewer mains shall be kept as deep as practicable to keep sewage lift stations to the smallest number
possible. When a sewage lift station and its related facilities is required, it and the sewer main system
to which it is directing sewage, shall generally be designed for an entire definable area and not just to
serve a single property owner or developer. The cost of the sewage lift station shall be equitably
divided between the developer and the city as set forth in the annexation or development agreement.
(Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-40: CITATION ISSUANCE; APPEARANCE REQUIRED:
Whenever it is determined by any police officer or other duly authorized officer that any person or
persons have violated any provisions of this chapter, the said officer shall provide in quadruplicate and
serve upon such person or persons a written citation containing a notice to appear in a designated
court of competent jurisdiction within the city. This citation shall contain the name and address of the
person charged, the offense charged, the time and place when and where the offense charged
occurred, and the time when the person charged shall appear in said court, and such other pertinent
information as may be necessary; and such person or persons shall appear in said court within five (5)
days after such citation is issued and served. The issuance of a citation shall not be the exclusive
method of summoning offenders hereunder. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-41: FAILURE TO APPEAR:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to fail or neglect to appear in response to and as
required by the citation regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which such citation was
originally issued. Appearance in court shall be deemed complied with upon appearance by the person
cited or his or her attorney. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-42: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, may be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by
imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day said
violation occurs shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 655, 9-27-1994)
8-2-43: AMENDMENT OF SEWER RATES, FEES SCHEDULES AND CHARGES:
The monthly schedule of rates, connection fees, system charges, equity buy in fees, and any other
rates or fees identified in this chapter shall be amended by resolution. All other sections of this chapter
shall be amended by ordinance. (Ord. 721, 5-10-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 197/315
Title 9
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
SIDEWALKS
9-1-1: SPECIFICATIONS:
The material and method of constructing sidewalks shall conform in all respects to the specifications
adopted by the City Council. These specifications shall be on file in the Clerk's office at all times.
(1962 Code)
9-1-2: PROPERTY OWNER MUST CONSTRUCT SIDEWALKS:
It shall be the duty of every property owner, upon notification by the City Council, to construct or repair
sidewalks as such is prescribed in said notice. (1962 Code)
9-1-3: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
If such property owner shall fail, after notification, to construct or repair any sidewalk, the City Council
may order same constructed or repaired. The costs of said work shall be assessed against the
property owner for which said sidewalk was constructed or repaired and said cost shall become a lien
upon the property. (1962 Code)
Chapter 2
REMOVAL OF SNOW AND/OR ICE
9-2-1: REMOVAL REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of the owner or tenant of any premises abutting or adjoining any public sidewalk to
remove all snow and/or ice from such sidewalk. (1962 Code)
9-2-2: NOTICE TO BE GIVEN:
It shall be the duty of the City to give notice to any owner or tenant of any property to remove snow
and/or ice, which notice shall be sent by registered mail to the last known address of such owner,
tenant or occupant. The owner or occupant shall have not more than twenty four (24) hours from and
after receipt of such notice, within which to remove the snow and/or ice as set forth in said notice.
(1962 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 198/315
9-2-3: FAILURE TO COMPLY, CITY TO REMOVE:
Upon failure of an owner or tenant to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, the City shall have
the right to remove such snow and/or ice and assess the cost thereof against the premises abutting
the sidewalk. Such assessment shall be certified to the County Assessor or other proper County
official having charge of the making of the assessment roll and such charge shall be placed on the
assessment roll and collected in the same manner as other City taxes are collected. (1962 Code)
Chapter 3
TREES
9-3-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the OROFINO TREE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 674, 1-12-1998)
9-3-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish and maintain an optimum amount, species variety and age
diversity of tree cover on public lands in the City and to maintain City trees in a healthy and minimally
hazardous condition through good arboricultural practices. (Ord. 674, 1-12-1998)
9-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATOR: The individual or individuals, as appointed and overseen by the terms of this
Chapter.
DEVELOPMENT: The alteration, construction or implementation of any building, structure, or use on
any piece of property or within any right of way.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Property owned by the City of Orofino either in fee simple absolute, or implied
or expressly dedicated to the public for present or future use, for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, or for public easements.
PUBLIC TREE: Any tree, shrub, or other woody vegetation on public property.
SHRUB: A multiple stemmed, woody plant whose height at maturity is between three feet (3') and
fifteen feet (15').
STREET TREE: Any tree, shrub or other woody vegetation on lands within any City right of way.
TREE: A woody perennial plant with one main stem or trunk. (Ord. 674, 1-12-1998)
9-3-4: URBAN FORESTS OF OROFINO COMMITTEE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 199/315
A. Committee Created; Membership: There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board to be
known as "Urban Forests of Orofino" for the City, which shall consist of seven (7) members,
citizens and residents of this community, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council.
B. Term Of Office: The term of the seven (7) persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be three (3)
years except that the term of two (2) of the members appointed to the first Board shall be for only
one year and the term of two (2) members of the first Board shall be for two (2) years. In the event
that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the
unexpired portion of the term.
C. Compensation: Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
D. Duties And Responsibilities:
1. It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or
update a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or
disposition of trees and shrubs in public ways, streets and alleys. Such plan will be presented to
the City Council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the Official
Comprehensive City Tree Plan for the City.
2. The Board, when requested by the City Council, shall consider, investigate, make findings,
report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work.
E. Operation: The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a
record of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of
business. (Ord. 674, 1-12-1998)
9-3-5: PUBLIC TREES:
A. Street Trees: All development, with the exception of the construction of single-family homes or
duplexes, shall include planting of street trees in accordance with the Plan or as required by the
Orofino Planning and Zoning Commission. Developers shall assume the cost of the purchase,
planting, irrigation, maintenance, and replacement of all street trees within any development. The
length of term of that responsibility shall not be less than three (3) years. Developers may provide
surety, in the same form and under the same specifications as for all other infrastructure, for the
installation of trees.
B. Violation: It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any person to abuse, destroy, poison, or mutilate
any public tree, plant or shrub, or the root of any public tree, plant or shrub. It shall be a violation of
this Chapter to top any public tree.
C. Permit Required: Permits shall be required for property owners to remove, prune or plant any street
tree. Permits for removal shall be issued only if the property owner has established, to the
administrator's satisfaction, that there is need for the removal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 200/315
D. Owners Of Adjacent Property: Owners of property adjacent to a street tree shall provide adequate
maintenance for that tree. Adequate maintenance shall include sufficient water, proper pruning,
supportive staking if needed, and protection from compaction or injury by vehicles or other causes.
E. Proper Care And Maintenance: The administrator shall encourage the proper care and
maintenance of public trees through the education of public utilities, tree removal and maintenance
companies, and private citizens.
F. Removal Of Trees: The administrator shall remove or cause the removal of public or private trees or
branches which provide a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, or public trees which
should be removed to further sound community forestry goals.
G. Disease Or Pest In Trees: Upon the discovery of an epidemic disease or pest in any public or
private tree, the administrator shall serve notice upon the owner of the tree which shall require that
owner to eradicate, remove, or otherwise control such conditions within a given time frame.
H. Variance Required: A variance shall be required when a property owner wants to deviate from the
rules and regulations of this Chapter. (Ord. 674, 1-12-1998)
9-3-6: ENFORCEMENT:
Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine equal to or less than
the monetary value of the tree as assessed by the administrator. The administrator shall use the tree
value assessment guidelines established by the International Society of Arboricultural Specialists, and
the amount of damage to the tree, in assessing fines. (Ord. 674, 1-12-1998)
Chapter 4
NOXIOUS WEEDS AND VEGETATION
9-4-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CITY OF OROFINO NOXIOUS WEEDS AND VEGETATION
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 781, 3-11-2014)
9-4-2: DEFINITIONS; ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
All definitions identified in Idaho Code title 22, chapter 24 are hereby adopted by reference with like
effect as if recited at length.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The Orofino "building official", the "Orofino fire chief", or any "law
enforcement officer" for the city.
NOXIOUS WEED: Any plant having the potential to cause injury to public health, crops, livestock, land
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 201/315
or other property; and which is designated as noxious by the director of the department of agriculture.
RANK: Growing with excessive luxuriance; vigorous and tall of growth.
RIGHT OF WAY: That portion of property also referred as a boulevard, parkway, walkway, or
undeveloped property for the use of pedestrian traffic or utilities which is located adjacent to the
property owner and the city street.
TREE: Any plant materials commonly referred to as trees which at maturity would exceed a height of
more than thirty inches (30").
VEGETATION: Any plant materials including, but not limited to, those commonly referred to as grass,
weeds, volunteer shrubs, volunteer trees, shrubs and trees. (Ord. 781, 3-11-2014)
9-4-3: DECLARED NUISANCE:
The allowing or permitting of the rank growth of any vegetation or trees as well as the growth of any
designated noxious weeds within the city is hereby declared a nuisance. (Ord. 781, 3-11-2014)
9-4-4: ABATEMENT:
No person as the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of any property within the city shall:
A. Allow or permit any rank growth of vegetation, trees or the growth of any designated noxious
weed(s) upon such property or upon any areas adjacent to such property, from the edge of the
adjacent street paving, centerline of adjacent alley travelways and centerline of adjacent
undeveloped right of way;
B. Allow or permit any vegetation or tree growth to overhang below nine feet (9') above the right of
way area, from the edge of the travelway to the property line of the adjacent property or rest upon
the sidewalk and/or sidewalk space adjacent to such property so as to interfere in any manner with
the full, free and unobstructed use of such sidewalk or sidewalk space;
C. Allow or permit any vegetation growth within the right of way, from the edge of the travelway to the
property line of the adjacent property, which would obstruct the clear vision area of an intersection
or driveway. This subsection shall not apply to trees placed on the right of way and maintained
pursuant to the urban forestry program and/or pursuant to the authority of the director of public
works;
D. Allow or permit any vegetation or tree growth to overhang below fourteen feet (14'), above any
public travelway designated for motor vehicle traffic. Measurements shall be determined from the
centerline elevation of the adjacent travelway;
E. Allow or permit any vegetation or noxious weed growth upon such property to the extent that it
creates a fire hazard as defined by the international fire code as adopted by this code;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 202/315
F. Allow or permit any vegetation, designated noxious weed or tree growth to the extent that it creates
a sight obstruction as defined in Idaho Code, section 49-221;
G. Allow or permit any tree infested with disease or insects to remain standing without application of
proper treatment(s) to correct and/or eliminate the disease or infestation. If said tree is determined
by the city forester to be dying or dead the tree shall be removed within ten (10) days after receipt
of written notice from the code enforcement officer, or within such additional extended time allowed
by the code enforcement officer. (Ord. 781, 3-11-2014)
9-4-5: ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION:
The code enforcement officer shall, no later than May 15 of each year, cause a notice to be published
in the official newspaper requiring all designated noxious weeds, rank vegetation, volunteer shrub
and/or tree, or tree growth to be properly controlled and/or eradicated upon any private property within
the city and upon any areas adjacent to such property as provided in section 9-4-4 of this chapter.
A. Notice To Abate Violation: Should any property located within the city limits of Orofino, Idaho
remain in violation of this chapter ten (10) days after publication of such notice, the code
enforcement officer shall serve notice upon the owner, person in control or contract purchaser of
said property describing the violation(s) and requiring the owner, person in control or contract
purchaser to eradicate and/or properly control any designated noxious weed, weeds, rank
vegetation, volunteer shrub and/or tree, or tree growth upon said property or adjacent areas as
provided in section 9-4-4 of this chapter. Such notice shall be accomplished by posting said notice
on the real property whereon the noxious weeds or rank vegetation should be eradicated and by
mail, addressed to said owner at his/her last address of record.
B. Properly Control: "Properly control" shall mean commonly used and specific methods of eradicating
and/or preventing the growth of broadleaf weeds, noxious weeds and other weed type vegetation
and/or undesirable volunteer trees along with commonly used and specific methods of caring for
and/or maintaining the growth of certain desirable vegetation commonly referred to as grass.
These methods include, but are not limited to:
1. The correct preparation of vegetation and/or undesirable volunteer trees for the application of
herbicides and/or the actual application of herbicides to vegetation and/or undesirable volunteer
trees, that are known to prevent, inhibit and/or eradicate the growth of specific vegetation
commonly referred to as weeds and volunteer trees.
2. The trimming, cutting, pruning and/or mowing of vegetation to a height that is correct for the
primary desirable vegetation present on the property and/or a height that will not be detrimental
to the healthy growth of the primary desirable vegetation present.
3. The pruning, cutting, and/or otherwise trimming of shrubs, trees and/or other vegetation in
manner that will prevent the same from interfering with any sidewalk area, sidewalk, right of way
or travelways by causing a physical obstruction and/or sight obstruction as defined by law.
4. In some instances the effective removal of vegetation, shrubs and/or trees may be required to
eliminate physical obstructions and/or sight obstructions present in the sidewalk, sidewalk area,
right of way and/or travelway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 203/315
5. The mowing and/or cutting of vegetation in a prescribed manner, to a prescribed height and in
an area of prescribed width in order to establish a satisfactory fuel break in areas where an
actual fire hazard is determined to exist.
6. The turning over, plowing and/or otherwise breaking up of the soil in a prescribed manner and in
an area of prescribed width in order to establish a satisfactory fuel break in areas where an
actual fire hazard is determined to exist.
C. Action Upon Noncompliance: Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or contract
purchaser, after being notified as provided for in subsection A of this section, to properly control
and/or eradicate any designated noxious weed, weeds, rank vegetation, volunteer shrub or tree, or
tree growth upon said private property or adjacent right of way areas, as specified in section 9-4-4
of this chapter, within ten (10) days of the posting of notice on the real property, the code
enforcement officer is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the violation to be abated
and/or to issue citation for violations of this code.
D. Charges For Abatement Of Violations - Special Assessments: When the city has caused any
violation of section 9-4-3 of this chapter to be abated, as provided for hereinabove in this section,
then the actual cost for such abatement, plus an administrative fee and accrued interest at the rate
of not more than six percent (6%) per annum from the date of the completed abatement shall be
chargeable and assessable against the owner or contract purchaser of the subject property. All
such charges if not paid within thirty (30) days to the city clerk of the city of Orofino, Idaho, shall be
declared delinquent and may be certified to the tax collector of Clearwater County, Idaho, by the
city clerk and collected in the manner provided for in Idaho Code, section 50-1008. (Ord. 781, 3-
11-2014)
9-4-6: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person or entity who owns or is in control of or is the contract purchaser of real property found to
be in violation of this chapter, shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor and for each
violation shall be fined a sum not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment in the
county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day
the real property remains in violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 781, 3-11-2014)
Chapter 5
MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL
9-5-1: OPERATION:
The Municipal swimming pool of the City shall be open to the public at all proper and reasonable
times, the opening date, hours of operation and closing date to be fixed annually by the Council. (Ord.
332, 5-9-1955)
9-5-2: RULES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 204/315
The operation of the swimming pool shall be subject to the rules and regulations prescribed by this
Chapter, and to such other rules and regulations as the Council may from time to time adopt or
authorize. (Ord. 332, 5-9-1955)
9-5-3: MANAGER; DUTIES:
The Council shall appoint a swimming pool manager who shall be an employee of the City, and who
shall receive such salary as may be authorized by the Mayor and Council. The manager shall have
general supervision over the swimming pool and the operation of the same. It shall be the duty of the
manager to preserve order, to enforce all provisions of this Chapter and all rules and regulations
adopted or authorized, and the manager is hereby authorized to exclude from the swimming pool any
person violating the same. (Ord. 332, 5-9-1955)
9-5-4: EMPLOYEES:
The Council shall appoint such employees, assistants, lifeguards and attendants as may be required
for the purpose of administering the provisions of this Chapter and of operating the swimming pool, all
of whom shall be under the immediate direction and supervision of the pool manager. (Ord. 332, 5-9-
1955)
9-5-5: DISEASED PERSONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease to enter the
swimming pool; and the manager is hereby authorized to require a certificate of a licensed physician
that any person applying for admission to the pool is free from any such contagious or infectious
disease. (Ord. 332, 5-9-1955)
9-5-6: POLLUTION OF POOL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place in the water or the pool any stones, debris, refuse
or discarded substances of any kind, or in any manner wilfully to pollute the water of the pool. (Ord.
332, 5-9-1955)
9-5-7: ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any animals in the water of the pool or in the pool area.
(Ord. 332, 5-9-1955)
9-5-8: POOL HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the water of the pool except during the prescribed operating
hours and while the manager or a lifeguard is present and on duty. (Ord. 332, 5-9-1955)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 205/315
9-5-9: PAYMENT OF CHARGES REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the pool or pool gates without first paying the established
charge to the cashier. (Ord. 332, 5-9-1955)
9-5-10: CHILDREN:
It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of seven (7) years to enter the pool unless
accompanied by a parent, guardian or some adult who shall be responsible for such child. (Ord. 332,
5-9-1955)
9-5-11: POOL CHARGES:
The charges prescribed for the use of the swimming pool shall be as determined from time to time by
the Mayor and Council. (Ord. 409, 5-23-1967)
Chapter 6
CEMETERIES
9-6-1: HILL CEMETERY:
The Hill Cemetery is hereby closed to the sale of lots therein. (Ord. 349, 3-25-1959)
9-6-2: RIVERSIDE CEMETERY; BURIAL CHARGES:
The new cemetery shall be known as the Riverside Cemetery and each lot for the burial of dead
human bodies therein shall be sold for a price established by resolution of the City Council, with no
reduction for purchasing more than one lot in a block; provided, however, that a one-half (1/2) lot for
the interment not requiring a grave in excess of three feet (3') in length, shall be sold for a separate
price as determined by resolution. (Ord. 566, 1-11-1983)
9-6-3: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR BURIAL; SEXTON'S CHARGES:
Before the City shall cause the sexton to open a grave, burial permit shall be presented to the
undertaker, showing proper compliance with the laws of the State relative to the burial of human
bodies; and, upon the presentation thereof, and the payment of the price of the burial lot, together with
the sexton's charges as established by resolution, for the opening and closing thereof; provided,
however, if the interment does not require a grave in excess of three feet (3') in length, a separate
charge will be determined by resolution; provided, further, that should the interment be made on a
Saturday, an additional charge as determined by resolution, shall be made for the service and no
person shall be allowed or permitted to open or close a grave on Sunday or any other legal holiday.
No person shall be allowed or permitted to open or close a grave except under the order of the sexton
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 206/315
designated by the Council. In the event that any of the provisions hereof are violated, the person so
violating the same shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 566, 1-11-1983)
9-6-4: BURIAL REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for the burial at separate times of more than one human body in one grave lot;
provided, however, that if two (2) dead human bodies are buried in the same casket as one interment,
this shall not apply. (Ord. 212, 1-12-1940)
9-6-5: PURCHASE OF LOTS FOR RESALE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase lots or blocks in either cemetery for the purpose of
resale thereof; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall prohibit a party who has
purchased lots or a block in said cemeteries, in good faith, from disposing of said lots or portions of a
block to others, in good faith, for the burial of members of the purchaser's family therein, or to prohibit
any society or fraternal organizations from purchasing blocks for burial of the members of that
organization. (Ord. 212, 1-12-1940)
9-6-6: HEADSTONE AND DECORATION REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed on any cemetery burial lot any
headstone or decorative marker that shall extend more than one-half inch (1/2") above ground level,
except that portions of the cemetery currently plotted, and of the effective date of this Section, are
exempt from this provision and aboveground headstones shall be permitted in said currently plotted
section, provided such headstones are permanently affixed to a solid base level with the ground and
extending a minimum of six inches (6") in all directions from the headstone. It shall also be unlawful
for any person to locate or cause to be located, on a permanent basis, on any burial lot, any tree,
shrub, fence, vase or any other decorative item. Decorative items may be placed on burial lots, on a
temporary basis, for a period not to exceed seven (7) days. Any decorative item not removed from a
burial lot within a seven (7) day period shall be discarded by the City. (Ord. 600, 4-23-1985)
Chapter 7
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
9-7-1: SYSTEM OF NUMBERING:
For the purpose of numbering for distribution of mail, the various lots, pieces and parcels of land within
the corporate limits, the following system is adopted:
A. East And West: As a base for numbering east and west, a line shall be established as commencing
at the south boundary of the City limits thence northwesterly along the center line of Main Street to
a point where the same intersects the center line of Michigan Avenue; thence northwesterly along
Michigan Avenue to a point where the same intersects the right-of-way line of the Northern Pacific
Railway Company; thence northwesterly along the said right-of-way line to a point where the same
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 207/315
intersects the City limits. A separate number shall be given for each approximate twelve feet (12')
of lot front and all blocks easterly or westerly from said line shall bear the same number in
hundreds and those westerly from said line shall be numbered as west, and accordingly as the
number of said block is east or west of said base line.
B. North And South: As a base for numbering north and south, a line shall be established as
commencing at a point in the meander line of the Clearwater where the same would be intersected
by Michigan Avenue extended, then extending easterly along said center line to the eastern
boundary of the City limits. A separate number shall be assigned for each approximate twelve feet
(12') of lot frontage and lots facing on A and B streets lying south of Michigan shall bear the prefix
South A and B, respectively, and those facing the same streets and lying north of Michigan shall
bear the prefix North, respectively, and all lots in the same block shall bear the same number in
hundreds and the blocks shall be numbered in hundreds according to the number of the block
north or south of said base. (Res., 4-11-1927)
Chapter 8
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
9-8-1: LOCATION AND ESTABLISHMENT:
The City is the owner and operator of that Municipal Airport located in Lots 9, 10, 11 and 12 in Section
1, Township 36 north, Range 1 E.B.M. and the same is maintained as a public airport.
An exclusive lease or permission to use or occupy the Municipal Airport shall not be granted to any
person, but said airport shall at all times be open for the use of the public for air navigation purposes.
Provided, however, permission may be granted for the establishing of airport facilities such as
hangars, machine shops or gasoline stations needed or used in air navigation. (Ord. 255, 2-14-1949)
9-8-2: FEES:
The airport shall be open for the landing and taking off of licensed aircraft as provided by the laws of
the United States and of the State of Idaho. Provided, however, that there shall be charged and
collected the following fees and taxes for the use of said airport:
A. Commercial Purpose: For the use of said airport by any person for commercial purposes, the sum
of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month, which said charge shall be in addition to all the other charges
provided for by this Chapter. As used herein, the term "commercial purposes" means the operation
of any aircraft for a profit to the operator.
B. Leasing Of Ground: For the leasing of ground for constructing and maintaining a hangar thereon,
the rental charge of the ground shall be one cent ($0.01) per square foot when used only for
private storage, and one and one-half cents ($0.015) per square foot when used for commercial
purposes. Such charge shall be paid annually and no lease shall be for less than two thousand
(2,000) square feet, and no lease shall be for longer than five (5) years, and shall require full
compliance with this Chapter; and when such hangar is removed, the ground shall be restored to
its present condition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 208/315
C. Gasoline Sold Or Dispensed: For all gasoline sold or dispensed from said airport, a tax in the sum
of two cents ($0.02) per gallon, the said tax to be paid by any dealer or other person selling or
dispensing gasoline from the said airport, on or before the fifth day of each month, for all gasoline
so sold or dispensed during the preceding calendar month. Any such dealer or person so selling
and dispensing gasoline from the said airport shall, with each remittance of tax monies, submit to
the Council a statement of the number of gallons of gasoline sold or dispensed by him during the
preceding calendar month.
D. Right To Limit Number Of Planes: The Mayor and Council, by resolution duly passed, reserve the
right to limit the number of planes to be maintained and stored on the said airport, and also the
number of hangars and the size thereof. Provided, that this clause shall not be so construed as to
grant any person the right to keep or store, or lease hangar space on said airport sufficient to
create a monopoly thereof. (Ord. 372, 6-14-1962, eff. retroactive to 6-1-1962)
9-8-3: RENTAL AND CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All buildings now located on said airport are declared the property of the City and before any person
shall have the right to the use or occupancy of any such building or structure, permission must be
secured from the Mayor and Council and upon such terms, rentals and conditions as may then be
determined and no permission for such use shall be made for a period of longer than one year, and
such use shall be subject to cancellation upon thirty (30) days' notice or upon any breach of the
permission granted. The mayor and council may permit the use of certain ground for the erection of a
private hangar, machine shop, gas station and pumps. Provided that, before any such facilities may be
built, constructed or installed, detailed plans thereof are to be filed with the clerk, showing the type of
construction and location. All permits must be in writing. No permit for the use of land shall be granted
which will, in the opinion of the mayor and council, interfere with the use of the runways or present
facilities of the airport. Such permission shall be limited as to time and are not transferable and are at
all times subject to cancellation for breach thereof. Each person granted permission to establish and
install facilities shall pay to the clerk reasonable monthly rental for the use of the ground, as the
council may determine. All such rentals shall be equal for like permits, subject, however, to the right of
the council to be the sole judge of the necessity and fitness of such grant or grants, but this shall not
be construed as to give the council the right to place such restrictions that would grant exclusive right
to concessions and any person and any concession, other than private hangar, is open to the public
and the charges made and services rendered shall be equal to all persons asking for the same. Any
discrimination given or shown by any person holding a concession permit shall constitute a violation of
the permit and, upon conviction thereof, the party found guilty shall have the permit canceled and be
subject to a fine of not over one hundred dollars ($100.00) and may be denied thereafter the use of
the airport. (Ord. 255, 2-14-1949)
9-8-4: FEES FOR TEMPORARY USE:
A. Temporary Barnstorming: In the event any person shall bring to said airport aircraft for the purpose
of temporary barnstorming and not regularly maintained at said airport, they shall pay to the city
such fees as may be determined by the council. Such person shall make report and payment daily
for the use of said airport and, if such payment and report is not made, they shall be denied the
use of the airport for such purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 209/315
B. Violation: The council reserves the right to designate some person to inspect the books of any
person using said airport as herein provided and, if it is found that false statements are made or
reports are not made, then such person making such false statement or failing to report shall, upon
conviction, and in addition to being prohibited from the use of said airport, be subject to
imprisonment in the city jail for not more than thirty (30) days or a fine not exceeding one hundred
dollars ($100.00), or both, and such action shall be tried before the police judge.
C. Occasional Business; Emergency Landings: No charge for the use of the airport shall apply to
aircraft stationed elsewhere and landing at the local airport for the purpose of discharging
passengers or cargo taken on elsewhere or when only an occasional passenger or cargo is
loaded, nor shall it apply to emergency landings or landing of aircraft during an emergency or for
loading or unloading firefighters. The council shall be the sole judge whether the landing is
occasional or as a regular business. (Ord. 255, 2-14-1949)
D. Commercial Use Of Airport: The city council shall set by resolution the daily fees for the temporary
use of airport facilities when an individual, group, organization, company, corporation, or other
entity uses the airport for private, commercial or business purposes. Prior permission from the city
is required before any use of the airport is granted. (Ord. 697, 5-22-2000)
9-8-5: MAINTENANCE AND CARE; RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGE:
All persons granted permits to use or maintain aircraft upon the airport or granted concessions
thereon shall be responsible for the proper maintenance thereof and care of the concession. Any
damage or expense caused by the negligence of any such person to properly keep the same shall
give the city the right to repair such damage or clean up the grounds and the cost thereof shall be
repaid to the city. Failure to repair or account to the city shall be grounds for refusal of the use of said
airport, but such refusal shall not prevent the city from suing for and recovering for said damage. (Ord.
255, 2-14-1949)
9-8-6: RIGHTS OF CITY TO SEIZE AIRCRAFT:
All persons having aircraft on said airport, or having equipment to conduct and operate concessions,
by granting of the permit to use the airport or establish concessions shall grant, and by the taking out
of such permit they do grant, to the city a lien thereon for the payment of any and all charges
heretofore provided, as well as penalties, and the city has the right, through its officers, to seize such
aircraft or equipment and hold the same until such charges are paid. In the event aircraft or equipment
of any person are so seized, they shall have the right to a hearing before the mayor and council by
making a demand therefor in writing, duly verified, setting forth the grounds of protest and serving the
same upon the mayor and clerk. When such a notice is served, the mayor shall call a special meeting
of the council within ten (10) days to hear and consider said protest and their decision shall be final.
Provided that, pending such hearing the person whose property is held shall have the right to deposit
with the clerk security in an amount equal to the amount claimed due, with costs, and when such
security is so filed, the property shall be released and such bond shall be in lieu of the property. (Ord.
255, 2-14-1949)
9-8-7: AIRPORT MAINTENANCE FUND:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 210/315
All fees, fines and charges obtained by virtue of this chapter shall be paid into the airport maintenance
fund and used for the upkeep and maintenance of said airport and paid out upon the warrant after
approval of the council. (Ord. 255, 2-14-1949)
9-8-8: PERMISSION TO USE AIRPORT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass upon the airport grounds without permission, other than
the right of ingress and egress in going to or from the aircraft or concessions in the usual manner.
(Ord. 255, 2-14-1949)
9-8-9: VEHICLE AND AIRCRAFT TRAFFIC REGULATED:
Vehicle and aircraft traffic on the municipal airport shall be regulated by resolution of the council; a
copy of all regulations shall be posted in the office of the airport manager, and copies of the
regulations shall be available from the airport manager. (Ord. 453, 12-13-1971)
9-8-10: STORAGE OF AVIATION FUEL:
No person shall bring aviation fuel upon or store aviation fuel upon the municipal airport without the
prior approval of the city council. (Ord. 453, 12-13-1971)
9-8-11: OPERATION OF FLIGHT TRAINING BUSINESS:
No person shall engage in the furnishing of flight training or instruction for a fee or other consideration
without first applying for and obtaining a permit from the council and providing the following
improvements and facilities, which shall be subject to the approval of the council:
A. Evidence Of Compliance: Each applicant shall have complied with all applicable laws, rules and
regulations of appropriate agencies and shall present evidence of such compliance to the council.
B. Lease Of Lots: Each applicant shall have leased from the city no fewer than two (2) standard airport
lots.
C. Liability Insurance: Each applicant shall provide liability insurance by a carrier and in amounts
acceptable and with riders protecting the city.
D. Classroom Space And Related Facilities: Each applicant shall provide adequate classroom space
and related facilities including restrooms, telephone and parking facilities.
E. Acquaint Students With Rules: Each applicant shall agree to fully acquaint his students with all
ordinances, rules and regulations of the city with regard to the use of the municipal airport and with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 211/315
regard to aircraft and vehicular traffic on and about the municipal airport. (Ord. 453, 12-13-1971)
9-8-12: AIRCRAFT CHARTER OR AIR TAXI OPERATIONS:
No person shall engage in the aircraft charter or air taxi business, or furnish aircraft charter or air taxi
services for a fee or other consideration without first applying for and obtaining a permit from the
council and providing the following improvements and facilities subject to the approval of the council:
A. Lease Of Lots: Each applicant shall have under lease a minimum of three (3) standard airport lots
from the city for the purpose of providing customer parking, aircraft parking and aircraft taxiing.
B. Evidence Of Compliance: Each applicant shall have complied with all applicable laws, rules and
regulations and shall furnish evidence thereof to the council.
C. Insurance: Each applicant shall obtain and furnish evidence to the council of insurance with an
acceptable company, in acceptable amounts with acceptable riders to protect the city.
D. Building And Facilities; Office Hours: Each applicant shall provide a building containing not less
than seven hundred eighty (780) square feet including public areas, restrooms, telephone and
other related facilities. Each applicant must maintain regular office hours with personnel on duty
during those hours as may be required by the council. (Ord. 453, 12-13-1971)
9-8-13: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to such penalties as are provided by law. (Ord. 453, 12-13-1971)
Chapter 9
EXCAVATIONS
9-9-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to tunnel under or to make any excavation in any street, alley or
other public place in the City without having obtained a permit as herein required, or without complying
with the provisions of this Chapter, or in violation of or variance from the terms of any such permit.
(Ord. 438, 12-4-1970)
9-9-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Applications for such permit shall be made to the City Clerk, and shall describe the location of the
intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose therefor, and the person doing the actual
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 212/315
excavating work and the name of the person for whom or which the work is being done, and shall
contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to
be done. (Ord. 438, 12-4-1970)
9-9-3: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
No permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has filed with the Clerk a certification
of effective liability insurance conditioned to indemnify the City for any loss, liability or damage that
may result or accrue from or because of the making, existence or manner of guarding or constructing
any such tunnel or excavation. (Ord. 438, 12-4-1970)
9-9-4: DEPOSIT:
No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has deposited with the Clerk a
cash deposit in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), if no pavement is involved, and the sum of one
hundred dollars ($100.00), if the excavation is in a paved area, to ensure the proper restoration of the
ground and laying of the pavement, if any. From this deposit shall be deducted the expense to the City
of relaying the surface of the ground or pavement and of making the refill if this is done by the City or
at its expense, and the balance shall be returned to the applicant without interest after the tunnel or
excavation is completely refilled and the surface or pavement is restored. (Ord. 438, 12-4-1970)
9-9-5: MANNER OF EXCAVATING:
A. Compliance With Terms Of Permit: It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in
any way contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper bracing shall be
maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground; and in excavations, the excavation shall
not have anywhere below the surface any portion which extends beyond the opening at the
surface.
B. Damage To Pipes, Cable Or Conduits; Notice: No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or
conduits in the making of such excavations or tunnels; and notice shall be given to the persons
maintaining any such pipes, cables or conduits or to the City department or officer charged with the
care thereof, which are or may be endangered or affected by the making of such excavation or
tunnel before such pipes, cables or conduits shall be disturbed.
C. Damage To Trees Or Shrubs: No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub,
or the roots thereof. (Ord. 438, 12-4-1970)
9-9-6: SIDEWALKS:
If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed or provided
which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users. (Ord. 438, 12-4-1970)
9-9-7: RESTORING SURFACE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 213/315
A. Restore To Original Condition: Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public
street, alley or other public place in the City shall restore the surface to its original condition.
B. Repairs Made And Surfaces Relaid: Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall be
repaired and the surface relaid by the applicant, in compliance with the ordinances of the City and
under the supervision of the Street Superintendent. (Ord. 438, 12-4-1970)
9-9-8: SUPERVISION:
The Street Superintendent shall from time to time inspect or cause to be inspected all excavations and
tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley or other public place in the City to see to the
enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 438, 12-4-1970)
9-9-9: PROTECTIVE MEASURES:
A. Maintain Barriers And Warning Devices: It shall be the duty of every person cutting or making an
excavation in or upon any public place, to place and maintain barriers and warning devices
necessary for safety of the general public.
B. Maintain Normal Traffic Conditions: The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that
during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as near normal as possible shall
be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining
property and to the general public. (Ord. 438, 12-4-1970)
9-9-10: CLEANUP:
As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth,
rock and other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such
excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the
satisfaction of the Street Superintendent. From time to time, as may be ordered by the Street
Superintendent, and in any event immediately after the completion of the said work, the permittee
shall, at his own or its own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind
resulting from said work, and upon failure to do so within twenty four (24) hours after having been
notified to do so by the Street Superintendent, said work may be done by the Street Superintendent,
and the cost thereof charged to the permittee. (Ord. 438, 12-4-1970)
9-9-11: PROMPT COMPLETION OF WORK:
After an excavation is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all
excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore
the street to its original condition, so as not to obstruct the public place or travel thereon more than is
reasonably necessary. (Ord. 438, 12-4-1970)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 214/315
9-9-12: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 438, 12-4-1970)
Chapter 10
AVISTA CORPORATION FRANCHISE
9-10-1: PURPOSE:
Avista Corporation (hereinafter referred to as "Grantee"), its successors and assigns, is hereby
granted a franchise by the city of Orofino (hereinafter referred to as "Grantor" or the "City") for the
purposes identified herein and subject to the terms and conditions outlined in this chapter. (Ord. 707,
11-12-2001)
9-10-2: FRANCHISE GRANTED:
Grantor hereby grants to grantee, its successors and assigns, the right, power, privilege and authority
to enter upon all roads, rights of way, streets, alleys, public places or structures lying within the
boundaries of grantor and owned or maintained by grantor, to locate, construct, operate and maintain
poles, wires, underground cables and all necessary or desirable appurtenances for the purpose of
transmitting and distributing electricity. This franchise shall allow for the placement of such facilities as
may be necessary to provide service within the city and surrounding areas. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-3: TERM:
The rights, privileges and franchise hereby granted to, and conferred upon the grantee shall, unless
this franchise be sooner terminated as herein provided, extend for a term of twenty five (25) years
from the date of written acceptance hereof by the grantee. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-4: TRIMMING/REMOVAL OF TREES:
The right of grantee to maintain its lines, facilities and appurtenances shall include the right, as
exercised in grantee's sole discretion, to utilize an integrated vegetation management program,
including the right to cut, trim or remove any and all trees, brush or shrubs growing in, on, or hanging
over any city roads, rights of way, streets, alleys or city property that interfere with or may interfere
with grantee's facilities, including wires, poles, conduits or other apparatus of grantee, its successors
and assigns. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-5: RIGHT OF EXCAVATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 215/315
For the purpose of carrying into effect the privileges granted hereunder, grantee is authorized at any
time to make all necessary excavations in the streets, alleys, roads, rights of way and public grounds
within the franchised area, but such excavation shall be carried out with reasonable dispatch and with
as little interference with or inconvenience to the rights of the public as may be feasible. Grantee shall
restore all streets, alleys, roads, rights of way and public grounds to a standard as agreed upon for
conditions of safety and use after excavation. In case any obstruction caused by grantee shall remain
longer than seven (7) days after notice to remove it, or in case of neglect by grantee to safeguard any
dangerous places, grantor may remove such obstruction or safeguard such dangerous places at the
expense of the grantee. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-6: NONINTERFERENCE WITH EXISTING FACILITIES:
All construction, installation, repair or relocation of lines and appurtenances performed by grantee
along or under the roads, rights of way or properties subject to this franchise shall be done in such a
manner as not to interfere with the construction and maintenance of other utilities, public or private,
drains, drainage ditches and structures, irrigation ditches and structures located therein, nor with the
grading or improvement of such roads, rights of way or other public property subject to this franchise.
(Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-7: NECESSARY CONSTRUCTION/MAINTENANCE BY GRANTOR:
The laying, construction, operation and maintenance of grantee's lines and appurtenances authorized
by this franchise shall not preclude the grantor, its agents or its contractors, from blasting, excavating,
or doing other necessary road work contiguous to the said lines and facilities of grantee, provided that
grantee shall be given not less than five (5) days' notice of said blasting or other work, and provided
further that the grantor, its agents and contractors shall be liable for any damages, including any
consequential damages to third parties, caused by said work to any installations belonging to grantee.
(Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-8: CONDUCT OF GRANTEE'S BUSINESS:
The grantor shall have the right to make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to
the conduct of the grantee's business. Service shall be supplied to the grantor and its inhabitants in
accordance with the grantee's rules and regulations and tariffs filed or hereafter filed with the
appropriate regulatory body of this state having jurisdiction over the grantee. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-9: RIGHTS OF INGRESS/EGRESS:
The grantee, its agents and employees, shall have the right and power to ingress and egress upon its
customers' properties for the purpose of installing, servicing and maintaining its facilities including the
testing and reading of service meters. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-10: VACATION OF PROPERTIES BY GRANTOR:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 216/315
If, at any time, the grantor shall vacate any road, right of way or other public property which is subject
to rights granted by this franchise, to the extent permitted by law, such vacation shall be subject to the
reservation of a perpetual easement in favor of grantor for the purpose of operating and maintaining
the facilities of the grantee and other public utilities. Such easement shall also expressly prohibit any
use of the vacated properties, which will interfere with grantor's ability to provide grantee's full
enjoyment of its rights under this franchise. Grantor shall also continue to permit grantee to operate
and maintain its facilities in or on the vacated property consistent with and subject to this franchise.
(Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-11: RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Grantor shall notify grantee of any intended or expected requirement or request to relocate grantee's
facilities as early as practicable, but not later than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to any such
relocation when the requirement or request could have been foreseen by that date. Grantor shall
endeavor to cause any such relocation to be consistent with any applicable long term development
plan or projection of grantor or approved by grantor. If, at any time, the grantor shall cause or require
the alteration or the improvement of any road, highway or right of way wherein grantee maintains
facilities subject to this franchise by grading or regrading, planking or paving the same, changing the
grade, altering, changing, repairing or relocating the same or by constructing drainage or sanitary
sewer facilities, the grantee upon written notice from the grantor shall, with all convenient speed,
change the location or readjust the elevation of its system and other facilities so that the same shall
not interfere with such work and so that such equipment and facilities shall conform to such new
grades or routes as may be established. The relocation of grantee's facilities shall be at the sole
expense of grantee unless: a) the improvement was not paid for solely with public funds, in which
case the grantor agrees to make reasonable efforts to facilitate an agreement between the adjoining
property owners or developers to pay for the costs of relocation; or b) grantor has failed to provide the
required advance notice in which case any and all excess costs caused by the failure to provide such
notice shall be paid by grantor. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-12: PRESERVATION OF GRANTOR'S RIGHTS TO CONTROL:
The grantor, in granting this franchise, does not waive any rights which it may now have or may
hereafter acquire with respect to road rights of way or other property of grantor under this franchise,
and this franchise shall not be construed to deprive the grantor of any such powers, rights or privileges
which it now has or may hereafter require to regulate the use of and to control the grantor's roads,
rights of way and other public property covered by this franchise. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-13: EMERGENCY REMOVAL OF GRANTOR:
The grantor reserves the right to remove any such wires, poles, or apparatus ("Grantee's facilities")
herein provided for in case of general conflagration or in other cases of extreme emergency where
there is neither the time nor the opportunity for grantee to perform such work. Grantor shall use
reasonable care in the exercise of such emergency powers. Grantor shall indemnify and hold
harmless the grantee, its successors and assigns, against any and all property damage, personal
injury, death, or other liability to third parties sustained as a result of the negligent exercise of such
reserved emergency powers, and shall, at its expense, restore grantee's facilities removed as a result
of such exercise. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 217/315
9-10-14: NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
This franchise shall not be deemed to be an exclusive franchise. It shall in no manner prohibit the
grantor from granting other franchises of a like nature or franchises to other public or private utilities
under, along, across, over and upon any of grantor's roads, rights of way or other property of grantor
subject to this franchise and shall in no way prevent or prohibit the grantor from constructing, altering,
maintaining or using any of said roads, rights of way, drainage structures of facilities, irrigation
structures of facilities, or any other property of grantor or affect its jurisdiction over such property to
make all necessary changes, relocations, repairs, maintenance, etc., insofar as the grantor may deem
fit. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-15: FORFEITURE:
If grantee shall wilfully violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this franchise through wilful
and unreasonable neglect or wilful and unreasonable failure to heed or comply with any notice given
grantee under the provisions of this grant, then grantee shall forfeit all rights conferred hereunder and
this franchise may be revoked or annulled by the grantor; provided, however, the grantor shall give
ninety (90) days' written notice of its intention to revoke or annul the franchise during which period
grantee shall have the opportunity to remedy any breach. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-16: EXPANSION OF GRANTEE'S FACILITIES:
Any facilities and appurtenances in streets, alleys, rights of way and public places, incidental to the
franchise system, that have been, or are at any future time acquired, leased or utilized in any manner
by grantee are thereupon to be deemed authorized by and shall be subject to all provisions of this
franchise. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-17: CHANGE OF BOUNDARIES OF GRANTOR:
Any subsequent additions or modifications of the boundaries of the grantor, whether by annexation,
consolidation or otherwise, shall be subject to the provisions of this franchise as to all such areas.
Grantor shall notify grantee of the precise scope of any change of boundaries not less than sixty (60)
days prior to such change becoming effective. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-18: PRIOR FRANCHISES SUPERSEDED:
This franchise shall update and supersede all prior electric franchises for the above stated purpose
heretofore granted to Avista Corporation or its predecessors, by grantor, or its predecessors, and shall
affirm, authorize and ratify all prior installations authorized by permits or other action not previously
covered by this franchise. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-19: ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISE:
Grantee, its successors and assigns, shall have the right to sell, transfer or assign this franchise. All
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 218/315
provisions, conditions, regulations and requirements herein contained shall be binding upon and inure
to the benefit of the successors and assigns of the parties hereto. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-20: EFFECT OF INVALIDITY:
The franchise is granted pursuant to the laws of the state of grantor relating to the granting of such
rights and privileges by grantor. If any article, section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this franchise is
for any reason held illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the
franchise or any of the remaining portions. The invalidity of any portion of this franchise shall not
abate, reduce, or otherwise affect any obligation required of grantee. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-21: FRANCHISE AS CONTRACT:
This franchise shall have the effect of and shall be a contract between grantor and grantee and shall
be the measure of the rights and liabilities of the grantor as well as of the grantee. (Ord. 707, 11-12-
2001)
9-10-22: EQUALITY OF FRANCHISE FEES AND COSTS:
In the event that grantor charges or imposes upon grantee any fees, taxes or other costs in
connection with the issuance, maintenance, existence, continuation, or use of the franchise, or the
public rights of way governed hereby, granted pursuant to this document, then grantor shall impose
equivalent charges, fees, taxes or costs upon any other franchisee in the same business or competing
with grantee.
The grantor shall follow the laws of the state of Idaho when assessing any franchise fees. A franchise
fee of three percent (3%) will be assessed against grantee. The grantor reserves the right to negotiate
the franchise fee with the grantee upon any subsequent changes in Idaho law. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-23: INDEMNITY:
Grantee agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the grantor, its appointed and elected officers
and employees, from any and all liabilities, claims, causes of action, losses, damages and expenses,
including costs and reasonable attorney fees, that the grantor may sustain, incur, become liable for, or
be required to pay as a consequence of arising from the construction, installation, maintenance,
condition or operation of the grantee's equipment or facilities, or appurtenances thereto, connected
with this franchise, that now or may hereafter be upon, under, over, in, across or along, the highways,
roads, alleys, bridges or other public ways or places of the grantor; provided, however, that this
indemnification provision shall not apply to the extent that said liabilities, claims, damages, losses and
so forth were caused by or result from the negligence of the grantor.
Grantor agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the grantee, its officers and employees, from
any and all liabilities, claims, causes of action, losses, damages and expenses, including costs and
reasonable attorney fees, that the grantee may sustain, incur, become liable for, or be required to pay,
as a consequence of or arising from the negligent acts or omissions of the grantor, its officers,
employees or agents; provided, however, that this indemnification provision shall not apply to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 219/315
extent that said liabilities, claims, damages, losses and so forth were caused by or result from the
negligence of the grantee. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-24: ABANDONMENT OF FRANCHISE:
Grantee may at any time abandon the rights and authorities granted hereunder, provided that six (6)
months' written notice of intention to abandon is given to grantor. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
9-10-25: ACCEPTANCE OF FRANCHISE:
Grantee shall notify grantor in writing of its acceptance of this franchise within thirty (30) days of the
approval of this franchise by grantor. (Ord. 707, 11-12-2001)
Chapter 11
STREET LIGHT FEE
9-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure the welfare and safety of the citizens by providing public
street lighting, which benefits accrue to all property owners even when such lighting is not adjacent to
their property. Expenses associated with public lighting within the City shall be financed by charges
assessed to the owners and occupants of improved real property. (Ord. 646, 8-27-1991)
9-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless the
context clearly requires otherwise:
FACILITY: Each family, business, office, person or entity comprising a multi-facility unit.
IMPROVED REAL PROPERTY: Includes real estate which has water service provided either by the
City or by Riverside Independent Water District; is paved; is landscaped; or has erected thereon any
construction for which a building permit would be required.
MULTI-FACILITY UNIT: Any building, apartment, office complex, mobile home court, business
complex or other structure, or any combination thereof, owned by one person or entity and occupied
by two (2) or more separate families, businesses, offices, persons or entities or combination thereof.
PUBLIC LIGHTING: Refers to all lighting of exterior public areas, which may include lighting of public
streets, sidewalks, walkways, bike paths, adjacent private property, and other areas not specifically
excluded herein, which is paid for and/or maintained by the City for the benefit of the general public.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Includes property having occupancy or living accommodations on a
permanent or semi-permanent basis. (Ord. 646, 8-27-1991; amd. Ord. 653, 8-25-1992)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 220/315
9-11-3: CHARGES:
The owners and/or occupants of all improved real property within the City are hereby made subject to
the service charges for public lighting. Owners and/or occupants of multi-facility units shall be subject
to the same service charges. (Ord. 653, 8-25-1992)
A. Included In Utility Billing: The charges assessed shall be included in the general utility billing as a
separate item and as hereinafter set forth; provided, however, that the costs of lighting to illuminate
parks and playfields shall be paid from the City Recreation Fund. Improved City property shall be
subject to said fees, to be paid from the appropriate department budget.
B. Enacted By Resolution; Liability For Payment: Service charges shall be enacted by resolution. The
owners and/or occupants of improved real property shall be jointly and severally liable for such
charges; the charges shall become a lien upon and against the property against which the charge
is levied to the extent permitted by the laws of the State and the ordinances of the City and may be
collected in any manner permitted or hereafter permitted by such laws and ordinances.
C. Charges Fixed To Pay Lighting Costs: Public lighting charges shall be fixed and determined in
amounts sufficient to pay the costs incurred under lease agreements with Washington Water
Power Company electrical energy costs, billing expense, replacement expenses, and costs of
labor and materials necessary to maintain the public lighting system within the City.
D. Distribution Of Costs: The public lighting costs shall be distributed on an equal basis among all
"improved real property" and "residential property" as defined in Section 9-11-2 of this Chapter.
Such charges may be changed or amended by the City Council from time to time, as determined
necessary to finance these street lighting costs. Any changes or amendments to such service
charges may be made and fixed by City Council resolution. Three (3) copies of such resolution,
duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk for the use and
examination by the public. Such fees shall not take effect until at least thirty (30) days after
adoption of such resolution. (Ord. 646, 8-27-1991)
9-11-4: BILLING:
A. Payment To Treasurer: All billings for public lighting charges shall be made by, and all payments
shall be made to, the office of the Treasurer of the City. Billings shall be mailed to the owner of said
improved real property unless he or she designates to the City Clerk in writing. Notice by an owner
that such billing be mailed to a person other than the owner does not relieve the owner of liability
therefor.
B. Time Of Billings: Billings for charges levied and assessed under the provisions of this Chapter may
be made monthly, quarterly or at such other intervals as may be determined by resolution of the
Mayor and City Council, and shall be fixed at such intervals as will correspond to billings of the
same improved real property for water, sewer and sanitation services. Such billings may be billed
on the same statement; provided, however, that the billings for each service shall be segregated.
Such charges shall be due at the same time as charges for water, sewer and sanitation services.
(Ord. 646, 8-27-1991)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 221/315
9-11-5: REVENUES:
All revenues for public lighting shall be accounted for separately and shall be used only for payment of
expenses relating to providing lighting services. (Ord. 646, 8-27-1991)
9-11-6: RIGHT TO APPEAL:
Any owner and/or occupant billed for public lighting services may file a written appeal to the City
Council. Such appeal shall set forth all reasons as to why the fee is excessive or inequitable. (Ord.
646, 8-27-1991)
Chapter 12
WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS; RATES AND CHARGES
9-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect and improve the public health and general welfare of the
City; to require mandatory connection of homes and other facilities within the City to the public water
system; to make and place into effect certain rules and regulations to provide efficient service of the
public water system of the City; to collect such rates, fees, tolls, or charges necessary to provide for
the repayment of City indebtedness for the construction and installation of the system and for its
efficient maintenance and operation; and in establishing such rates and charges the City has taken
into account the cost and value of the system, operation and maintenance expenses, possible
delinquencies, proper allowance for depreciation, contingencies, and any amounts necessary to retire
all bonds payable from the net revenues and the reserves therefor. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this Chapter shall have the meanings herein given to them.
APPLICANT: The owner or authorized agent of the property to be served. The applicant shall be the
person responsible for payment of bills for domestic water service.
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The Water/Wastewater Superintendent of the City of Orofino or his duly
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
BILLING PERIOD: Each successive month of the City's fiscal year, immediately following the month in
which the water, sewer and sanitation services were used.
CITY: The City of Orofino, Idaho.
COMMERCIAL BUILDING OR UNIT: Any structure or part of a structure used for the purpose of
providing goods or services to the public through one facility including, but not limited to, stores,
service stations, schools, hospitals, rest homes, State, County or Federal offices or buildings or any
structure used for the manufacture of goods. "Commercial building or unit" also includes any property
requiring water service to provide goods or services to the public that has no structure on the property,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 222/315
including, but not limited to, parks and rock crushing sites or for any type of business or enterprise not
otherwise described or covered under definition of Dwelling.
COMMERCIAL USER: All persons not specifically classified as domestic or as an industrial water
user.
DWELLINGS:
Multi-Facility Dwelling Or Unit: Any building, apartment, office complex, mobile home court,
business complex or other structure, or any combination thereof, owned by one person or entity
and occupied by two (2) or more separate families, businesses, offices, persons, or entities, or
combination thereof, which shall include townhouses or condominiums.
Single-Family Dwelling Or Unit: Any building, home, trailer house, mobile home, or structure
used as a residence occupied exclusively by one family for living or sleeping purposes, and
having one kitchen or set of cooking facilities.
IRRIGATION USAGE: Water used for maintaining shrubs, grass or landscaping of property which is
not returned to the City sanitary sewer system for treatment.
PERSON: Individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, group, or other entity.
PRIVATE WATER MAIN: A water main serving buildings, residences or properties, constructed by
private contract outside of the public right of way and remaining under private ownership and
jurisdiction and which shall be maintained by said private owners. Private water mains shall be
designed, constructed and maintained by said private owners to the same design, construction and
maintenance standards as are public water mains.
PUBLIC WATER MAINS: Water mains provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the City. It shall also
include water mains within or outside the City boundaries that serve one or more persons potable
water, even though those water mains may not have been constructed with City funds. All public water
mains shall be located in dedicated public rights of ways or easements. Public water mains shall be at
least six inches (6") in diameter unless the Superintendent deems different.
REPLACEMENT: Any expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or
appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the water system or treatment facility to
maintain the capacity and performance for which such facilities were designed and constructed. The
term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement.
SUPERINTENDENT: The Water/Wastewater Superintendent of the City of Orofino.
UTILITY BILL: The combined charges for water, sewer, light, and sanitation services and any
combination of fees, charges or penalties incident thereof. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-3: WATER SYSTEM PROPERTY OF CITY:
All mains, laterals, pipes, hydrants and fixtures now laid, constructed or installed or hereafter to be
laid, constructed or installed, in, under, across or through the streets, avenues, alleys and other
thoroughfares, shall be located in dedicated public rights of ways or easements of the City for
supplying potable water to the City and the inhabitants thereof excepting properties under the control
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 223/315
of and owned by any water district formed pursuant to title 42, chapter 32, Idaho Code, are hereby
declared to be the property of the City, under the control thereof and subject to the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-4: SUPERINTENDENT IN CHARGE OF SYSTEM; DUTIES:
The Superintendent or his duly authorized deputy or representative shall have general supervision
over the waterworks of the City, and appurtenances thereto, under the direction to the Mayor and
Council. Said Superintendent shall attend the tapping of mains, laying and connecting up of laterals
and installation of meters and meter boxes, and shall see that all open ditches and excavations on or
along the streets, alleys and thoroughfares of said City are carefully guarded by rails and lights or
other proper warning signals. He shall have charge of and operate the treatment plant, pumping
stations and reservoirs and shall keep the mains of the said system filled with pure and wholesome
water at a pressure sufficient for proper fire protection. Prior to the hour of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of
the fifth business day before the close of the billing period, the said Superintendent shall have all
meters inspected and shall enter the present readings thereof in a permanent record opposite the last
pervious reading, and deliver the same to the Clerk. The said Superintendent shall at frequent
intervals examine the premises of customers supplied with water at a flat rate, and report to the Clerk
any improper diversions or use of water, or use of equipment other than that herein specified for flat
rate customers. At the order of the Council or Clerk, the Superintendent shall proceed to collect all
delinquent utility charges and the penalties as hereinafter provided. All sums collected by the
Superintendent under this Chapter shall be paid over to the Clerk with a statement of such collection
and a list of customers whose utility service has been disconnected. The Superintendent shall also
keep an inventory of all property belonging to the water system and shall, with the consent of the
Mayor and Council, purchase supplies and equipment necessary for the maintenance of the system.
He shall, upon request, attend meetings of the Council and render such report and statements as may
be required, he may perform such other duties as may be required of him by the Mayor and Council,
and to the end that the provisions of this Section may be carried out, the Superintendent shall be
allowed such assistance as the Mayor and Council may deem necessary and proper. (Ord. 659, 9-27-
1994)
9-12-5: APPLICATION FOR WATER CONNECTION:
Any person desiring to have premises connected with the water supply system of the City shall
present at the office of the Clerk, or other place provided for the conduct of such business, the
following information: copy of the building permit, location of premises with reference to abutting
streets, avenues and alleys, state fully all purposes for which such water is to be used, the number of
families to be supplied or other indication of the potable consumption, the size of the service pipe or
connection believed to be necessary; and the applicant shall therein agree to abide by and conform to
the provisions of this Chapter and shall agree that the officers and agents of the City shall have the
right at all reasonable times to enter upon the premises of such applicant for the purpose of inspection
of service pipes and equipment and reading, testing and repairing pipes and meters of the City
installed thereon; provided however, that the applicant is not the owner of the premises, the applicant
shall secure consent of the owner thereto and require the owner to guarantee the payment of the
water rentals and charges. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-6: SERVICE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED:
All water furnished to consumers shall be furnished through meters except as provided in Section 9-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 224/315
12-21 of this Chapter.
A. Separate Meter, Tap And Service Pipe Required: Every commercial building or residence and its
necessary outbuildings supplied with water shall have a separate meter, tap and service pipe
connected with the main, and the owner thereof shall be liable for all fees and other charges to
become due or due thereon. Provided, that the applicant for such service is not the owner of the
premises, the owner shall agree in writing to abide by the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Other Service Connections; Inspection Fee: No other service connections shall be allowed within
the City's water service area except to the City's potable water supply. Those commercial services
in existence and all residential services from other sources shall be discontinued, or shall be
subject to inspection for backflow prevention and an approved device installed as warranted. Such
service connection will be subject to an annual inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) and testing of
all sources as determined by the City.
C. Furnishing Water To Other Persons: No person whose premises are supplied with City water shall
furnish water to additional persons or property.
D. Individual Customer Services: Individual customer services three-fourth inch (3/4") to four inches
(4") and fire taps from four inches (4") to six inches (6") will be allowed to connect to City supply
mains only. Eight inch (8") taps will be allowed for looped systems, subdivisions and fire hydrants
and shall be approved by the Superintendent. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-7: SERVICE CONNECTION SPECIFICATIONS:
All persons connecting to a City-owned service connection shall use approved type K copper pipe up
to and including two inches (2") in nominal diameter in, under, across or through the streets, avenues,
alleys, thoroughfares, or dedicated public rights of ways or easements of the City and extending to the
property line of the owner. All private service lines shall be laid not less than three feet (3') below the
surface of the ground or equal distance below the established or predicated grade of any street. (Ord.
659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-8: INSPECTION OF CONNECTION:
Whenever the owner of any premises connected with the City water supply system or his duly
authorized agent shall desire to use the water, he shall request the Superintendent to have the water
turned on and service begun. The owner shall leave his portion of the trench containing the service
connection open until the same has been properly inspected and the water turned on, when he/she
shall immediately and properly cover such pipe. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-9: RIGHT OF ENTRY; TURN OFF FOR REPAIRS:
A. Right Of Entry; Violation: No person shall refuse, neglect or fail to afford any duly authorized
representative of the City free access at all reasonable hours to any and all parts of buildings or
premises supplied with water from the City water supply system for the purpose of making records,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 225/315
readings, and inspections of the location, condition and sufficiency of pipes, fixtures, and
appliances and noting the amount of water used and the manner in which it is used. Violation of
this Section or the abuse, threatening or attempted intimidation of any employee of the City may
result in the shutting off of the water and imposition of the usual penalties, in addition to
punishment for violation of this Section as provided in this Chapter.
B. Water Shutoff: The water may be shut off at any time from mains, laterals or service lines, without
notice, for the purpose of making repairs or extensions or in other cases of necessity, and the City
will not be responsible for any damages caused thereby or resulting from. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-10: REPAIR OF SERVICE LINES CUSTOMER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
All customers shall keep their service lines in good repair and protected from frost at their own
expense, and no deduction will be made on water usage for freezing, breaking or leakage on service
lines or fixtures. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-11: CHECK OR PRESSURE VALVES:
Where it is deemed necessary to protect the City's water meter from hot water or steam, the
Superintendent shall have the right to order the owner or water user to install an approved backflow
device, as provided in Section 9-12-44 of this Chapter. Any existing service or new construction within
the City where City main pressure exceeds eighty (80) psi and/or property owner requests or requires
less pressure, an approved pressure-regulating valve will be installed at the property owner's expense
on the owner's system. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-12: STEAM BOILER CONNECTIONS:
Water for high pressure or other steam boilers shall not be drawn directly from the City mains, but
shall in all cases be first fed into a suitable tank of sufficient capacity to supply needed water for at
least one-half (1/2) day. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-13: CONNECTIONS FOR ICE AND COLD STORAGE PLANTS:
No ice machine or cold storage plant shall at any time be connected in any manner with the City water
supply system, so that water which has been used in any part of such machine or plant will or may be
returned after use into the City mains. All water so used shall be at once discharged into the sewers or
other proper place of disposal. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-14: REGULATION OF SERVICE FOR SPRINKLING:
The City reserves the right to regulate the use of water for sprinkling and irrigating purposes and the
Superintendent shall give notice by publication, of any restrictions on the use of water for such
purposes, and further notices shall be given thereof to consumers with the next monthly statement
rendered by the Clerk, and thereafter any consumers using or permitting water to be used for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 226/315
sprinkling or irrigating purposes except as limited in such notice, upon two (2) or more wilful violations
of any rules or regulations so promulgated shall be deemed a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, may be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by
imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days or both such fine and imprisonment for each offense,
and in default of payment thereof the water shall be shut off. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent,
whenever the consumption of water threatens to exceed the capacity of the City's treatment and
transmission facilities, to report such condition to the Mayor and Council thereof in order that the use
of water for sprinkling and irrigation may be restricted. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-15: SPRINKLING PERSONS ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
No person shall wilfully place or permit any automatic sprinkling device or wilfully place or hold any
hose in such position or manner that water therefrom falls on any person while on any public street,
alley, highway, or sidewalk. The Superintendent may shut off the water on any person so offending.
(Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-16: METER TAMPERING; FEE:
Where it is determined by the Superintendent that the City curb cock shutoff has been tampered with,
damaged or is not in the "on" or "off" position as recorded by the City, the property owner of the
premises in question shall be assessed a fee of the actual costs of repair or a minimum of seventy five
dollars ($75.00) per occurrence to be charged with the regular utility billing. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-17: TAKING WATER FROM OTHER PREMISES AFTER SHUTOFF:
Where water has been shut off from any premises for lack of payment of charges or penalties or for
any other cause, no person occupying such premises shall take water from any other premises
connected with the City water supply system, nor shall any person permit such taking of water. (Ord.
659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-18: WASTING, POLLUTION, DESTRUCTION OF WATER SUPPLY:
Any person who shall interfere with, molest, injure or destroy any fire hydrant, pipe, main, meter,
service box or other appurtenance of the water system, or shall open any fire hydrant or tap or make
connection with any water main, lateral or pipe without having first obtained permission from the
proper official, or shall divert or appropriate water from any hydrant, main, lateral or water pipe without
paying the rentals and charges hereinafter specified, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. Proper Use Of Water; Maintenance Of Plumbing And fixtures: No person shall waste water or allow
it to be wasted by imperfect or leaking stop valves, check valves; other valves, faucets, pipes,
fittings, fixtures or devices of any kind for the utilization and control of water supply or allow any
faucet or valve to run wholly or partly open for the prevention of freezing or any other reason or
use the water for any purpose other than those upon which his contract is based or use water in
any way in violation of any provisions of this Chapter. In case of the neglect or failure to comply
with these requirements for the proper maintenance of plumbing and fixtures and the proper use of
water, the Superintendent may shut off the water until proper repairs are made and the usual
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 227/315
penalty paid. Upon the conviction of any person for the violation of the provisions of this Section, in
addition to other penalties imposed by this Chapter, the water on such premises shall be shut off
and shall not be again turned on until the best adjustment possible shall have been made for the
water so illegally consumed, insofar as the same can be approximately determined and the
charges and all penalties incurred have been paid in full.
B. Contamination Of Water Supply: No person shall place or cause to be placed in any part of the City
water supply system, within the limits of the jurisdiction of the City over the sources of supply, in
the pipes, reservoirs or plants thereof within the City any offal, garbage, refuse matter or other
unwholesome, injurious or poisonous substance, wash or bathe therein or contaminate the same
in any manner. Nor shall any person injure or offer or attempt to injure the water supply of the City
or any part of the plant or equipment maintained for that purpose.
C. Backflow Prohibited: Any physical arrangement whereby the City's domestic water supply is
connected directly or indirectly with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool,
storage or reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which contains, or may contain contaminated
water, sewage, or other waste or liquid which would be capable of imparting contamination to the
domestic supply as a result of backflow is prohibited.
D. Consumer Responsibility: The consumer has the responsibility of preventing actual and potential
contamination of the City water system and the consumer's own system. The consumer's
responsibility begins at the point of delivery from the City and includes all of the consumer's water
supply system. The consumers, at their own expense, shall install and maintain (USCEC)
University of Southern California Engineering Center approved backflow prevention devices as
directed by the City. Backflow prevention devices installed on lawn sprinkler or irrigation systems
may be installed, upon obtaining the proper permits, by the property owner, plumber or other lawn
sprinkler of irrigation system installer. At the City direction, backflow prevention devices installed on
all other systems shall be installed by a certified plumber. A list of approved backflow prevention
devices and certified plumbers shall be maintained at City Hall. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-19: USE OR OBSTRUCTION OF HYDRANTS:
A. Authorized Personnel Only: No person, except one duly authorized by the Superintendent or Fire
Department, shall open, close, turn on, turn off, interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to or
connect anything with any fire hydrant, standpipe, stopcock, or meter belonging to the City; nor
shall any person make any connection with any water main or water pipe belonging to the City
water supply system without due authority first having been obtained.
B. Backflow Device: For other than fire suppression and fire hydrant testing, an approved backflow
device or appropriate air gap will be required on any vehicle or equipment that will be connecting to
any hydrant or any appurtenances of the City's whether its metered or not.
C. Hydrant Meter Permit Required; Fee; Penalty: For other than fire suppression and fire hydrant
testing, a hydrant meter permit is required of any person desiring to use a fire hydrant. The
minimum charge shall be thirty five dollars ($35.00) or the actual cost of the water consumed,
whichever is greater. A deposit fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00), refundable upon removal by
the City of the undamaged meter and backflow device, and finding the hydrant undamaged, shall
be required before refunding said deposit. Anyone found using a hydrant without a permit or an
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 228/315
approved backflow device shall be assessed a civil penalty as follows:
First $ 500.00
Second 750.00
Third 1,000.00
and shall be levied on the next billing period, to the business/property owner using the water illegally.
D. Access To Fire Hydrant: No person shall obstruct the ready access to any fire hydrant by placing
around or thereon any stone, brick, lumber, dirt or other material, attempt to draw water therefrom
or wilfully or carelessly damage the same.
E. Damage Of Appurtenance: In the event that any person shall wilfully, carelessly or otherwise
damage or break any fire hydrant, street standpipe, public drinking fountain, water main or other
appurtenance connected with the City water supply system, he/she shall at once report the
occurrence to the Superintendent or police with his/her name and address and shall give such
undertaking as may be required of him/her that he/she will pay the cost of the repairs or
replacement made necessary thereto. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-20: WATER FOR CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS:
Water for construction operations may be supplied only at schedule rates. The owner or contractor
desiring the service may be required to make such a deposit with the Superintendent as will, in the
latter's opinion, secure the City against the nonpayment of all charges and penalties. Should no
service connection be available at the desired point, the Superintendent may make a special service
connection therefor and shall charge the cost of such work of installation and removal, less salvage of
the material recovered, to the account of the applicant or deduct it from any deposit made as above
prescribed. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-21: PRIVATE FIRE LINES AND AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS:
All domestic and fire lines into a structure must be separate.
A. Minimum Annual Charge: The minimum annual charge for private fire lines and automatic sprinkler
systems in private buildings is as follows:
Type Of Connection Yearly Rates
2 inch or less $ 12.00
3 inch 22.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 229/315
4 inch 35.00
6 inch 75.00
8 inch 130.00
10 inch 205.00
B. Red Fire Lines: All fire lines hereinafter installed in any structure in the City shall be painted red.
C. Minimum Charges Applicable: These minimum charges shall apply in all cases where automatic
sprinklers are installed and where fire gates and other outlets are sealed.
D. Extinguishing Fires: No charge will be made for water used in extinguishing fires.
E. Size Of Pipe: The inside diameter of the pipe leading to the fire hydrant shall determine the size of
the hydrant.
F. Improper Conditions: Should the City find that water not metered is used through a fire connection
for any purpose other than the extinguishing of fire upon premises, the owner and occupant will be
notified. If such improper conditions are not corrected within ten (10) days, the water shall be shut
off until adjustments are made.
G. Fire Protection Service: If any fire protection service is installed outside the City, the same may be
discontinued at the will of the City Council and the connection with the main removed at the
expense of the owner or occupant of the property served.
H. Responsibility Of Owner: All fire service connection between water mains and property lines shall
be installed and maintained by the City at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises
served, and shall be the property of the City.
I. Detailed Plans: At the time of making application for such services, the applicant shall file with the
City detailed plans showing all piping installed or to be installed for fire protection, all fire gates,
automatic sprinklers and all other outlets, gates or appurtenances. Each fire service connection
shall have a gate valve with an adequate valve box installed between the main and the property
line of the premises served.
J. Fire Line Connections: All new and remodeled fire line connections, all change in flow fire line
connections and all change in condition fire line connections shall have an approved backflow
device, to be installed and located in an accessible area for annual testing, as provided in Section
9-12-44 of this Chapter (cross-connections).
K. Maximum Size: No fire service connection larger than six inches (6") in diameter shall be installed
without special permission from the Superintendent.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 230/315
L. Cost Of Installation: Upon receipt of such application, the Superintendent shall fix the charge to be
made for the installation of such services plus ten percent (10%), taking into consideration length
and size of pipe and the condition of street and sidewalk, all relative to the character of the service.
M. Charges Prepaid: Such charge shall be paid by the applicant before installation is made. (Ord. 659,
9-27-1994)
9-12-22: SERVICE CONNECTION CHARGES:
Before a service connection is installed, the property owner shall pay the City both an equity buy in fee
and a service connection charge as herein set forth:
A. Equity Buy In Fee: An equity buy in fee shall be paid for each connection made to the City water
system in accordance with the following schedule:
Single-family $ 425.00
Multi-facility family 250.00
Per unit 175.00
Commercial
3/4 inch service 425.00
1 inch service 600.00
11/2 inch service 750.00
2 inch service 1,250.00
3 inch service 4,650.00
Greater than 3 inches Negotiated
B. Service Connection Charges: The service connection charge to be made for all service connections
within the City shall be the actual cost of labor and materials used in the installation thereof, plus
ten percent (10%). An estimate of this cost shall be made by the superintendent, and such sum so
estimated shall be paid by the one requesting service.
C. Time Of Payment: All equity buy in and service connection charges shall be paid at the time the
service connection is requested.
D. Outside City Limits: The service connection charge for any service connection outside the city limits
shall be one and one-half (11/2) times the rates hereinabove set forth.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 231/315
E. Charges Calculated: All charges for pipe incident to the installation and connection of water service
shall be calculated as if the water main were in the center of the street in order that a uniform
charge may be made to property abutting on opposite sides of the street.
F. Size Of Pipes: Any and all pipe from the water meter to owner's property line shall be approved type
K copper, at least equal in size to the meter installed.
G. Request For Change: One making a request for a change in the size of the service connection
shall pay to the city clerk, before such change in any service, the actual cost of labor and materials
used in the installation thereof, plus ten percent (10%). (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-23: PROPERTY OWNERS LIABLE FOR UTILITY BILLS:
A. Responsibility Of Owner; Change Of Ownership; Transferee Service Fee: The owner of real
property shall be liable for payment of all utility bills. All utility bills shall be made out and mailed to
the property owner, unless he or she designates otherwise to the city clerk in writing. Notice by an
owner that utility bills be mailed to a person other than the owner does not relieve the owner of
liability thereof. In the event of change of ownership of property, the transferee shall make
application for utilities in his or her name and may have the water turned off if service has not
already been discontinued. The application of the transferee shall be accompanied by payment of
the service fee for turning on the water if service has previously been disconnected. The transferee
shall not be liable for the fee provided in subsection B of this section when the lateral connections
have been installed under previous application if the existing meter meets current city
requirements.
B. Primary Responsibility And Liability: Any owner of real property renting the same to others shall, as
a condition prerequisite to connection and/or recommencement of services upon a change of
occupancy, be required to execute a written agreement, in the manner and form prescribed by the
city clerk, acknowledging primary responsibility and liability on the part of the owner for utility
charges incurred on behalf of the tenant.
C. Written Agreement: The owner of any real property which is served by city utilities, whether owner
occupied or rented to another shall, upon initial connection or recommencement of such services,
execute a written agreement, in the manner and form prescribed by the city clerk, providing that all
charges for city utilities shall constitute a continuing lien upon the premises served thereby, which
agreement may be filed of record with the office of the county recorder serving as notice to
prospective purchasers or transferees of the obligation of the owner or his/her successor in interest
for payment of any outstanding charges. Such written agreement shall constitute a lien upon the
premises as hereafter provided in section 9-12-33 of this chapter. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-24: CHARGES WHEN METER OUT OF ORDER:
In the event a meter malfunctions, the consumer shall be charged on an average made from the
amount consumed in the same period of the preceding year, or from the other most reliable data in the
possession of the billing department. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 232/315
9-12-25: TURN OFF ON REQUEST; CHARGES FOR TURNON:
Water shall be turned off on written request from the consumer, or for violation of rules or nonpayment
of bills, and service shall not be reinstated until the applicant shall have paid to the clerk a service fee
of thirty five dollars ($35.00)1 in addition to all delinquent charges on such service. There shall be no
charge whenever water service is turned off and/or on for routine service or an emergency during
normal business hours. When turnoff and/or turnon is required after business hours, regardless of the
reason for the request, a forty five dollar ($45.00) fee will be assessed. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
shall be paid to the clerk by the customer when a previously existing meter must be replaced due to a
request for removal by a customer or removal necessitated by delinquency. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994;
amd. Res. 08-392, 8-12-2008)
9-12-26: CHARGES; WHERE AND HOW PAYABLE:
All utility bills are payable at the office of the clerk in current lawful money. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-27: TIME OF PAYMENT; DELINQUENCIES; SERVICE TERMINATION:
A. Time Of Payment; Delinquency Charges: All utility bills shall be due and payable at the office of the
clerk during regular business hours. Such accounts shall become delinquent at five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. on the twenty fifth of each month or on the next regular business day thereafter should the
twenty fifth fall on a weekend or a legal holiday, and a delinquent charge of eight dollars ($8.00)2
shall be added to the amount of the delinquency, except that the delinquency charge for residential
"garbage only" accounts shall be seventy five cents ($0.75)3 and may be collected according to
the provisions of section 9-12-31 of this chapter. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994; amd. Res. 354, 8-22-2005;
Res. 08-391, 8-12-2008)
B. Termination Of Service: All utility customers shall be notified of such delinquency in writing and if
full payment of the delinquent billing is not made, or arrangements made for a pretermination
hearing, prior to the tenth day of the following month, the customer's water service shall be
terminated. Exceptions to the above policy shall be made only at a pretermination hearing.
C. Charges For Restoring Service: Should a utility customer's service be terminated or an adverse
decision be rendered against the customer as a result of a pretermination hearing, the city shall
require the utility customer to pay the entire bill in full plus a turnon charge before service will be
restored.
D. Pretermination Hearing: The city, in its delinquency notice, shall inform, in writing, all delinquency
utility customers of their right to a pretermination hearing, with such hearing to be held with the due
process protection described below; and will not discontinue water service to any utility customer
prior to providing opportunity to confront witnesses, to personally appear with retained counsel to
be judged on facts adduced at the hearing to otherwise be heard and defended the claim made by
the city, if a pretermination hearing is requested by any utility customer. The city council shall make
a record of any pretermination hearings. The city council shall render its decision in writing, giving
the reasons for its determination. In decisions adverse to the utility customer, the city council will
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 233/315
inform the utility customer of the right to appeal the decision pursuant to the Idaho state
administrative procedures act.
E. Denial Of Service; Hearing: Provided, however, the city shall not initially deny or discontinue water
service to any utility customer because of any delinquent utility bill on that premises that is
attributable to the prior water usage of another utility customer. Provided further that the city shall
not initially deny water service to any water user for whatever reason without informing the utility
customer of the right to a hearing before the city council on the issue of whether the city can
initially deny water services. In the case of an initial denial of water service, the city is not required
to provide water service pending a hearing. However, a hearing upon request of a utility customer
initially denied service shall be held as expeditiously as possible and according to the procedures
for pretermination hearings delineated above.
F. Fees Prorated: All single-family, multifacility, and commercial units connected to the city water
and/or sewer system shall pay one-half (1/2) of the base rate for each connected utility during any
period for which utility services are discontinued. Such fees shall be suspended only upon the
removal of the water meter and disconnection of the sewer lateral to the premises. (Ord. 659, 9-27-
1994)
9-12-28: SCHEDULE OF RATES:
A. Basic Rate: The basic monthly water rate will be set by resolution. (Ord. 665, 3-27-1995)
B. Usage Rate: The usage rate per gallon of metered water used and sewer discharged during any
one month will be set by resolution.
C. Single-Family And/Or Commercial Units: Owners of a single-family and/or commercial unit shall
pay monthly the basic rate plus the usage rate for any water used.
D. Multifacility Units: Owners of multifacility units shall pay the basic rate for one facility and two-thirds
(2/3) of the basic rate for each additional facility, plus the usage rate for any water used. (Ord. 659,
9-27-1994)
9-12-29: ADDITIONAL CHARGES:
In addition to the foregoing schedule of rates, all water service shall be charged the following
amounts.
Size Of Meter Monthly Charge
5/8 inch $ 2.35
2.60
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 234/315
3/4 inch
1 inch 2.85
11/2 inch 3.65
2 inch 4.60
21/2 inch 4.95
3 inch 6.65
4 inch 9.55
6 inch compounds 22.90
8 inch compounds 32.25
Backflow device testing 50.00 per test
Water line disinfection 0.28 per foot
Bacterial testing 12.00 per sample
(Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-30: SPECIAL METER READING CHARGE:
If a special meter reading is requested by an owner or occupant, there shall be a charge made
therefor in the sum of ten dollars ($10.00). A forty dollar ($40.00) charge will be applied if the request
is made for a special reading to be performed after regular working hours. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-31: UTILITY BILLS:
The Clerk shall maintain an office in the business district of the City and shall keep the same open five
(5) days a week, except for designated holidays, between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and
five o'clock (5:00) P.M. for receiving payment and collection of utility bills and for such business as
may come before the Clerk. The Clerk shall compute the utility bill for each and every customer as the
sum of the following:
A. The monthly charge for sanitation service.
B. The monthly basic rate charge for water and sewer.
C. The monthly usage rate charge for water and sewer.
D. The monthly street light fee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 235/315
E. Any connection charges and penalties.
F. Any additional or special charges. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-32: SUMS CREDITED TO WATER FUND:
The Treasurer shall credit all sums received from the Clerk, as hereinabove provided, to a fund to be
known as the Water Fund and no disbursements shall be made therefrom except on order of the
Council by warrant issued as in other cases. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-33: LIEN FOR PAYMENT OF UTILITY ACCOUNTS:
A. Lien: Utility bills shall constitute a lien upon real property for which service was provided, pursuant
to written agreement executed by the owner of such real property, in the manner and form
prescribed by the City Clerk, and as referred to in subsection 9-12-23C of this Chapter. Upon initial
hookup or any transfer in occupancy of the premises, the owner of such real property shall, as a
condition precedent to receiving utility services, execute a written agreement providing that
charges for City utilities shall voluntarily constitute a lien upon the premises served thereby. Every
owner of real property rented to others, as a condition prerequisite to transfer of utility bills into the
name of the present occupant, shall execute a written agreement acknowledging responsibility on
the part of the owner for payment of such utility assessments and further providing that all such
charges and assessments shall constitute a lien on the premises served thereby. The City Clerk
may record all such agreements with the office of the County Recorder which, upon recording,
shall serve as notice to prospective purchasers and/or transferees of the premises of the liability of
owner and his/her successors in interest.
B. Delinquent Bill; Statement Of Lien Claim: Whenever a bill remains unpaid sixty (60) days after it
has been mailed to the owner or occupant, as the case may be, the Clerk may file with the County
Recorder a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the
premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the City claims a lien for that
amount as well as for all utility bills served subsequent to the period covered by the bill, and that
the recorded owner of the premises has executed an agreement providing for creation of such lien.
If the consumer whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the Clerk has notice of
such occupancy, then notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if his/her address is
known to the Clerk, whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of sixty (60) days after it has
been rendered. The failure of the Clerk to record such lien claim, or to mail such notice, or the
failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the right to foreclose said lien in
accordance with the initial written agreement endorsed by the owner. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-34: EXTENSION OF WATER MAIN WITHIN CITY SERVICE AREA:
The Superintendent shall be authorized to construct, or cause to be constructed, extensions to the
water system if one of the following conditions exist:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 236/315
A. Annual Anticipated Revenue: The annual anticipated revenue made available to the City from the
customers to be immediately served by such extension is not less then one-tenth (1/10) of actual
cost to the City for construction of said extension.
B. Declaration By Superintendent: The Superintendent declares that the water main extension is
needed for the overall benefit and improvement of the entire water supply system.
C. Approval Of Council: The City Council approves a contract for construction of the extension with a
party or parties desiring water service. Provided, however, that subdividers within or adjacent to
the City service area shall construct at their own expense all water mains within their subdivisions
or developments expect that the City will be responsible for those water main costs set forth in
subsection 9-12-40B of this Chapter. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-35: EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS IN CONTIGUOUS AREAS:
In areas contiguous to the City service area that may be annexed to the City, the City may require
such areas to be annexed before water service is provided. Prior to annexation the City shall require
the execution and approval of an annexation agreement which shall detail the conditions of water
service. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-36: EXTENSION OF MAINS OUTSIDE CITY SERVICE AREA:
Water mains shall not, without the City Council's approval, be extended outside the City service area;
however, when in the opinion of the Superintendent, there will be special benefit and improvement to
the City by reason of an extension outside the City service area, special arrangements may be made
with the Council to allow said extension. Provided, however, that the area to be serviced outside of the
City service area shall not benefit to a greater extent than like areas provided with water service within
the City service area, and provided further, that no such arrangement shall be made unless adequate
excess water and treatment facility capacity is available for such outside-the-City water service. (Ord.
659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-37: WATER SYSTEM MATERIALS AND INSTALLATION:
A. All water main pipe shall be cast iron, ductile iron or PVC C900.
B. All water main fittings, i.e., tees, crosses, bends, etc., shall be cast iron or ductile iron.
C. All water main materials and installation shall be in accordance with the City standard specifications
for the construction of water lines and applicable standard drawings depicting various water main
installation details.
D. All water system materials shall be of the class, strength or thickness necessary to safely
accommodate or provide for a water system pressure of one hundred fifty (150) psi.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 237/315
E. All materials must be approved by the City. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-38: WATER SYSTEM DESIGN:
A. Water Main Plans: All water main plans must be designed and sealed by a registered licensed
professional engineer in the State.
B. Compliance With State Health Requirements: All water mains and pumping stations shall be
designed and approved in accordance with State Health Department requirements.
C. Minimum Water Main Size: Minimum water main size shall be six inch (6") diameter. Larger sizes
shall be as required by the City's Master Water Plan or as are needed to provide adequate water
quantity and pressure to the area (and surrounding developable area) being developed and/or,
annexed to the City.
D. Location: Water mains shall be at least four feet (4') from the top of the water line pipe to the
surface of the ground or equal distance below the established or predicated grade of any street.
E. Dead-End Water Mains: All dead-end water mains shall have a fire hydrant or approved flush-out
valve installed on the end thereof.
F. Fire Hydrants4: Fire hydrants shall be located no more than five hundred feet (500') apart within
residential areas. Within commercial or industrial areas, there shall be one fire hydrant for every
eighty thousand (80,000) square feet of subdivision or development area, including streets and
alleys, with fire hydrants located in proximity to the buildings as approved by the City. Sprinkling
systems may be required within the interiors of buildings having a high hazard of fire risk.
G. Valves: Water mains shall be valved at every intersection so that every block of City water main
can be shut off and isolated from the rest of the water system to facilitate maintenance and repair
work while keeping public inconvenience to a minimum. Where blocks are exceptionally long,
additional valves shall be installed at such additional approved locations as are necessary so that
no more than six hundred foot (600') length of water main has to be shut off or out of service at any
one time to accommodate repairs and maintenance.
H. Location Of Mains And Sewer Lines: Water mains and sanitary sewer lines shall, wherever
possible, be located on opposite sides of the street, a ten foot (10') (out-to-out) horizontal
separation between water line facilities and sewer line facilities (either sanitary or storm) and an
eighteen inch (18") (out-to-out) vertical separation between said line facilities shall always be
maintained, unless a specific variance to this requirement is obtained from the City. The applicable
separation requirements of the State Health Department shall also be complied with.
I. Drawings: All drawings shall be on linen or mylar in pencil or ink and of such quality that they clearly
show the dimensions, locations, sizes, etc., of all facilities represented thereon. All water main
appurtenances shall be clearly shown and identified by name and by station or other means of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 238/315
horizontal location. Water mains shall be shown both plan and profile if other utilities such as
sanitary sewer or storm drain will be adjacent to said water main. If a profile of the water main is
not provided, it shall be located in the vertical plane by elevations on the top of the pipe at all
fittings, valves, etc., and at other such locations and intervals not exceeding two hundred feet
(200'), or as the City may require. Drawings shall be drawn on a scale of one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100') unless the amount of detail, topography, etc., necessitates their being
drawn on a larger scale (i.e., 1 inch = 40 feet) to provide the clarity and completeness needed on
the drawings.
J. Design Approved By City: The design of all water mains and all water system plans must be
approved by the City. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-39: AS-BUILT DRAWINGS AND ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATION:
A. Copies To City: As-built or record drawings of water main plans shall be prepared by a professional
engineer and the "corrected" original drawing or a duplicate mylar copy of the "corrected" original
drawing(s) shall be provided to the City.
B. Certification Required: As-built plans shall include a certification thereon signed by the registered
professional engineer in charge of the work that the as-built drawings are true and correct and that
he/she (the registered professional engineer) has inspected the construction of the water system
installation and that the materials and installation of same were all done in conformance with the
City standard specifications for water system construction. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-40: WATER MAIN CONSTRUCTION:
A. Owner Or Developer Responsibility: The owner or developer of any piece of property or tract of
land is responsible for the construction of the water main (or for the water main costs) along any
property sides or frontages of the property along which a water main is needed for the overall
completeness and continuity of the City's water system. If it is a large tract of land, the owner or
developer shall also be responsible for the necessary and required system of water mains within
the interior of the tract of land. The owner or developer of any piece of property shall construct all
needed water mains (of the approved size) within and along all sides or frontages of any piece of
property prior to the time any building constructed thereon is occupied or utilized unless "phased"
construction of the water main system is specifically allowed or provided for in the annexation or
development agreement.
B. City Responsibility; Exception: The owner or developer of any property or subdivision will normally
be responsible only for the cost of up to an eight inch (8") diameter water main. The additional cost
of providing a water main of a size greater than eight inches (8") will normally be a City
responsibility. The City will reimburse the developer for the extra cost of the additional water main
size (over the 8 inch diameter size referenced above) as set forth in the annexation or
development agreement between the developer and the City. Provided, however, that if any
proposed subdivision or development is of such size or magnitude that it requires or necessitates a
water main size larger than an eight inch (8") diameter, then the owner or developer of said
subdivision or development shall be responsible for the entire cost to whatever size of water main
is required for said subdivision or development. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 239/315
9-12-41: PUMPING STATIONS AND RESERVOIR STORAGE:
The owner or developer of any piece of property, subdivision or tract of land is responsible for the
development and construction of necessary water pumping stations and water reservoirs, to serve
such piece of property prior to the time any building constructed thereon is occupied or utilized. When
a water pump station, reservoir and its related facilities is required, it and the water main system
directing water to it shall generally be designed for an entire definable area and not just to serve a
single property owner or developer. The cost of the water pump station, reservoir and related facilities
may be divided between the developer and the City as set forth in the annexation or development
agreement. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-42: NONRESIDENT WATER SERVICES:
All non-City resident property owners who request City water services must first submit an official City
application for annexation of the property into the City limits. The completion, submission and approval
of the application for annexation shall be prerequisite to any water services being provided to any
nonresident property owners unless annexation requirements are waved by the Mayor and City
Council as provided in subsection 9-12-43A of this Chapter. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-43: APPLICATION FOR ANNEXATION; WAIVE REQUIREMENT:
A. Conformance With Idaho Code And City Code: All annexation applications shall be in conformance
with Idaho Code sections 50-222 through 50-224 and shall be subject to public hearing procedures
established under Idaho Code section 67-6512. Prior to the approval of any land annexation, the
City shall make an initial determination regarding potential conflict with the City's Comprehensive
Plan, shall determine the feasibility of providing services to the site, and shall determine whether
any services to be provided will be in compliance with existing provisions of the City Code. All
annexations under this Section shall be considered on a individual basis according to the merits of
each. The submission of an application for annexation shall not be a guarantee of approval.
B. Establishment Of Time Frames: The Mayor and City Council have the authority to waive annexation
requirements for providing City services to nonresidents, and to provide services prior to the
completion of the application and public hearing process as outlined in subsection A above. Any
application for annexation for the sole purpose of obtaining City services may be considered at a
date and time established by the Mayor and City Council in consideration of the City's
Comprehensive Plan and other long- range objectives. Any decision to waive or approve
annexation shall be by majority vote of the City Council. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-44: CROSS-CONNECTIONS:
The City has primary responsibility to protect the City-owned potable water system from actual and
potential contamination by objectionable and hazardous liquids, solids, and gases. The City's
responsibility includes the total water system and extends from the source of supply to the point of
delivery to the consumer's water system. It is also the City's responsibility to ensure that the consumer
has taken proper steps to protect the City's potable water system from actual and potential
contamination from the consumer's water system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 240/315
A. Prohibited: Except as approved by the State Department of Health, hereinafter referred to as the
Health Department, all "cross-connections" as herein defined, whether or not cross-connections
are controlled by automatic devices such as check valves or by hand-operated mechanisms, such
as gate valves or stopcocks, are hereby prohibited.
B. Definitions: For purposes of this regulation, cross-connects are defined as follows:
1. Any bypass, being defined as any physical arrangement whereby water may be diverted around
any feature of purification process of the City.
2. Any emergency intake or secondary being defined as an intake or other device capable of
introducing water into the public water system from a source of supply which, because of its
unsafe characteristics, has not been approved for drinking and culinary purposes by the Idaho
State Health Department.
3. Any other cross-connection as defined in the Manual of Cross-Connection Control published by
the Foundation For Cross-Connection Control Research, University of Southern California,
Eighth Edition, June 1988, or current addition.
AIR GAP SEPARATION: The vertical physical separation between a supply line and the overflow
rim of a receiving vessel. This separation must be at least twice the inside diameter of the supply
line, but never less than one inch (1").
APPROVED: Approved in writing by the Department of Health and Welfare, Division of
Environment Public Water Supplies or other agency having jurisdiction.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER (AVB): A device which contains a float check (poppet), a
check seat, and air inlet port. When water pressure is reduced to gauge pressure of zero or
below, air enters the device preventing back siphonage. An atmospheric vacuum breaker is
designed to protect against back siphonage only.
AUXILIARY SUPPLY: Any water source or system, other than the public water supply, that may
be available in the building to premises.
BACK PRESSURE: Backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, or other means that
could create pressure within the system greater than the supply system.
BACK SIPHONAGE: A form of backflow due to a negative or subatmospheric pressure within a
water system.
BACKFLOW: The flow other than the intended direction of flow, of any foreign liquids, gases, or
substances into the distribution system of a public water system.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device to counteract back pressures or prevent back
siphonage.
CROSS-CONNECTION: A point in a plumbing system where the potable water supply is
connected directly or can be connected directly to a nonpotable source.
DOUBLE-CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of two (2) single, independently
acting check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end on the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the water tightness of each valve.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 241/315
INTERNALLY LOADED CHECK VALVE: A check valve, which is internally loaded, either
weighted or spring loaded, to the extent it will be drip tight in the direction of flow with a one psi
differential.
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER (PVB): A device consisting of a spring-loaded check valve (3
inches and larger consists of 2), an independently operating air inlet valve, inlet and outlet shutoff
valves and properly installed test cocks. The air inlet valve is internally loaded to the open
position, normally by means of a spring. This internal loading allows the device to be installed on
the pressure side of a shut-off valve. It is designed to protect against back siphonage only.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device
incorporating two (2) or more check valves and a automatically operating differential relief valve
located between the two (2) checks, two (2) shutoff valves, and equipped with necessary
appurtenances for testing.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or operator of the public potable water system supplying water
to the public.
4. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all existing and all new construction utilizing the City
potable water system.
C. Inspection:
1. Backflow Prevention Device Installation: The City shall review all water service connections and
evaluate the degree of hazard and the type protection needed to comply with the requirements
of Idaho Department of Health and Welfare Rules and Regulations (section 16.01.8900,09).
Where potential or actual cross-connection exists, the City shall notify the water consumer to the
type of backflow prevention device that must be installed to provide adequate protection to the
City's potable water system. The consumer shall proceed with the installation of the device at
the location recommended by the City. When possible, the device shall be installed at the point
of service delivery.
A certified backflow prevention device tester shall test all backflow prevention devices a
minimum of one time each twelve (12) months, a list of approved certified plumbers will be
available at City Hall. When a defective device is discovered, the consumer shall repair the
defective device (time limit by degree of hazard) specified by the City.
A report sheet shall be filled out and completed by the tester after each test and upon
completion of any repairs.
All new backflow prevention devices shall be on the current approved list and have passed a
performance test conducted by University of Southern California Engineering Center or meet
AWWA C-506-78 standards.
2. Underground Sprinkling Device: No underground sprinkling device will be installed without an
approved backflow prevention device at the point at which the water for irrigation is taken from
the domestic water system. Atmospheric vacuum breakers will not be approved for this type of
installation.
Where there may be a separate system for irrigation purposes, it should never enter the
consumer's residence or structure. Said system should terminate at least two feet (2') outside
the residence or structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 242/315
3. Construction For Industrial Or Other Purposes: Any construction for industrial or other purposes
where it is reasonable to anticipate intermittent cross-connections such as laboratories,
hospitals, manufacturing, will be protected by the installation of one or more approved backflow
prevention devices at the point of service from the public potable water system.
4. Existing Structures: Annual inspections shall be made of all buildings, structures, or
improvements of any nature, now receiving water through the City's system for the purpose of
ascertaining whether any cross-connections exist. Such inspections shall be on a continuing,
rotating basis and shall be made by City authorized personnel certified by the Idaho State
Certification Board or the Health Department.
Such inspections shall be for the purpose of establishing the water uses on the premises, the
existence of any possible cross-connection, the availability of pollutants, contaminants and other
liquid, solid, or gaseous substances which may be used industrially for stabilization of water
supplies, and may also include such other inspections and/or processes as necessary for
determining whether a health hazard exists upon the premises.
5. Right To Accompany On Inspections: Representatives of the State Health Department or the
U.S. Public Health Service or Idaho DEQ or EPA, shall have the right to accompany City
personnel on any inspection and may request inspections or may reinspect as they may deem
necessary.
6. Level Of Hazard: Depending on the level of hazard, whenever a consumer's water system
incorporates only atmospheric vacuum breakers to prevent back siphonage, the City water
system may be required to be protected by either a double check valve assembly or a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device.
D. Correction, Reinspection:
1. If the City shall determine that by reason of a cross-connection a health hazard exists upon any
premises inspected, the same shall be corrected by the landowner, at the landowner's expense.
2. The City has the right to direct the landowner as to a minimum acceptable procedure for
correcting the situation. Standards shall be based upon the latest edition of the Cross-
Connection Control Manual, Accepted Procedures and Practice.
3. The time limit as to the installation of a newly required device will be dependent upon the degree
of health hazard that is present to the City's potable water supply. The higher the hazard, the
shorter the time limit.
4. The representative of the City, in cooperation with the Idaho State Health Department, shall
determine a reasonable time within which the property owner shall complete such correction and
shall reinspect the premises after the expiration of such period of time.
E. Penalties: In the event an improper cross-connection shall be found and shall not be corrected
within the time limits set by the Superintendent, or authorized personnel, (unless such time limit be
extended for good cause by the Superintendent) or in the event any owner of real property shall
refuse the Superintendent or authorized personnel access to any portion of such real property or to
all improvements thereon for the purpose of determining whether or not any such cross-connection
exists, in either event the service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the City if a
backflow prevention device required by Idaho Administrative Procedures Manual or the City has
not been installed, tested and maintained on an annual basis. Water service will not be restored
until such conditions or defects are corrected. The amount of any fees or costs incurred by the City
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 243/315
in order to enforce the provisions of this regulation shall be paid by the consumer before water
service is restored.
1. When a device has been required and installed and tested, it is not to be removed or tampered
with in any way except by an authorized plumber and prior approval by the City's authorized
personnel. Any violation shall be a misdemeanor and punishable as follows:
First violation $ 500.00 fine
Second violation 750.00 fine and possible jail (3 month sentence)
Third violation 1,000.00 fine and possible jail (6 month sentence)
Any violation will result in immediate termination of water service until said violation is corrected.
Any fine will be levied on the next billing or may be required to be paid prior to having service
reestablished.
2. Devices that have been installed on lawn sprinkling or irrigation systems for the purpose of
protecting the domestic water supply may be tested by certified backflow prevention device
tester with the results being sent to the City on an original or carbon copy form, but not a
photocopy of the form and is to be pen ink not pencil, to be held valid. These devices are to be
tested annually, preferably prior to the irrigation or sprinkling season. Faulty devices will be
required to be corrected within seven (7) days of the failed test.
Anyone found to be filing incorrect forms (not doing the physical test) will be assessed a civil
penalty as follows:
First violation $ 500.00
Second violation 750.00
Third violation 1,000.00
F. Attorney Fees: In the event it shall become necessary for the City to incur any attorney fees or suit
costs in order to enforce the provisions of this Section concerning cross-connections against any
property owner, the amount of such fees and costs shall be paid by such owner before water
service is restored to the premises.
G. Installation: Whereas it is deemed necessary for a backflow prevention device to be installed for
protection of the public potable water system, said device shall never be placed below ground level
or in a vault/pit or other structure except with these minimum requirements:
1. Twelve inches (12") plus the nominal diameter of the device clearance below the device.
2. Area is able to be drained to daylight, with a line at least twice the size of the device.
3. Drain line to be unrestricted in flow characteristics. Drain line is to have magnetic door to
prevent rodents from entering and to prevent plugs from occurring.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 244/315
4. Will not be subject to flood conditions/submerged.
5. At least twelve inches (12") clearance from the walls of the vault or structure.
6. Access to the area of the device by an authorized employee of the City is unrestricted and
attainable (e.g., not covered in any way for beautification sake). (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-45: CITATION ISSUANCE; APPEARANCE REQUIRED:
Whenever it is determined by any police officer or other duly authorized officer that any person or
persons have violated any provisions of this Chapter, the said officer shall provide in quadruplicate
and serve upon such person or persons a written citation containing a notice to appear in a
designated court of competent jurisdiction within the City. This citation shall contain the name and
address of the person charged, the offense charged, the time and place when and where the offense
charged occurred, and the time when the person charged shall appear in said court, and such other
pertinent information as may be necessary; and such person or persons shall appear in said court
within five (5) days after such citation is issued and served. The issuance of a citation shall not be the
exclusive method of summoning offenders hereunder. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-46: FAILURE TO APPEAR UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to fail or neglect to appear in response to and as
required by the citation regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which such citation was
originally issued. Appearance in court shall be deemed complied with upon appearance by the person
cited or his attorney. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
9-12-47: AMENDMENTS OF WATER RATES:
Water rates, connection charges, equity buy-ins, private fire lines, turn-on fees, delinquency charges,
special meter reading chargeS, additional charges, and any other rates or fees associated with this
Chapter shall be amended by resolution. All other sections of this Chapter shall be amended by
ordinance. (Ord. 665, 3-27-1995)
9-12-48: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, may be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by
imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day said
violation occurs shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 659, 9-27-1994)
Chapter 13
PARKS
9-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 245/315
The city hereby adopts the following definitions for purposes of enforcement of this chapter. Words
and phrases defined for the purposes of this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in this section,
unless normal construction in context shall clearly indicate to the contrary.
PUBLIC PARK: The Orofino City Park; Champion Park; and the Lewis Clark Park all located within the
city limits of Orofino. (Ord. 761, 9-8-2009)
9-13-2: CITY PARK HOURS:
All city parks shall open at five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and shall close at ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. each day
unless agreements have been established between a user and the city of Orofino. Any individual who
remains or enters a city park after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. shall be guilty of trespassing and subject to
a misdemeanor penalty. (Ord. 761, 9-8-2009)
9-13-3: CITY PARK TRESPASSING PENALTY:
Individuals who violate section 9-13-2 of this chapter shall be guilty of misdemeanor trespassing and
shall pay a penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each occurrence. Said penalty shall be paid
within fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of the citation. (Ord. 761, 9-8-2009)
9-13-4: OTHER VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Individuals who violate any other provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
pay a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each occurrence. Said penalty shall be paid within
fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of the citation. (Ord. 761, 9-8-2009)
Title 10
TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
10-1-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
Pursuant to Idaho Code section 49-208(4), the Idaho rules of the road are hereby adopted as and for
the traffic ordinance of the city with like effect as if recited at length. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-1-2: SPEED LIMIT:
The speed limit in all areas of the city shall be twenty (20) miles per hour unless the area is otherwise
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 246/315
posted. It shall be unlawful to exceed the posted speed limits within the city. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-1-3: TRAFFIC STUDY1:
The city of Orofino by reference adopts the traffic study conducted on October 15, 2002, and declares
the same to be a reasonable and rational basis for the establishing of speed limits within the city. (Ord.
744, 7-28-2009)
10-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
The city hereby adopts definitions contained in Idaho Code title 49 for the purposes of enforcement of
this title unless otherwise specifically defined.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE OR ATV: Any recreation vehicle with three (3) or more tires, weighing under
nine hundred (900) pounds, fifty inches (50") or less in width, having a wheel base of sixty one inches
(61") or less, traveling on low pressure tires of ten (10) psi or less, has handlebar steering and a seat
designed to be straddled by the operator.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles of the fire department, duly chartered rescue
squad, police department, ambulance service, state, county or municipal agency and such privately
owned ambulances, tow trucks, wreckers, flag car services, vehicles providing road service to
disabled vehicles, service vehicles of a public service corporation, postal service vehicles, snow
removal equipment, class A vehicles of firefighters, class A vehicles of members of ambulance
services, and class A vehicles of members of duly chartered rescue squads, and all other emergency
vehicles as are designated by the agency responsible for the operation and control of these persons
or organizations.
BICYCLE: Every device which does not have a motor attached and which is propelled by human
power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more than
twenty inches (20") in diameter.
BUS: Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers and used for the
transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the
transportation of persons for compensation.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a street or highway when within any
six hundred feet (600') along such highway there are buildings in use for business or industrial
purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations, and public
buildings which occupy at least three hundred feet (300') of frontage on one side or three hundred feet
(300') collectively on both sides of the street or highway.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY: Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or
occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same
except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway.
CROSSWALK: Includes:
A. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of
the sidewalks on opposite sides of the street or highway measured from the curbs or, in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 247/315
absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway; and
B. Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian
crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE OR EPAMD: A self-balancing, two (2)
nontandem wheeled device, designed to transport only one person, with an electric propulsion system
with average power of seven hundred fifty (750) watts (1 horsepower), whose maximum speed on a
paved level surface, when powered solely by such a propulsion system while ridden by an operator
who weighs one hundred seventy (170) pounds, is less than twenty (20) miles per hour.
EXPLOSIVES: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for
the purpose of producing an explosive and which contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other
ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion,
by percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden
generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing
destructive effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID: Any liquid which has a flashpoint of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F), or
less, as determined by a Tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
GROSS WEIGHT: The weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon.
INTERSECTION: Includes:
A. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines or, if none,
then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) streets or highways which join one
another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon
different streets or highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict; and
B. Where a street or highway includes two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or more apart, then every
crossing of each roadway of such divided street or highway by an intersecting highway shall be
regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting street or highway also
includes two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways
of such streets or highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for
vehicular traffic.
MOPED: Every motorcycle or motor driven cycle unless otherwise specified in this title, which is
equipped with two (2) or three (3) wheels, foot pedals to permit muscular propulsion and an
independent power source providing a maximum of two (2) brake horsepower. If a combustion engine
is used, the maximum piston or rotor displacement shall be fifty (50) cubic centimeters regardless of
the number of chambers in such power source. The power source shall be capable of propelling the
vehicle, unassisted, at a speed not to exceed thirty (30) miles per hour on a level road surface and
shall be equipped with a power drive system that functions directly or automatically only, not requiring
clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 248/315
MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE: Every motorcycle having a piston displacement of more than fifty (50) cubic
centimeters but not more than one hundred fifty (150) cubic centimeters, or with not more than five (5)
brake horsepower.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by
electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails, except motorized
wheelchairs.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to
travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
OWNER: A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an
agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the
conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional
vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such
conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this title.
PARK: When prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading.
PARKING AREA: Lots, areas or other accommodations for the parking of vehicles off the street or
highway and open to public use with or without charge.
PASSENGER VAN: Any van or other motor vehicle owned by any agency, business or other legal
entity and operated for the purpose of transportation of children under the age of eighteen (18) years,
other than a van utilized for private use, taxicab, bus or school bus. Passenger vans include, but are
not limited to, vehicles used by daycare centers, after school centers and nursery schools; provided,
that the term "passenger van" does not include any van or other motor vehicle which is utilized for the
specific purpose of transporting children to medical facilities for the purpose of medical or dental
treatment and which loads and unloads the children on private property, making no stops for loading
or unloading along public roads or highways.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot or any person using a wheelchair.
PERSON: Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.
POLE TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and
attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured
to the towing vehicle and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as
poles, pipes, trusses or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams
between the supporting connections.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations
of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY; PRIVATE PROPERTY: A. "Private road" or "driveway" means every
way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having
express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
B. "Private property" means real estate in private ownership without regard to the manner in which
it is used.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 249/315
RAILROAD: A carrier of persons or property, upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon
stationary rails.
RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL: Any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or
official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of
a railroad train.
RAILROAD TRAIN: A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto,
operated upon rails, except streetcars.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a street or highway not comprising
a business district when the property on such street or highway for a distance of three hundred feet
(300') or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for
business.
RESIDENTIAL STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way, whether publicly
or privately maintained, located within any subdivision, development or other similar area used
primarily for residential purposes when any part thereof is open to the common use of those living in
such area for the purpose of vehicular travel.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular
travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a street or highway includes two (2) or more
separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but
not to all such roadways collectively.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of
pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly
visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the
transportation of children to or from school, or privately owned and operated for compensation for the
transportation of children to or from school.
SCHOOL GROUNDS: Includes the land on which a school is built together with such other land used
by students for play, recreation or athletic events while attending school.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some
part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street or highway between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a
roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians.
STOP: When required, means complete cessation from movement.
STOP, STOPPING OR STANDING: When prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY; ALLEY: A. "Street" or "highway" means the entire width between the
boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 250/315
B. "Alley" means a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or
buildings in urban districts and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.
THROUGH STREET OR THROUGH HIGHWAY: Every street or highway or portion thereof at the
entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by law to stop
before entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in this title.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances either
singly or together while using any street or highway for purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: Any sign, signal, marking and device not inconsistent with this title
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL: Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated,
by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
TRAILER: Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its
weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK: Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks or wheelchairs.
WHEELCHAIR: A motorized or nonmotorized wheeled device designed for, and used by, a person
with disabilities that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight (8) miles per hour. (Ord. 744, 7-28-
2009)
Chapter 2
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES
10-2-1: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department to enforce all street traffic laws of this
municipality and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this municipality.
B. Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal
in conformance with traffic laws; provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to
expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
C. Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, traffic accident or other emergency may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. (Ord. 744, 7-28-
2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 251/315
10-2-2: VEHICLES UPON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this title relating to the operation of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of
vehicles upon streets and highways except:
A. Where a different place is specifically referred to in a given section. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-2-3: GOVERNMENT VEHICLES; EXCEPTIONS:
A. The provisions of this title applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets or highways shall
apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, this state, or any
county, municipality, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided
in this section and subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this title with reference to
authorized emergency vehicles.
B. Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this title shall not apply to persons, teams,
motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street or
highway but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. (Ord.
744, 7-28-2009)
10-2-4: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES; GENERALLY:
A. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in
the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon
returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
B. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
1. Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title;
2. Proceed past a red stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary
for safe operation;
3. Exceed the speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property;
4. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions.
C. The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the
driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as
may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one red lighted
flashing lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of
five hundred feet (500') to the front of such vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle
operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a warning light visible from in
front of the vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 252/315
D. The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the
driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (Ord. 744, 7-28-
2009)
10-2-5: PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLES:
Every person riding an animal or driving any animal drawn vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all
of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title,
except those provisions of this title which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 744, 7-
28-2009)
10-2-6: IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; REDEMPTION:
Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal and impounding of a vehicle under the
following circumstances:
A. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, bridge or causeway and is illegally parked
so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to
unreasonably interfere with street cleaning or snow removal operations.
B. When any vehicle has been abandoned or junked on private or public property as provided in
Idaho Code.
C. When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of the owner.
D. When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to display the current lawfully required
license plates.
E. When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the commission of a felony.
F. When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable or violates equipment
provisions of this title or Idaho Code whereby its continued operation would constitute a
condition hazardous to life, limb or property.
G. When any vehicle is left unattended due to the removal of an ill, injured or arrested operator.
H. When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has failed to stop in case of an
accident or collision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 253/315
I. When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving without a lawful license or
while his license has been suspended or revoked.
J. When any vehicle is found for which two (2) or more citation tags for violations of this title have
been issued and the owner or operator thereof has failed to respond to such citation tags as
lawfully required.
Any vehicle removed under authority of subsection B of this section shall be disposed of as provided
under Idaho Code. Any other vehicle removed under authority of this section shall be ordered into
storage and the police department shall forthwith notify the registered vehicle owner of the fact of such
removal and impounding, reasons therefor and the place of storage. Any person desiring to redeem
an impounded vehicle shall appear at the police department to furnish satisfactory evidence of identity
and ownership or right to possession. Prior to issuance of a release form, the claimant, owner or
operator shall either pay the amount due for any fines for violations on account of which such vehicle
was impounded or, as the court may require, post a bond in an amount set by the court, to appear to
answer to such violations. The pound operator shall release such vehicle upon the receipt of the
release form and payment of all towage and storage charges. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-2-7: RIGHTS OF OWNERS OF REAL PROPERTY:
Nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent an owner of real property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel by permission of the owner and not as matter of right from prohibiting
such use, or from requiring other or different or additional conditions than those specified in this title,
or otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such owner. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-2-8: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any provision of this title for which another penalty is not provided shall be fined not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days, or both. (Ord.
744, 7-28-2009)
Chapter 3
TRAFFIC CONTROL
10-3-1: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES;
SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Council or an officer designated by the mayor with the approval of council, shall place and maintain
all traffic control devices, including signs, markings, and signals, when and as required by the
provisions of this title or other ordinances of this city, to make such provisions effective. All traffic
control devices placed within this city shall conform to the requirements and specifications of the
manual for a uniform system of traffic control devices promulgated by the state department of
highways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 254/315
B. No traffic control device shall be placed upon any street which is part of the state highway system
except by permission of the Idaho transportation department. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-3-2: EFFECT OF PREVIOUSLY INSTALLED TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
All traffic control devices, signals, signs and markings heretofore installed by authority of council and
which are in place on the effective date of this section shall be deemed to be traffic control devices
until such time as they may be removed by authority of council, and until they are so removed it shall
be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any instruction or directive indicated by any such
traffic control device. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-3-3: CHIEF MAY CLOSE STREETS:
The chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered, when he deems it advisable for the public
safety and convenience, to close any street or highway or part thereof to all traffic, or to traffic of
certain classes or descriptions or direct the traffic thereon or divert or direct the course of traffic
thereon for such periods of time as he may deem advisable, in which cases he shall cause the
necessary signs, signals and markings, controlling such traffic to be placed or installed. (Ord. 744, 7-
28-2009)
10-3-4: FIRE LANES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY DEVOTED TO PUBLIC USE:
A. Prior to designating any fire lane on any private property devoted to public use, council shall afford
the owner or manager of such property an opportunity to appear before council and be heard, or at
his option, submit to council in writing his comments on the subject; and the fire chief or his
representative shall be afforded the same.
B. When official traffic control markings or signs are in place on any private property devoted to public
use, giving notice of a fire lane, no person shall park any vehicle wholly or partially within such fire
lane or to otherwise obstruct or impede the free passage of any other vehicle in such fire lane.
C. Some examples of private property devoted to public use are, but not limited to, shopping centers,
parking lots for customers of stores and patrols of business establishments, and the grounds of
institutions. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
Chapter 4
ENFORCEMENT
10-4-1: APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAWS:
All traffic laws of the state and the rules and regulations thereunder, not covered by this title, shall
apply to and cover the operation of vehicles and traffic upon the streets of the city to the same effect
as if incorporated herein. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 255/315
10-4-2: OFFICER AUTHORITY:
Officers of the police department shall have the power and it shall be their duty to enforce all traffic
regulations, including applicable state laws, within the city; to require all persons using the streets of
the city to do so carefully, safely and with the exercise of care for the person, property and safety of
others; and, in accordance with the provisions of this title, to safeguard and protect the surface and
other paved portions of the streets and enforce any laws for highway safety; to regulate traffic on all
the streets and roadways within the city; to investigate accidents; to cooperate with state, county and
other officials in the administration of traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and to carry out all such other duties as are specially imposed upon the department by this
title. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-4-3: OBEDIENCE BY POLICE OFFICERS:
The provisions of this title are applicable to the driving of vehicles upon the streets and shall apply to
the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the city, by the United States, the state or any other
county, city, village or other political subdivision of the state, except as provided in this title, and
subject to such exemptions as are set forth in this title with reference to authorized emergency
vehicles. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-4-4: TRAFFIC RECORD REQUIREMENTS:
The police department shall keep and maintain traffic records in respect to the following matters, such
records to accumulate for a period of at least five (5) years and thereafter such records shall be
maintained complete for at least the most recent five (5) year period:
A. The police department shall keep a record of all violations of traffic regulations (except standing or
parking violations) of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final
disposition of all such cases.
B. The police department shall keep a record of all accidents investigated by the department and of
the disposition of all cases where arrests and prosecutions of persons for causing or contributing to
such accidents have been made.
C. The police department shall keep and maintain a record of the traffic accidents, warnings, arrests
and convictions of each driver charged with violations of this title (except for violations of standing
or parking regulations) which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned,
and it shall be the duty of the police department to bring to the attention of the court, in the
prosecution of any driver for a traffic violation, any record of prior violations charged against such
driver so maintained by the department.
D. All records required to be kept under the provisions of this section shall be public records. (Ord.
744, 7-28-2009)
10-4-5: ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 256/315
A. It shall be the duty of the police department officers to investigate all traffic accidents coming to
their attention, to determine, so far as is possible, the cause thereof, and to make arrests and
assist in the prosecution of those persons who, by reason of violation of the traffic laws, caused or
contributed to such accidents.
B. Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police department shall
conduct studies thereof and endeavor to adopt remedial measures to prevent future accidents at
such locations. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-4-6: ANNUAL TRAFFIC REPORT REQUIRED:
The police department shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the mayor and
council, containing information as to the number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the
number of persons injured, the number of traffic accidents investigated, the number of arrests made
for violation of the traffic laws, and shall make plans and recommendations of the police department
for future traffic safety activities and other pertinent traffic accident data. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-4-7: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
The police department shall designate suitable insignia or other means to identify the vehicles in a
funeral procession and may provide a police escort for such processions, whenever, in the opinion of
the chief of police, such an escort is necessary. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-4-8: AUTHORITY TO REGULATE TRAFFIC MOVEMENT:
The police department, with the approval by resolution of the mayor and council, may designate those
portions of any street or roadway where overtaking and passing or driving on the left side of the street
or roadway would be a special hazard, to be known as "no passing zones", may designate any street,
alley or separate roadway within the city for one-way traffic, and may designate any street or roadway
or portion thereof within the city where parking on all or any part of the street or roadway may be
prohibited either all of the time or within certain designated hours. When appropriate signs are
erected, such designations shall be effective at all times thereafter. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-4-9: PLAY STREETS; POLICE CHIEF AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE:
The chief of police shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof as a play street for certain
hours of the day by posting appropriate signs indicating the hours when traffic shall be prohibited in
such area. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-4-10: EXEMPTION OF PERSONS AND EQUIPMENT WORKING ON STREETS:
Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this title shall not apply to persons, teams, motor
vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in the work of garbage removal, construction,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 257/315
repair or maintenance of the streets or roadways of the city, but shall apply to such persons and
vehicles when driving to and from such work. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
Chapter 5
PUBLIC PARKING
10-5-1: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
Any person who parks a vehicle, except when necessary to allow movement of other vehicular traffic
or pursuant to the direction of a peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the following
designated places, shall be guilty of an infraction:
A. On a public sidewalk.
B. Within any portion of a public or private driveway or entrance to a public street.
C. Within an intersection.
D. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
E. Within a crosswalk.
F. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk located at any intersection.
G. Within thirty feet (30') of the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal.
H. Between a designated safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the
curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a traffic regulatory sign indicates a
different length is allowed.
I. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
J. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station or within seventy five feet (75') of
such entrance when parking on the side of the street opposite such entrance, when regulatory
signs indicate such prohibition.
K. Beside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction in a manner which obstructs traffic.
L. Upon any street or portion thereof in a manner which blocks or interferes with the regular flow of
vehicular traffic.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 258/315
M. Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon or part of a public highway.
N. At any place where traffic regulatory signs prohibit such parking.
O. In any fire apparatus access road as defined in the international fire code.
P. Within any portion of a public right of way between the curb and a public sidewalk. (Ord. 744, 7-28-
2009)
10-5-2: PARKING IN ALLEYS PROHIBITED:
Any person who parks a motor vehicle in any alley within the city for any purpose other than to load or
unload such vehicle in a reasonably expeditious fashion shall be guilty of an infraction. Parking for
purposes of loading or unloading a vehicle shall be permitted only if a clearance of at least five feet
(5') in width between the adjacent building or other structures is left on each side of the vehicle. (Ord.
744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-3: PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
Any person who parks a motor vehicle having a gross vehicle weight greater than sixteen thousand
(16,000) pounds in any residentially zoned district within the city shall be guilty of an infraction unless
such parking is necessary to load or unload such vehicle in an expeditious manner. (Ord. 744, 7-28-
2009)
10-5-4: REPAIR OF VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS:
Any person who uses any street or alley within the city for the purpose of repairing any vehicle, except
for temporary emergency repairs, shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-5: STORAGE OF VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS:
Any person who parks or allows a vehicle to be parked upon any street or alley within the city for a
period of forty eight (48) or more consecutive hours in the same location shall be guilty of an
infraction. Any vehicle so parked or stored may be removed by or under the direction of any peace
officer and may be impounded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-6: MANNER OF PARKING:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who parks any vehicle, or allows the parking
of any vehicle, in the following manner shall be guilty of an infraction:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 259/315
A. Where the right hand wheels of such vehicle are at a distance greater than eighteen inches (18")
from the right hand curb upon any two-way street; or
B. At a distance of greater than eighteen inches (18") between the left wheels of the vehicle and the
left hand curb where parking is permitted on either side of a one-way street.
C. At a distance of greater than eighteen inches (18") between the curb, the point on front bumper of
such vehicle closest to the curb, where the area is designated for angle parking. (Ord. 744, 7-28-
2009)
10-5-7: UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE:
Any person who owns or has control of any motor vehicle and who leaves the vehicle upon a grade
without turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the street, shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord.
744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-8: SIGN VIOLATION:
Any person who parks or allows any vehicle to be parked upon any street in violation of any sign
restricting parking within such area, shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-9: WINTER PARKING:
A. Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
STREET: Any street, avenue, place, drive or any other public way in the city.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
B. Parking Prohibition: Between November 1 and April 1, no owner or operator of any vehicle shall
park or allow such vehicle to stand on any street within the downtown business district and
Riverside Avenue between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. when
there is an accumulation of any snowfall of four (4) or more inches. Said streets include Michigan
Avenue, Johnson Avenue, College Avenue, Main Street, Wisconsin Avenue, First Avenue, A Street
and Riverside Avenue. (Ord. 763, 11-9-2009)
C. Vehicle Removal; Payment Of Fee: Any vehicle which shall be left parked or standing in violation of
this chapter may be summarily removed without notice to the owner or operator by officers of the
police department of the city, or persons employed or designated by them, and stored in any
appropriate place. All necessary costs and expenses of towing, removing and storage of such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 260/315
vehicle shall be first paid to the impound facility by the person claiming the vehicle before release
of the same. All streets with parking prohibitions shall be posted.
D. Penalty: Owners of vehicles who do not remove their vehicle(s) from the street when snow
accumulates to four inches (4") shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) per incident, per vehicle, per
day. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-10: CITY PARKING LOTS:
All city parking lots owned or leased by the city including all city parks and recreational parking lots
shall have the following rules for usage:
A. No overnight parking or camping.
B. No vehicles shall be allowed to park in excess of twelve (12) hours.
C. No commercial vehicles or trucks in excess of ten thousand (10,000) GVWR.
D. All vehicles in violation of rules will be towed at owner's expense. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-11: IMPOUNDING VEHICLES:
Any peace officer may remove, cause to be removed and impound any vehicle parked in violation of
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-12: IMPOUNDING FEES:
The owner of any motor vehicle or trailer that has been impounded by the police under any provision
of this code or any law of the state of Idaho shall pay to the city an impound fee in the amount of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) before such vehicle or trailer shall be released. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-13: PAYMENT OF TOWING AND STORAGE FEES:
The owner of any motor vehicle or trailer that has been duly impounded, removed from the city
streets, towed or stored at the direction of the police department shall pay all towing and storage fees
before such vehicle or trailer may be released. The towing and storage fees shall be paid to the
person or company effecting the removal and towing and providing the storage for such vehicle or
trailer. If the motor vehicle or trailer is towed or stored by city personnel, the towing and storage fees
shall be paid to the city. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-14: ESTABLISHMENT OF STORAGE FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 261/315
The city council may annually establish by resolution the towing and storage fees provided for in this
chapter. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-15: PARKING ZONES ESTABLISHED:
The city council may establish parking and loading zones upon the streets of the city. The
establishment of, and all changes in, such zones shall be only as duly ordered by the city council and
entered in the official minutes of its meeting. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-16: DESIGNATION OF PARKING ZONES:
The chief of police shall designate all parking and loading zones established by the council by causing
appropriate parking signs to be installed upon the streets clearly informing the public of the location of
the parking and loading zones and the parking time allowed therein. Such zones shall be designated
by painting or otherwise marking lines upon the street surface, or upon the adjacent curb, designating
the area within such zones are located. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-17: OPERATING TIME DEFINED, EXCEPTIONS:
"Operating time" is that time when parking within parking zones and loading zones is regulated and is
the time between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of every day. "Operating time"
shall not include any Saturday or legal holiday. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-18: PARKING IN LOADING ZONES:
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, a person may park a vehicle in a loading zone for the
purpose of unloading persons, supplies or merchandise. Parking in a loading zone or space during
"operating time" for any other purpose is unlawful. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-19: UNLAWFUL PARKING:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, or, having parked the same, to allow it to
remain parked in violation of the regulations of any parking sign located within clear view of a
restricted parking area. When the parking sign merely states the duration of time allowed for
parking, then the regulation shall be in force only during "operating times". When the sign forbids
parking at all times, or at designated times, the regulation is in force at all times, or as stated. Any
person who violates this section shall be guilty of an infraction.
B. Parking shall be regulated in the central business district (C-3) to the restricted time limitations as
set by the council where traffic signs are clearly posted. Individuals who leave their vehicle(s) in
excess of the posted time limitation in any one location where properly posted signs are located
shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to penalties pursuant to section 10-5-30 of this chapter.
(Ord. 774, 8-13-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 262/315
10-5-20: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
Any person who parks or allows a vehicle to be parked in any parking space designated for use by
persons with disabilities and signed in conformity with the next section of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction, unless the vehicle is momentarily in the space for the purpose of allowing a disabled person
to enter or leave the vehicle, or unless special license plates or a temporary card issued for the
disabled pursuant to Idaho Code section 49-410 is displayed on the vehicle. For the purposes of this
section, the registered owner of a vehicle who has expressly or impliedly consented to the use of his
or her vehicle shall be deemed to have allowed the parking of such vehicle by the person to whom
such consent was given. The term "person with a disability" shall have the same meaning ascribed in
Idaho Code section 49-117(7)(b). (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-21: DESIGNATION OF PARKING SPACES FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES:
For the purposes of the preceding section, a parking space designated for persons with disabilities
shall be any parking space or area upon which there is posted immediately adjacent thereto, and
visible from each stall or space, a sign which is at least thirty six inches (36") above the ground,
displaying the international symbol of accessibility that shall have the same proportions shown in
Idaho Code section 49-410. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-22: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES:
No person shall park any vehicle, or combination of vehicles, which are more than twenty five feet
(25') in length on any street or alley for more than four (4) hours, except in special areas set aside for
such vehicles. Each four (4) hour period that a vehicle is parked in violation of this section shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-23: ENFORCEMENT ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
The provisions of sections 10-5-20 and 10-5-21 of this chapter shall be enforceable with respect to
handicapped parking spaces upon public property and private property open to public use. (Ord. 744,
7-28-2009)
10-5-24: VEHICLES PARKED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No driver of a vehicle shall stop, park or leave standing unattended any vehicle on a private road or
driveway or on private property without having express or implied permission from the owner, tenant
or lessee of such land. The owner, tenant or lessee of such private road or driveway or private
property may move, or have moved, any vehicle stopped, parked or left standing unattended on his or
her private road, driveway or private property as above prohibited without any liability for the cost of
moving any vehicle, nor shall he or she be liable to the owner of the vehicle for any damage done to
such vehicle in moving it, unless the owner, tenant or lessee of such private road or driveway or
private property was negligent in removing or authorizing the removal of the vehicle. The owner of
such vehicle shall be responsible for paying all removal costs to the persons removing such vehicle. In
addition to any penalties imposed by law, upon conviction, such person shall be assessed restitution
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 263/315
for all costs or expenses incurred by any public entity resulting from removal of said vehicle. Any
person who removes any vehicle under the provisions of this section shall notify the police
department. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-25: REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING:
In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony that a vehicle bearing a
certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as prohibited by the provisions of this title, and
further testimony that the records of the department of motor vehicles show that the license plate was
issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle which was unlawfully parked
was so parked by the defendant. A certified copy of registration from the department of motor vehicles
shall be proof of such ownership. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-26: VEHICLES WITHOUT LICENSES:
No vehicle shall be parked or stored on any public street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or way in this city at
any time if such vehicle is required by the laws of this state to have current registration license tag
thereon and does not have such current registration license affixed thereto as required by the state
motor vehicle law, unless such vehicle is attached or connected to a towing vehicle which towing
vehicle shall have affixed to it a current registration license tag. Any such vehicle may be towed
immediately without notice to the titled or registered owner. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-27: ABANDONED VEHICLES:
A. Abandonment Of Motor Vehicle Prohibited: No person shall, within this city, abandon a motor
vehicle or major part thereof upon the right of way of any public highway, upon any other public
property or upon any private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the
property, or upon property owned or controlled by that person, unless it is at a licensed salvage
yard or at the business establishment of a demolisher, or a business licensed to do business in the
state of Idaho and not in the primary business of offering motor vehicles or parts thereof for sale.
(Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-28: TRAILERS, CAMPERS, BOATS, ATVs:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park trailers, campers, boats or ATVs within the public right of
way between the curb of the street and a public sidewalk. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-29: NOTICE OF PARKING VIOLATIONS:
A. A notice of a violation of the parking regulations of this chapter may be issued by any police officer
or by any person duly authorized by the chief of police. The notice of violation shall be issued by
placing it on the windshield of an illegally parked vehicle, or any prominent location if the parking
violation involves a trailer, camper, boat or ATV. A separate notice shall be issued for each parking
regulation violated. If the violation is overtime parking, a separate notice shall be issued for each
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 264/315
hour, or fraction thereof, the owner or operator of the vehicle allows it to remain parked in violation
of this chapter.
B. The notice of violation shall state the date and time when it is issued and the nature of the parking
violation observed. The notice shall advise the owner or operator of the vehicle that he or she must
admit the violation and pay the penalty therefore or deny the violation and appear before
Clearwater County magistrates court within fourteen (14) days of the date the notice is issued, in
default of which a summons and criminal complaint may be served upon such person.
C. Any person issued a parking notice may enter an admission in the following ways:
1. Depositing the notice of violation with the amount of penalty stated thereon in any collection box
designated by the police department;
2. Mailing the notice of violation with the amount of the penalty stated thereon to the address
indicated on the notice; or
3. Presenting the notice together with the amount of the penalty indicated thereon at the office of
the city treasurer. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-5-30: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who violates section 10-5-20 of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable as follows: If there have been no other citations given to the
recipient within the past thirty (30) days, the penalty shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). If there
has been one other citation received in the past thirty (30) days by the recipient, the penalty shall
be fifty dollars ($50.00). If there have been two (2) or more other citations received by the recipient
in the past thirty (30) days, the penalty shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00).
B. Any person who violates the provisions of section 10-5-21 of this chapter is guilty of an infraction
and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00).
C. Unless otherwise provided, any person who violates any other provision of this chapter, shall be
guilty of an infraction, and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of twenty five
dollars ($25.00).
D. If a person cited with an infraction for any parking violation either fails to appear before the
magistrate court or to pay the penalty as provided in the previous subsections within fourteen (14)
days of the date the ticket is issued, a notice shall be sent via U.S. mail to the registered owner of
the automobile advising the owner that if the fine is not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of
the notice, the violation will be turned over to the state of Idaho department of motor vehicles,
which may result in a suspension of the owner's driver's license pursuant to state law. (Ord. 744, 7-
28-2009)
10-5-31: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES PRESERVED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 265/315
The issuance of a notice of violation shall not be the exclusive remedy for enforcing the parking
regulations of this chapter and all other lawful remedies are reserved, including prosecution by filing a
criminal complaint for an infraction violation. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
Chapter 6
TRUCK AND RESIDENTIAL ROUTES
10-6-1: ROUTES ESTABLISHED:
A. Truck Routes: Those city streets known as Michigan Avenue, Main Street, College Avenue,
Johnson Avenue, Vida, South A, South B, South C, South F, South G, South H, Dent Bridge Road,
Upper Fords Creek Road, 122nd Street from Highway 12 to Indio Avenue, Indio Avenue from
122nd Street to Diagonal Street and Diagonal Street from Indio Avenue to the city limits, hereafter
shall be designated as "truck routes", and shall be regulated in accordance with terms and
provisions herein established for truck routes.
B. Residential Routes: All other streets, avenues and alleyways within the city limits shall be referred
to as "residential routes" and shall be regulated in accordance with the terms and conditions herein
established for residential routes. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-6-2: WEIGHT AND TIRE REGULATIONS; TRUCK ROUTES:
All truck routes shall be, unless otherwise reduced and posted by reason of climatic or other
conditions, governed as to weight and tire regulations in accordance with the following limits: eight
hundred (800) pounds per inch of tire tread width, multiplied by the number of tires, not to exceed
twenty thousand (20,000) pounds per axle and thirty seven thousand eight hundred (37,800) pounds
for any tandem axle and front end; a maximum gross weight not to exceed one hundred five thousand
five hundred (105,500) pounds for any vehicle and trailer combination. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-6-3: WEIGHT LIMIT ON RESIDENTIAL ROUTES:
It is unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor for any person to operate a motor vehicle exceeding
sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds' gross weight at any time upon any residential route, unless
otherwise posted, except for the limited purpose of loading or unloading goods or persons and/or
performing emergency or maintenance services in the area. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
10-6-4: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
The owner and operator of any vehicle or other contrivance over or upon any street, avenue or
alleyway within the city, in violation of any of the terms or conditions hereof, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and may be held jointly and severally responsible for any and all damages which any
such street, avenue, or alleyway may sustain as a direct or indirect result of such violation and all said
damages may be recovered by the city in an action at law or equity. (Ord. 744, 7-28-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 266/315
Title 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
SUBDIVISIONS
11-1-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No plat of any subdivision of any land within the city shall be approved unless it be in full compliance
with all the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 786, 3-8-2016)
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALLEY: A passageway open to public travel which affords generally a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting lots and is not intended for general traffic circulation.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, including
the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulations within such a
development.
CUL-DE-SACS: Designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than four hundred feet (400') and
shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least
eighty feet (80'), and a street property line diameter of at least one hundred feet (100').
DEAD END STREET: A minor street with only one outlet and is of a temporary nature, with a
turnaround at the end of it. Provision shall be made for further extension of the street into adjoining
properties.
FINAL PLAT: The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is
presented to the council for final approval.
LOT: A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separated from other parcels or
portions by description as on a subdivision or record of survey map or by metes and bounds, for the
purpose of sale or lease to, or separate use of, another.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to arterial streets and
which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
MINOR STREET: A street used primarily for access to the abutting properties.
OWNER: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust, or any other
legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and
maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: The preliminary map, drawing or chart indicated for the proposed layout of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 267/315
subdivision to be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its consideration and
recommendations.
SIMPLE LOT SPLIT: The division of a parcel or tract of land within the city or area of impact into no
more than three (3) lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development
where new street access is not being created or major extension of public improvements is not
required. Lots that are split or divided with the intention of development must meet the minimum
zoning and building requirements.
STREET: A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway,
throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however otherwise designated.
SUBDIVIDER: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, corporation, trust or any other legal entity
commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for
another.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a parcel or tract of land within the city or area of city impact into two (2)
or more lots, tracks, or parcels of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building
development where new street access is created or major extension of public improvements is
required; except that:
A. The sale or exchange of parcels of land to or between adjoining property owners where such
sale or exchange does not create additional lots shall not be deemed subdivision.
B. The allocation of property by court decree in settling the estate of a decedent or in partitioning
land among owners shall not be deemed subdivision.
C. The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnation procedures, or the acquisition of
street rights of way by a public agency in conformance with the comprehensive plan, shall not be
deemed subdivision.
D. A division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of five (5) acres or more shall not
be deemed subdivision.
E. A division of land that meets the definition of a simple lot split.
WIDTH OF STREET: The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right of way of a street.
(Ord. 786, 3-8-2016)
11-1-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The subdivider or his representative discusses the proposed subdivision with city staff to determine
the type of subdivision request, regular subdivision or simple lot split, and receives the necessary
application forms and procedural requirements to follow. If the subdivision is situated in the area of city
impact, city ordinance 7141 shall first be reviewed to determine if the city subdivision will apply or
whether the subdivision may be waived to Clearwater County for their enforcement. The city planning
and zoning commission shall make this recommendation to the city council. No building permits shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 268/315
be issued for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a plat has not been approved in
accordance with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 786, 3-8-2016)
11-1-4: REGULAR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE:
Before subdividing any tract of land a subdivider shall:
A. Preconference Meeting: The contractor shall be involved in a preconference meeting to discuss all
or as much of what is expected by the city and what is required by the city subdivision ordinance.
B. Submission Of Preliminary Plat: Submit, at least thirty (30) days before a regular planning and
zoning commission meeting, two (2) copies of a preliminary plat to the planning and zoning
commission for examination and subsequent recommendations of approval or disapproval. The
planning and zoning commission shall, within ten (10) days from the date of its next regular
meeting following such submission, forward its recommendations for approval or disapproval to the
council. The planning and zoning commission may hold the preliminary plat until its next regular
meeting if insufficient documentation or information is needed.
C. Submission Of Final Plat: Within three (3) months or less after receiving tentative approval of the
preliminary plat, the original and three (3) copies of the final plat shall be submitted to the planning
and zoning commission for recommended final approval by the council.
D. Approval Of Council: After receiving recommended final approval by the planning and zoning
commission, the original and two (2) copies of the final plat shall be presented to the council for its
final approval.
E. Failure To Record Plat: Approval of the final plat by the council shall be null and void if the plat is
not recorded within ninety (90) days after the date of approval. (Ord. 786, 3-8-2016)
11-1-5: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch to two hundred feet
(1" = 200'), and shall contain the following information:
A. Proposed name of the subdivision.
B. Names and adjacent subdivisions and owners of adjoining parcels of land.
C. Names and addresses of the subdivider, owner and engineer.
D. Location by section, town, range, township, county, state.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 269/315
E. Names of streets within the adjoining plat.
F. Boundaries of the subdivision indicated by a heavy line and the approximate acreage.
G. Location, widths, and names of existing or platted streets, railroad rights of way, easements, parks,
permanent buildings, sections and corporation lines.
H. Drainage channels and drainage requirements, wooded areas, power transmission poles and lines,
and any other significant items should be shown.
I. Date of preparation, scale of map, north point.
J. Location and principal dimensions for all proposed streets, alley, easements, lot lines, and areas to
be reserved for public use.
K. Provisions for sewage disposal, drainage and flood control.
L. The planning and zoning commission may require a contour map showing contour intervals
consistent with the contour of the ground. (Ord. 786, 3-8-2016)
11-1-6: FINAL PLAT:
The final plat must be prepared in accordance with chapter 13 of title 50, Idaho Code, and shall
contain the following information:
A. Name of the subdivision.
B. Names of adjacent subdivisions and owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land.
C. Names and addresses of the subdivider, owner and engineer.
D. Location by section, town, range, township, county, state.
E. Names of streets within the adjoining plat.
F. All plat boundaries.
G. Bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines, section corners or other recognized
permanent monuments which shall be accurately described on the plat.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 270/315
H. Municipal, township, county or sectional lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by
distance and bearings.
I. Accurate location of all monuments.
J. Length of all arcs, radii, internal angles, points of curvature and tangent bearings.
K. When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than ninety degrees
(90°), the width at the building line shall be shown.
L. Date of preparation of plat, scale of map, north points.
M. All easements for right of way provided for public services or utilities, and any limitations of such
easements.
N. All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths, and with bearings or
angles to street and alley or crosswalkway lines.
O. Accurate outlines of any areas to be dedicated or temporarily reserved for public use with the
purpose indicated. (Ord. 786, 3-8-2016)
11-1-7: AGREEMENTS AS TO IMPROVEMENTS:
The final plat, when submitted to the council for final approval, shall be accompanied by the following:
A. Plans And Specifications: Plans and specifications for the required land improvements, approved
by the building official.
B. Agreement: An agreement executed by the owners and subdivider whereby they agree to make
and install the improvements provided for in section 11-1-8 of this chapter, in accordance with the
plans and specifications accompanying the final plat, and subject to inspection and approval by the
building official.
C. Bond, Deposit Or Other Assurance: The council shall withhold its approval of the final plat until the
agreement is given, supported by a bond, a cash deposit, or other assurance satisfactory to the
council, that the required improvements will be completed within two (2) years after approval of the
final plat. (Ord. 786, 3-8-2016)
11-1-8: REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS:
Unless waived or modified by the planning and zoning commission, no final plat shall be approved by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 271/315
the council without receiving a statement from the planning and zoning commission that the
improvements described in the plans and specifications of the subdivider meet the minimum
requirements of the laws of the city, and that they comply with the following:
A. Streets:
1. Surfacing: All streets shall be surfaced in accordance with applicable paving standard
specifications of the city.
2. Curbs, Gutters And Drainage: Curbs, gutters, drainage and drainage structures shall be
provided in accordance with standard specifications of the city.
3. Sidewalks: Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed along at least one side of every minor street
shown on the plat in accordance with the applicable standard specifications of the city and
concrete sidewalks shall be constructed along both sides of all arterial and collector streets.
4. Name Signs: Street name signs shall be placed at all street intersections within or abutting the
subdivision.
5. Lighting: The minimum requirements for street lighting facilities shall be one 2500-lumen light, or
equal, at each street intersection within or abutting the subdivision and every two hundred feet
(200') within the subdivision with not less than a one hundred fifty (150) watt metal halide or
sodium vapor light.
B. Water Supply:
1. Connection: Where public water supply approved by the city is reasonably accessible and in
accordance with title 9, chapter 12 of this code, each lot within the subdivision shall be provided
with a connection thereto.
2. Wells Or Private Water Supply: In a proposed subdivision, pending accessibility of a public water
supply, the subdivider may be required to construct wells or a private water supply system in
such a manner that an adequate supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the
subdivision at the time improvements are erected thereon.
3. Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be installed in all subdivisions placed not more than three
hundred feet (300') apart2.
4. Water Mains: Water mains shall be constructed in accordance with a design which has been
reviewed and approved by the division of environmental quality and the city. Water mains shall
be extended to the boundaries of the subdivision tract to permit possible future extensions3.
C. Sewers4:
1. Connection: Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, each lot within the
subdivided area shall be provided with a connection thereto.
2. Sewer Mains: Sewer mains shall be constructed in accordance with a design which has been
reviewed and approved by the division of environmental quality and the city of Orofino. Sewer
mains shall be extended to the boundaries of the subdivision tract to permit possible future
extensions. (Ord. 786, 3-8-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 272/315
11-1-9: SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS:
All subdivisions shall comply with the following minimum standards:
A. Streets:
1. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform and
shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions,
to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the
land to be served by such streets.
2. The arrangements of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions for the continuation of
the existing streets in adjoining areas.
3. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall
make provision for the proper projection of streets.
4. When a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land susceptible of being subdivided, then the
new streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the tract proposed to be subdivided.
5. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall be
avoided.
6. Cul-de-sacs, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than four hundred feet (400')
and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter
of at least eighty feet (80'), and a street property line diameter of at least one hundred feet
(100').
7. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing arterial street the mayor and council may
require marginal access streets or other such treatment as may be necessary for adequate
protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
8. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
9. Street widths shall not be less than fifty feet (50') in right of way.
10. The intersection of more than two (2) streets at one point shall be avoided except where it is
impracticable to secure a proper system otherwise. Streets shall intersect one another at an
angle as near to a right angle as possible, and no intersection of streets at angles less than sixty
degrees (60°) shall be approved. Street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of ten feet
(10') measured at the back of curbs when the said intersection occurs at right angles. If an
intersection occurs at an angle other than a right angle, it shall be rounded with a curve of a
radius acceptable to the mayor and council. In a business district, the mayor and council may
permit comparable cutoffs or chords.
11. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any point by more than ten degrees
(10°), they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to ensure a sight distance of
not less than six hundred feet (600') for minor and collector streets, and of such greater radii as
the mayor and council shall determine for special cases.
12. A tangent of at least one hundred feet (100') long shall be introduced between reverse curves
on arterial and collector streets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 273/315
13. Where a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be
arranged so as to allow the opening of future streets and logical further resubdivision.
14. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except under conditions
approved by the mayor and council.
15. No street grade shall be less than one percent (1%), and shall not exceed ten percent (10%),
with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves.
16. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right of way or limited access highway
right of way, the mayor and council may require a street approximately parallel to and on each
side of such right of way, at a distance for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park
purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts.
Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach
grades and future grade separations.
17. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the
subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations and where the Mayor
and Council find it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided,
the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract.
18. Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street names unless a new street is
a continuation of, or in alignment with the existing or platted street. House numbers shall be
assigned in accordance with the house numbering system now in effect in the City. All new
streets shall be named by the subdivider subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council.
19. The subdivider shall provide access to all proposed streets, across all ditches, in a standard
method approved by the City Council.
B. Alleys:
1. Alleys shall not be permitted in residential areas.
2. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts except that the Mayor and Council
may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service
access, such as off street parking, loading, and unloading consistent with and adequate for the
use proposed.
3. The right-of-way width of an alley shall be twenty feet (20') minimum.
4. Dead end alleys shall not be permitted, except that the Mayor and Council may waive this
requirement where such dead end alleys are unavoidable and where adequate turnaround
facilities have been provided.
C. Easements:
1. Easements with a right-of-way width of ten feet (10') shall be provided on each side of all rear lot
lines and along certain side lot lines where necessary for utilities.
2. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall
be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the
lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for
the purpose. (Ord. 786, 3-8-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 274/315
11-1-10: SIMPLE LOT SPLIT PROCEDURES:
A. A property owner or their representative shall submit a completed application to the Planning and
Zoning Administrator before any split or division of property within the City. The Administrator shall
provide a Simple Lot Split Application to property owners who divide a parcel or tract of land within
the City into no more than three (3) lots or parcels. The completed application shall be reviewed by
all departments for compliance of all City ordinances and shall not be approved until all
departments have signed the application.
B. Any property owner or their representative who has an application that has been denied shall
receive an explanation in writing from the Administrator. Any applicant can also request a formal
appeal of any denied application with the City Planning and Zoning Commission. The commission
shall hold a public hearing and follow the same public hearing procedures as section 11-2-14 of
this title and forward their recommendation to the City Council as Governing Board for a final
decision. (Ord. 796, 2-13-2018)
Chapter 2
USE DISTRICTS
11-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein are defined. All words used in
the present tense include the future tense; all words in the plural number include the singular number,
and all words in the singular number include the plural number; unless the natural construction of the
wording indicates otherwise. The word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "building" includes the
word "structure"; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "used" shall be
deemed also to include "designed, intended, or arranged to be used". Unless otherwise specified all
distances shall be measured horizontally. The word "city" means the "city of Orofino", in the county of
Clearwater, state of Idaho; the term "council" means the city council of said city; the term
"commission" means the planning and zoning commission of said city of Orofino.
ACCESSORY: A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to the use of the main building on
the same lot.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: Any structure attached to, located adjacent to a home or on the same
lot, including awnings, steps, porches, carports, garages, and storage buildings. Accessory structure
shall be constructed in compliance with standards specified by the city and shall be aesthetically
harmonious with the home and the neighborhood. An accessory structure shall be considered
"detached" if located more than three feet (3') from the primary housing unit.
ACCESSORY USE: A minor or second use for which a lot, structure or building is designed or
employed in conjunction with but subordinate to its primary use. The term is synonymous with
"secondary use".
AIRPORT: Orofino City Airport1.
ALLEY: A passageway open to public travel which affords generally a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting lots and is not intended for general traffic circulation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 275/315
ALTERATIONS: A change or arrangement of the structural parts of existing facilities, or an
enlargement by extending the sides or increasing the height or depth, or the moving from one location
to another. In buildings for business, commercial, industrial or similar uses, the installation or
rearrangement of partitions affecting more than one-third (1/3) of a single floor area shall be
considered an alteration.
APARTMENT HOUSE: A building, or portion thereof, used or designed as a dwelling for three (3) or
more families or households living independently of each other.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building partly underground and having at least one-half (1/2) of its
height more than five feet (5') below the adjoining finished grade.
BEDROOM: A room other than a living room, kitchen, bathroom, eating area or utility room which may
be used for sleeping purposes.
BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling in which not more than four (4) roomers, lodgers and/or boarders are
housed or fed.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof, but excluding all forms of vehicles even though immobilized.
When a use is required to be within a building, or where special authority granted pursuant to this
chapter requires that use shall be within an entirely enclosed building, then the term "building" means
one so designed and constructed that all exterior walls of the structure shall be solid from the ground
to the roof line, and shall contain no openings except for windows and doors which are designed so
that they may be closed.
BUILDING AREA: The total ground coverage of a building or structure which provides shelter
measured from the outside of its external walls or supporting members or from a point four feet (4') in
from the outside edge of a cantilevered roof, whichever covers the greatest areas.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The perpendicular distance from the established grade of the street to the
average roof elevation, not to exceed international building code. For buildings set from the street line,
the height of the building may be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade along the
front of the building, provided its distance from the street line is not less than the height of such grade
above the established grade.
CARPORT: A structure to house or protect motor vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the
main building which is open to the weather on two (2) sides.
CHILDCARE FACILITY: A business or establishment operated within the city which is licensed
pursuant to the Orofino childcare facility ordinance and title 5, chapter 11 of this code.
CITY IMPACT: The officially adopted geographic area of city impact is shown on the map adopted by
reference herein and entitled "area of Orofino city impact" and includes specifically defined land
outside the city limits2.
CLINIC: A building designed and used for the medical, dental and surgical diagnosis and treatment of
patients under the care of doctors and nurses.
CLUB: An incorporated or unincorporated association or persons organized for social, educational,
literary or charitable purpose. Property occupied by a club shall be deemed to be semiprivate in
character and shall be subject to the regulations governing public buildings and places, excluding
groups organized primarily to render a service which is normally considered a business.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 276/315
COMMERCIAL USE: An activity maintaining a display of goods, merchandise or services, for sale or
involving a rental fee.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A motor vehicle used for purposes other than a family car, such as a taxi,
delivery or service vehicle.
COMMUNITY CENTER: A building where the public can meet and use as a recreational activity and
other community services for the people who live in the community.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use permitted in one or more zones as defined by this chapter but which,
because of characteristics peculiar to such use, or because of size, technological processes or
equipment, or because of the exact location with reference to surroundings, street, and existing
improvements or demands upon public facilities, requires a special degree of control to make use
consistent with and compatible to other existing or permissible uses in the same zone or zones.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: The documented evidence of authority granted by the planning and
zoning commission and the city council to locate a conditional use at a particular location.
COURT: An open, unoccupied space other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or buildings
and which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by such buildings or building, including the open space
in a house, court or apartment, providing access to the units thereof.
CURB CUT: A cut in the curb line for passage of vehicles, not to exceed twenty feet (20') in width.
DETACHED BUILDING: A building surrounded on all sides by open space.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building containing two (2) kitchens and designed to be occupied by two
(2) families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT: A building or portion thereof providing complete housekeeping facilities for one
family. The term "dwelling" shall not be deemed to include motel, hotel, tourist home or boarding
house.
ESTABLISHED GRADE: The high point of the sidewalk at the front or side lot line as established by
the city.
FLOODPLAIN: The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in
loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare3.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a building or buildings,
measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls and from the centerline of division walls. Floor area
shall include: basement space, elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, mechanical equipment
rooms or attic spaces with headroom of seven feet six inches (7'6") exterior steps or stairs, terraces,
breezeways and open spaces.
FUNCTIONAL OPEN SPACE: Land within a development which is permanently reserved as open
space, free from permanent structures, useful for recreational or social use by the residents of the
development, or others; such space shall not include streets, roadways or parking areas.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A building or portion thereof for the housing or care of self-propelled vehicles.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 277/315
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof designed and used for the storage, rental, repair or
servicing of motor vehicles or boats, as a business.
GASOLINE STATION: Any area of land, including the structures thereon, that is used for the sale of
gasoline or other motor fuels, oils, lubricants, and auto accessories and which may or may not include
washing, lubricating, or other minor servicing, but no painting operation.
GUESTHOUSE: A detached structure, being an accessory to a single-family dwelling with not more
than two (2) bedrooms, having no kitchen facilities, and which shall be used and/or designed for use
primarily by guests and/or servants for sleeping quarters only.
HABITABLE FLOOR: Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating,
cooking or recreation or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a
"habitable floor".
HOME (REST, CONVALESCENT, GUEST, FOR THE AGED): A home operated similarly to a boarding
house but not restricted to any number of guests or guestrooms and the operator of which is licensed
by the state to give special care and supervision to his or her charges, and in which nursing, dietary
and other personal services are furnished to convalescents, invalids and aged persons suffering from
a mental sickness, mental disease, disorder or ailment, or from a contagious or communicable
disease, and in which no surgery is performed, maternity or other primary treatments such as are
customarily provided in sanatoriums or hospitals, and in which no persons are kept or served who
normally would be admitted to a mental hospital.
HOME CHILDCARE: A home or place in which four (4) or fewer children not related by blood or
marriage to the person or persons operating such home are regularly received and provided with part
time supplemental parental care during any part of the twenty four (24) hour day when the parents are
not on the premises. See definition of Childcare Facility.
HOME OCCUPATION: Those activities engaged in one or two (2) rooms of a home or its accessory
building; such as home care products, arts and crafts, online computer services, typing, and
bookkeeping and like activities. A home occupation shall not detract from or change the integrity or
character of the residential zone. There shall not be any outside indication such as signage or other
indication that a home occupation exists at a residence. Any occupation that does not conform to the
intent of this definition shall apply for a special use permit with the planning and zoning commission.
The city reserves the right to revoke a home occupation permit and license if the nature of the home
occupation changes or complaints on the home occupation persist.
HOME RETIREMENT: A place of residence of several families or individuals in apartment like
quarters, rented or condominium, which may feature services to retired persons such as limited
nursing facilities, minimum maintenance living accommodations, and recreation programs and
facilities.
HOSPITAL: An establishment which provides accommodations, facilities and services over a
continuous period of twenty four (24) hours or more, for observation, diagnosis and care, of two (2) or
more individuals, not related by blood or marriage to the operator, who are suffering from illness,
injury, deformity or abnormality, or from any condition requiring obstetrical, medical or surgical
services.
HOTEL: Any building or portion thereof containing six (6) or more rooms that are rented, or hired out
to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes for compensation, whether the
compensation be paid directly or indirectly. A central kitchen and dining room and accessory shops
and services catering to the general public can be provided. Not included are institutions housing
persons under legal restraint or requiring medical attention or care.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 278/315
JUNKYARD (SALVAGE): A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used for the collecting, storage and
sale of wastepaper, rags, glass, plastic, scrap metal or discarded material, or for the collecting,
dismantling, storage, salvaging or sale of parts of machinery or vehicles not in running condition.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any lot or building in which four (4) or more dogs and/or cats are kept
commercially for board, propagation or treatment.
KITCHEN: Any room used or intended or designed to be used for cooking and/or preparation of food.
LINE: The line of the fascia or part of a building perpendicular to the ground nearest the property line.
LOT: A single tract of land, no matter how legally described whether by metes or bounds and/or by lot
or lots and block designation as in a recorded plat, which at the time of applying for a building permit is
designated by its owner or developer as the tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit of land
under single ownership or control and assigned to the particular use for which the building permit is
being secured and having frontage on or access to a public street.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot. Where utility or street
easements are located within or bordering a parcel, lot area computation shall not include that area
contained within the easement.
LOT CORNER: A lot at the junction of and fronting on two (2) or more intersecting streets.
LOT DEPTH: The mean dimension of the lot from the front street line to the rear line.
LOT INTERIOR: A lot fronting on one street and between the two (2) corner lots.
LOT THROUGH: A lot fronting on two (2) streets that do not intersect on the parcel's lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: The dimension of the lot line at the street, or in an irregular shaped lot the dimension
across the lot at the building line, or in a corner lot the narrow dimension of the lot at a street or
building line.
MANUFACTURED HOME (Formerly MOBILE HOME): A structure constructed after June 15, 1976,
built according to the federal manufactured housing and safety standards act (HUD code), and is for
residential use only. For an expanded definition of a manufactured home (i.e., length, size, chassis or
foundation and utility requirements), see state code 39-4105.
MEAN DEPTH: The mean depth of a lot is the depth of such lot measured on a line approximately
perpendicular to the fronting street and midway between the side lines of such lot.
MOBILE HOME: A factory assembled structure or structures equipped with necessary service
connections and made so as to be readily movable as a unit or units on its (their) own running gear
and designed to be used as a dwelling unit(s) without a permanent foundation.
MOTEL: A building or buildings, detached or in connected units or designed as a single structure, the
units of which are used as individual sleeping or dwelling units having their own private toilet facilities
and may or may not have their own kitchen facilities, and are designed primarily for the
accommodation of transient automobile travelers. Accommodations for trailers are not included. This
term includes tourist court, motor hotel, motor lodge, cabin court, motor inn and similar names.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING USE: The use of a building or structure which was a lawful use at the
time this chapter was passed but which use, because of the passage of this chapter, does not conform
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 279/315
to the regulations of the district in which the use exists.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the time this chapter
becomes effective and which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is
located.
OFF STREET PARKING: Parking facilities for motor vehicles on other than a public street or alley and
not located in required front or street side yard setbacks.
OPEN PARKING: Any part of a lot unobstructed from the ground upward. An off street parking facility
designed for more than four (4) parking spaces.
PARKING SPACE: Any use authorized or permitted along or in conjunction with another use in a
specified district and subject to the limitations or the regulations of such use district.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: The PUD is characterized by a unified site designed for a number
of housing units and/or other buildings where clustering of buildings and utilization of open space will
allow for enhanced land use. Through a PUD, a development may be planned as a unit and the
density of use may be calculated on the basis of the entire project, rather than on a lot by lot basis.
Individual uses and structures in a PUD need not comply with specific building locations, height,
building size, floor area, lot size and open space requirements of the underlying basic zone; provided,
that requirements set forth herein are complied with, and the development as a whole is harmonious
with the community, particularly adjacent land uses.
PRINCIPAL USE: The principal or predominant use to which the property is or may be devoted, and to
which all other uses on the premises are accessory. The term is synonymous with "primary use".
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES: Offices maintained and used as a place of business conducted by
persons engaged in the healing arts for human beings, such as doctors and dentists (but wherein no
overnight care for patients is given), and by engineers, attorneys, architects, accountants and other
persons providing services utilizing training in and knowledge of the mental discipline as distinguished
from training in occupations requiring mere skill or manual dexterity or the handling of commodities.
PUBLIC UTILITY: A public service corporation performing some public service and subject to special
governmental regulations, or a governmental agency performing similar public services, the services
by either of which are paid for directly by the recipients thereof. Such services shall include, but are
not limited to, water supply, electric power, gas and transportation for persons and freight.
RECREATION FACILITIES, COMMUNITY AND NONCOMMERCIAL: Facilities such as rod and gun
clubs and shooting ranges, swimming pools, athletic clubs, golf and country clubs, for the use of the
general public or provided for and by members of semiprivate corporations.
ROOMER: Lodger or boarder occupying a rented room in a private home or rooming house.
SCHOOL: Elementary, junior or senior high, including public, private and parochial. An institution of
learning which offers instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught in
the public schools by the Idaho state board of education.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY: A building or buildings consisting of individual, small, selfcontained
units, and the majority of the units being less than five hundred (500) square feet in area,
that are leased or owned for the storage of business or household goods.
SERVICE BUILDING: A building housing a communal toilet, laundry and other sanitary facilities
necessary for the health and convenience of the trailer court occupants.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 280/315
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS: The distance that buildings or uses must be removed from their lot
lines. Setbacks shall be measured, where applicable, from proposed or actual public or private street
right of way lines.
SIGN: Any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof
to the attention of the public.
SITE: The total horizontal area within the property lines excluding external streets, public or private.
SPECIAL USE: A use permitted in one or more zones as defined by this chapter; but, because of
characteristics peculiar to such use, or because of size, technological process or equipment or
because of the exact location with reference to surroundings, streets and existing improvement or
demands upon public facilities, requires a special degree of control to make uses consistent with and
compatible to other existing or permissible uses in the same zone or zones. Special uses are
distinguished from conditional uses by their potential impact on the entire community as opposed to a
specific neighborhood and are therefore judged for compliance with the Orofino comprehensive plan
by its authors, the planning and zoning commission.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: The documented evidence of authority granted by the Orofino city council to
locate a special use at a particular location.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and upper surface
of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included
between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
STORY, FIRST: The lowest story in a building that qualifies as a "story", as defined herein, except that
a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be classified as a first story, provided such
floor level is not more than four feet (4') below grade, as defined herein, for more than fifty percent
(50%) of the total perimeter, or not more than eight feet (8') below grade, as defined herein, at any
point.
STREET: A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.
STREET FRONT: A street on which the lots of a subdivision of a city block generally front upon.
STRUCTURE: A combination of materials constructed and erected permanently on the ground or
attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. Not included are residential fences
less than six feet (6') in height, retaining walls, rockeries and similar improvements of a minor
character less than three feet (3') in height.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY: Not having or requiring permanent attachment to the ground, or
involving structures which have no required permanent attachment to the ground.
STUDIO APARTMENT: A zero bedroom apartment with a separate kitchenette and with a bathroom.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels for the purpose of
transfer of ownership or building development, or, if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of
land; provided, that a division of land which may be ordered or approved by a court or affected by
testamentary or interstate provisions, or a division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels
of five (5) acres or more or not involving a new street shall not be deemed a subdivision. The term
includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing
or to the land subdivided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 281/315
TRAILER COURT: A court, opening on a street, equipped with sanitary facilities for the parking of
three (3) or more trailers, mobile homes and/or trailer coaches.
USE: The purpose of land, a building or structure now serves or for which it is occupied, maintained,
arranged, designed or intended.
USE DISTRICT: A portion or portions of Orofino designated on district zoning maps as one or more of
the categories listed and described in this chapter.
USE, MIXED: Two (2) or more different uses of the same land, buildings or structures. When a
development of land, buildings or structures has mixed use, the more restrictive requirements shall
apply, unless the requirements are specifically stated.
USED CAR LOT: Any place outside a building where two (2) or more automobiles are offered for sale
or are displayed.
VARIANCE: The means by which an adjustment is made in the application of the specific regulations
of this chapter to a particular piece of property which, because of special circumstances applicable to
it, is deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zone or vicinity, and
which adjustment remedies disparity in privileges.
WAREHOUSE: A building used primarily for the storage of goods and material.
YARD: An open unoccupied space in front, rear or side on the same lot with a building or proposed
building.
YARD, FRONT: An open unoccupied space extending from thirty inches (30") above the general
ground level at the principal street line to the nearest point of the eave line of the main building on the
lot and including the full width of the lot to its side lines.
YARD, REAR: An open unoccupied space extending from thirty inches (30") above the general level
of the ground at the rear lot line to the nearest point of the eave line of the main building and including
the full width of the lot to its side lines.
YARD, SERVICE: An open area, usually paved, with access to a street to allow vehicular access to a
building or use for purposes of loading or unloading equipment, freight, livestock or people.
YARD, SIDE: An open unoccupied space extending from thirty inches (30") above the general ground
level on the lot from the side yard line to the nearest point of the eave line of the main building and
extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear lot line or a front lot line shall be
considered a side lot line. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
11-2-2: DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS:
In order to regulate and restrict the location of trades, callings, industries and the location of buildings
designed for specific uses, and to regulate and limit the height of buildings hereafter erected or
structurally altered, to regulate and determine the area of yards and other open spaces about
buildings and to regulate and limit the density of population, the city is hereby divided into districts of
which there shall be six (6) known as:
R-2 Single-family residence district
R-3 Multiple-family residence district
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 282/315
MXD Mixed use district - sales and service, R-2 residential
C-3 Central business district
C-4 Commercial, industrial and manufacturing district
P Special public district
(Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
11-2-3: ADOPTION OF DISTRICT MAP; RESTRICTIONS:
The city is hereby divided into six (6) districts as aforesaid, and the boundaries of such districts are
shown on the map, filed in the office of the clerk and made a part of this chapter, being designated as
the district map, and said map and all the notations, references and other things shown thereon shall
be a part of this chapter as if the matters and things set forth by the map were fully described herein.
Except as provided hereinafter:
A. Permitted Uses: No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any
buildings or premises be used for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which such
building or premises is located.
B. Building Height: No building shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit
herein established for any district in which such building is located,
C. Yards And Open Space: No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open
spaces be smaller than prescribed by this chapter, nor shall the lot area per family be reduced in
any manner except in conformity with the area regulations hereby established for the district in
which such building is located. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
11-2-4: SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT (R-2):
A. Uses Permitted Outright: In an R-2 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
outright subject to the provisions of the adopted international codes.
Accessory buildings and private garages designed to accommodate no more than four (4) motor
vehicles. Accessory detached buildings shall be five feet (5') from the side property line and five
feet (5') from the rear lot line.
Churches.
Doublewide manufactured homes meeting HUD approved specifications, and Idaho Code
requirements.
Existing lot development patterns and policies embodied in the comprehensive plan will guide
application of this district.
One single-family dwelling per lot.
Single-family dwelling unit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 283/315
Small daycare facility for four (4) or less children.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures:
Home occupations.
Parking lots for nonresidential church uses permitted in the R-2 district.
Private noncommercial greenhouses from which no products are sold to the public.
C. Special Uses:
Accessory living quarters serving as a guesthouse or domestic servant quarters.
Antenna towers.
Boarding house or bed and breakfast, limited to a maximum of two (2) bedrooms, with the
conditions that adequate off street parking be provided and that the use will not change the
character of the neighborhood.
Home occupations (which do not conform with the definition).
Public libraries, public galleries, and public museums.
Public or private schools.
Public parks and recreation facilities; provided, however, that any service yard located within said
park shall be maintained no closer than fifty feet (50') to a property line of an adjoining residence or
street frontage.
Public service and utility facilities not listed as permitted uses in this district, such as fire stations,
police stations, telephone switching facilities, fairgrounds, cemeteries, national guard armories, fire
training facilities, pumping stations, electric substations and similar public service facilities
necessary to the neighborhood or community, including signage and other necessary accessory
structures.
Other residential uses not specifically listed shall be evaluated by the zoning official for compatible
use. If found incompatible, the use shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission and
the city council as a special use request.
D. Limitation On Uses: All principal uses other than dwellings shall comply with the following
standards:
1. One covered off street parking space is required per dwelling.
2. Off street parking shall not be located in required front or street side setbacks.
3. Any lights illuminating any parking area or building shall be arranged to direct the light away
from adjoining premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 284/315
E. Lot Requirements:
1. Minimum lot area: Four thousand eight hundred (4,800) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: Forty eight feet (48').
F. Minimum Yard Requirements: All minimum yard requirements are measured from the drip line of the
structure.
1. Front yard: Twenty feet (20').
2. Street side: Twenty feet (20').
3. Any other side: Five feet (5'); but the sum of the two (2) side yards shall be at least fifteen feet
(15').
4. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
5. Corner lots: The front yard requirement for streets upon which the front of the building faces
shall apply. The side yard shall be equal to the front yard requirements on lots fronting upon the
side streets. No accessory building on the lot regardless of the way it faces, shall project beyond
the front yard line of either street.
G. Permitted Signs:
1. One building mounted sign per principal structure, limited to a maximum of three (3) square feet
each.
2. One temporary "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign per principal structure on the offered site, limited to
a maximum area of six (6) square feet.
3. One ground or building attached sign per principal structure, identifying churches, schools, or
public facilities located on the site. Such signs may be illuminated only by indirect lighting, shall
not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in size, must be found to be compatible with the
neighborhood by the zoning administrator, shall not obstruct any neighbor's view, and shall not
obstruct intersecting street visibility.
H. Fences; Permits Required: Permits are required for all fences.
1. No fence shall exceed six feet (6') in height, except fences located on public facilities.
2. Fences constructed within required front yards or street side yards shall not exceed the following
heights:
a. Solid fences: Three feet (3').
b. Open rail fences and other open fences where the posts and material constitute not more than
one-third (1/3) the fence area: Four feet six inches (4'6").
3. Barbed wire fences are prohibited, except where five (5) acres or more are adjacent to
Clearwater County for the purpose of pasturing horses and cattle. Other fences, including
electric fences constructed in a manner that may be hazardous to persons or animals are
prohibited. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 285/315
11-2-5: MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT (R-3):
A. Uses Permitted Outright: In an R-3 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
outright:
Boarding or rooming houses.
Churches.
Home occupations.
Manufactured homes, mobile homes and trailers.
Multi-family dwelling units.
Single-family dwelling units.
Two-family dwelling units.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures:
Accessory buildings and private garages designed to accommodate no more than four (4) motor
vehicles.
Parking lots for uses permitted in the R-3 district.
Private noncommercial greenhouses from which no products are sold to the public.
C. Special Uses:
Accessory living quarters serving as a guesthouse or domestic servant quarters.
Antenna towers.
Boarding house or bed and breakfast, limited to a maximum of two (2) bedrooms, with the
conditions that adequate off street parking be provided and that the use will not change the
character of the neighborhood.
Home occupations. Nonconformance with definition.
Public libraries, public galleries, and public museums.
Public or private schools.
Public parks and recreation facilities; provided, however, that any service yard located within said
park shall be maintained no closer than fifty feet (50') to a property line of an adjoining residence or
street frontage.
Public service and utility facilities not listed as permitted uses in this district, such as fire stations,
police stations, telephone switching facilities, fairgrounds, cemeteries, national guard armories, fire
training facilities, pumping stations, electric substations and similar public service facilities
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 286/315
necessary to the neighborhood or community, including signage and other necessary accessory
structures.
Other residential uses not specifically listed shall be evaluated by the zoning official for compatible
use. If found incompatible, the use shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission and
the city council as a special use request.
D. Limitations On Uses: All principal uses other than dwellings shall comply with the following
standards:
1. One and one-half (11/2) parking spaces are required for each dwelling unit.
2. Off street parking shall not be located in required front or street side yard setbacks.
3. Any lights illuminating any parking area or building shall be arranged to direct the light away
from the adjoining premises.
4. The minimum lot size for a manufactured home multisectional or singlewide is four thousand
eight hundred (4,800) square feet. Two (2) such manufactured homes multisectional or
singlewide may occupy a single lot; but in such event the minimum lot size shall be seven
thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet. A combination of more than two (2) of any such
structures is prohibited on a single lot.
E. Lot Requirements:
1. Minimum lot area:
a. Single-family dwelling: Four thousand eight hundred (4,800) square feet.
b. Two-family dwelling: Seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: Forty eight feet (48').
F. Minimum Yard Requirements: All minimum yard requirements shall be measured from the drip line
of the structure.
1. Front: Twenty feet (20').
2. Street side: Twenty feet (20').
3. Any other side: Five feet (5'), but the sum of the two (2) side yards shall be at least fifteen feet
(15').
4. Corner lots: The front yard requirement for streets upon which the front of the building faces
shall apply. The side yard shall be equal to the front yard requirements on lots fronting upon the
side streets. No accessory building on the lot, regardless of the way it faces, shall project
beyond the front yard line of either street.
G. Permitted Signs:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 287/315
1. One building mounted sign per principal structure, limited to a maximum area of three (3) square
feet each.
2. One temporary "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign per principal structure on the offered site limited to
a maximum area of six (6) square feet each.
3. One ground or building attached sign per principal structure, identifying churches, schools, or
public facilities located on the site. Such signs may be illuminated only by indirect lighting, shall
not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in size, must be found to be compatible with the
neighborhood by the zoning administrator, shall not obstruct any neighbor's view, and shall not
obstruct intersecting street visibility.
H. Fences; Permits Required: Permits required for all fences.
1. No fence shall exceed a height of six feet (6'), except fences located on school grounds.
2. Fences constructed within required front yards or street side yards shall not exceed the following
heights:
a. Solid fences: Three feet (3').
b. Open rail fences and other open fences where the posts and material constitute not more than
one-third (1/3) of the fence area: Four feet six inches (4'6").
3. Barbed wire fences are prohibited, except where five (5) acres or more are adjacent to
Clearwater County for the purpose of pasturing horses and cattle. Other fences, including
electric fences constructed in a manner that may be hazardous to persons or animals are
prohibited. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
11-2-6: MXD MIXED USE DISTRICT - SALES AND SERVICE, R-2 RESIDENTIAL:
The intent of the mixed use district is to provide a location where commercial sales and service or
residential uses are permitted outright. In order to promote compatibility among the mixed uses
required off street parking and development standards will protect the public's interest while providing
sound development.
All commercial business activity in connection with a use permitted outright, other than off street
parking or off street loading, shall be wholly within an enclosed building.
A. Permitted Principal Uses And Structures:
Appliance sales and service .
Automobile dealers/parts and repair.
Bakers.
Banks.
Beauty parlors and barbershops.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 288/315
Boat storage and sales.
Bowling lane.
Building and mechanical materials.
Carpeting.
Churches.
Clinics.
Clothing.
Contractors (building, electrical, mechanical and plumbing).
Copy services.
Crafts.
Dance aerobics.
Daycare facilities.
Dry cleaning and laundry.
Elderly care facility.
Feed dealers.
Gift shops.
Glass - auto/plate/windows.
Government agencies.
Grocery stores.
Guide shops.
Hardware stores.
Hotels.
Jewelers.
Landscape contractors and nurseries.
Lawn equipment.
Libraries, civic groups and community center.
Mortuaries.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 289/315
Motels.
Music stores.
Newspaper.
Office buildings.
Parks and recreation.
Pawnbrokers.
Pet shops.
Pharmacies.
Photography shops.
Printers.
Professional services.
Radio stations.
Real estate agencies.
Restaurants.
Service stations.
Single-family dwellings.
Small engine sales and repair.
Sporting goods.
Storage units.
Taverns.
Theaters.
Thrift shops.
Tire sales/repair/rental.
Truck sales/repair/rental.
Utility companies.
B. Special Uses:
Daycare facilities within a residential dwelling (5 or more children).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 290/315
Mixed uses on the same lot or within the same structure.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Other uses not specifically listed in subsection A of this section shall be evaluated by the zoning
official for compatible use. If found incompatible the use shall be referred to the planning and
zoning commission and the city council as a special use request.
C. Bulk Requirements:
1. Residential Uses: Residential uses are subject to section 11-2-4 of this chapter.
2. Front Setback: Ten feet (10').
3. Rear Area: There shall be a rear area of not less than three feet (3') in depth, any part of which
may be used for off street parking; provided, however, that construction may be permitted on the
property line if an acceptable access for maintenance agreement has been recorded with the
Clearwater County recorder. The three foot (3') dimension shall be measured from the drip line
of the structure.
4. Side Setback: There shall be a side setback on each side of the building of not less than three
feet (3') measured from the drip line of the structure.
5. Lot Area: The minimum lot size shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet. Residential uses are
subject to section 11-2-4 of this chapter.
Business activity shall be allowed on existing lots of a minimum four thousand eight hundred
(4,800) square feet providing parking requirements have been met.
6. Fence Permits Required: Residential fences are subject to section 11-2-4 of this chapter.
D. Off Street Parking Requirements: Off street parking shall be required, together with the following:
Residential uses are subject to section 11-2-4 of this chapter.
1. Taverns shall be provided with one off street parking space for each seventy five (75) square
feet of floor space, or for each five (5) seats.
2. Service stations shall be provided with a minimum of four (4) off street parking spaces, and one
additional space for each vehicular greasing facility.
3. All the business establishments shall be provided with one off street parking space for each two
hundred (200) square feet of office space. Accessory and secondary buildings may not require
additional parking requirements.
4. Adequate parking shall be provided for all other businesses and occupancies based on lot size
and occupancy rating from the international building code.
E. Home Businesses: Businesses in homes which have not been changed to commercial setbacks
and exterior frontage can convert back to a residence.
F. Restrictions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 291/315
1. Signs: No permitted sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in size. Signs in excess of
one hundred (100) square feet shall first receive approval of the city council through a special
use permit.
2. Fences: Barbed wire may be affixed to the top of a fence when required for security purposes.
All portions of such wire shall be installed at a minimum of eight feet (8') above ground level.
G. Development:
1. Equipment Location: Heating, ventilating, air conditioning units, air compressors and similar
mechanical equipment installed after the effective date hereof shall be located and directed
away from adjacent residential uses.
2. Screening: Adequate screening shall be required for new commercial use established next to
existing residential uses. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
11-2-7: CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-3):
The principal purpose of the C-3 zone is to provide a location for groups of compatible commercial
uses having the common characteristic of not involving more than incidental and minimal assembly,
fabrication or storage of commodities. The C-3 zone is the most intensive commercial zone. To
promote pedestrian use, unbroken street level, commercial frontage is encouraged in this zone.
A. Permitted Principal Uses And Structures:
Drive-up windows associated with financial institutions.
Eating and drinking establishments catering primarily to on premises consumers; entertainment,
dancing and recreation establishments, including restaurants, bars, theaters, video arcades, dance
halls and physical fitness centers.
Hotels providing one off street parking space per unit.
Lodges, private clubs, and fraternal societies.
Multi-family apartments and condominiums, providing living spaces are on the second floor or
higher. Providing one and one-half (11/2) parking spaces per unit.
Printing and publishing houses, including newspaper publishing.
Professional, financial, business and medical offices, and any enterprise rendering professional or
personal services.
Public utility installations relating directly to local distribution of services, including switching and
transmission stations, but not including warehouses and services areas.
Publicly and privately owned off street parking facilities. Any such area shall not be used as a sales
or storage area for mobile homes, or heavy equipment.
Repair shops for commodities such as household appliances, bicycles and shoes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 292/315
Retail sales enterprises, excluding firms selling bulky items such as building materials, mobile
homes, and heavy equipment.
Vocational schools, churches, synagogues, mosques, governmental offices, libraries, museums,
art galleries, police and fire stations and similar public and private institutions.
B. Special Uses:
Other uses not specifically listed in subsection A of this section shall be evaluated by the zoning
official for compatible use. If found incompatible the use shall be referred to the planning and
zoning commission and the Orofino city council.
The installation, construction and operation of all telecommunication towers and antennas,
including, but not limited to, stealth towers, guyed towers, monopole towers and lattice towers or
any other tower or structure that exceeds fifty feet (50') in height from the ground to its top which
includes any base, building or other structure the tower sits on. Any accessory devices, lighting
requirements or antennas attached to the tower shall be included in its height. Telecommunication
includes all wire and wireless communication devices including telegraph, cable, telephone, radio,
and television.
C. Limitations On Uses:
1. All products made incident to a permitted use which are manufactured, fabricated, processed or
treated on the premises shall be sold primarily on the premises.
2. Operations conducted on the premises shall not constitute a nuisance beyond the property lines
by reason of smoke, fumes, odor, steam, gases, vibration, noise, hazards, visual or other
causes.
D. Minimum Lot Requirements: None specified.
E. Minimum Area Requirements: None specified.
F. Required Open Space: None specified.
G. Maximum Height Of Structures: None specified.
H. Permitted Signs: No permitted sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in size. Signs in
excess of one hundred (100) square feet shall first receive the approval of the city council through
a special use permit.
I. Fences; Permits Required: Permits are required for all fences.
1. No fence shall exceed a height of six feet (6'), except fences located on school grounds or in
public parks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 293/315
2. Barbed wire fences are prohibited. Other fences, including electric fences constructed in a
manner that may be hazardous to persons or animals are prohibited.
J. Nonconforming Uses: Residential dwellings that are owner occupied exempt from section 11-2-11 of
this chapter. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
11-2-8: COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING DISTRICT (C-4):
The intent is designed to encourage sound industrial development in the city by providing a protective
environment primarily for such development.
A. Permitted Principal Uses And Structures:
Any manufacturing, processing, assembling, research, wholesale or storage use.
Automobile, truck and heavy equipment repair and garages, boat and RV sales.
Building materials sales yards.
Bulk plants and service stations.
Parks and recreation.
Private or public utility service buildings, structures and uses.
Public off street parking facilities, whether publicly or privately owned or operated.
Railroad yard and freight stations, trucking and motor freight stations and facilities.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures: Business offices incident to any of the permitted uses
shall be located on the same site with the principal building.
C. Conditional Uses: Dwelling for a caretaker or watchman employed on the premises.
D. Special Uses:
Chemical plants.
Concrete, asphalt, batch plants, gravel and rock stockpiles.
Junkyards, auto wrecking, salvage and scrap yards, provided all storage and salvage operations
are screened from the public view.
Meatpacking plants.
Other uses not specifically listed shall be evaluated by the zoning official for compatible use. If
found incompatible, the use shall be referred to planning and zoning commission and the city
council as a special use request.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 294/315
E. Limitations On Uses:
1. Pump islands for service stations shall not be closer than fifteen feet (15') to any street or
property line or public way, nor shall any gasoline service station signs extend over the property
boundary line, street property line or public way.
2. Off street parking shall be one space per each two hundred (200) square feet of office building
space and/or one space for each employee.
F. Minimum Lot Requirements: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
G. Minimum Setback Requirements:
1. Front setback: Ten feet (10').
2. Side setback: None specified, except ten feet (10') on the street side.
3. Rear setback: None specified.
H. Permitted Signs: Signs, advertising structures, and area illumination are permitted, subject to the
following limitations:
1. Signs and advertising structures shall not extend over any property boundary line, street
property line or public way.
2. If illuminated in any manner, signs shall not create a hazard or nuisance to passing traffic, nor
shall the glare from any illuminating device be visible from any residential zone where such sign,
advertising structure or illuminated area is within two hundred feet (200') of such a zone.
3. Where dimensional or other regulations are in conflict with any other ordinance, the more
stringent regulations apply.
4. No permitted signs shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in size. Signs in excess of one
hundred (100) square feet shall first receive the approval of the city council through a special
use permit.
I. Fences; Permits Required: Permits are required for all fences.
1. No fence shall be constructed to a height greater than eight feet (8').
2. Barbed wire may be affixed to the top of a fence when required for security purposes. All
portions of such wire shall be installed at a minimum of eight feet (8') above ground level. (Ord.
787, 3-8-2016)
11-2-9: SPECIAL PUBLIC DISTRICT (P):
The purpose of this classification is to create a district which will protect and maintain the public
environment and provide for the location and grouping of compatible uses. Property owned by a public
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 295/315
agency which sells, trades or transfers property to private ownership that property shall automatically
be rezoned to the most compatible adjacent zone.
A. Permitted Uses:
Airports.
Cemeteries.
Hospitals.
Schools.
Other public facilities.
Other uses not specifically listed shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission and
the city council through a special use application.
B. Bulk Requirements:
1. Minimum lot area: None specified.
2. Minimum lot width: None specified.
3. Building height: None specified.
4. Minimum setback requirements: None specified except rear yards where abutting a residential
(R) district shall be twenty feet (20') in depth, measured from rear property line to the rear of the
structure. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
11-2-10: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. Accessory Buildings: No accessory building may be located within five feet (5') of an interior lot line,
nor within five feet (5') of the rear lot line.
B. Attached Accessory Buildings: Where an accessory building is structurally attached to a main
building it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations applicable to such main building.
C. Semidetached Buildings: For purposes of front, side and rear yard regulations, a semidetached
two-family dwelling or bungalow court shall be considered as one building occupying a lot.
D. Yard Requirements On Corner Lots: On corner lots the front yard requirement for streets upon
which the front of the building faces shall apply. The side yard shall equal to the front yard
requirements on lots fronting upon the side streets. No accessory building on the lot regardless of
the way it faces, shall project beyond the front yard line of either street. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
11-2-11: NONCONFORMING USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 296/315
A. The lawful use of land or buildings existing at the time of the passage of this chapter, although such
does not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued but if such nonconforming use is
discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months, any further use of the premises shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any such building or structure may be repaired whenever such repairs shall be necessary or
convenient to the use of such buildings, and in the event any such building is destroyed or
damaged to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its fair market value, such
nonconforming use shall thereafter be discontinued.
C. No nonconforming building shall be enlarged or structurally altered except to make it a conforming
building. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
11-2-12: BUILDING PERMITS; CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE:
A. Building Permits: No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered until a
building permit shall be issued by the building inspector stating that the building or structure, and
use of land, comply with the provisions of this chapter. All applications for building permits shall be
made as provided in the building code.
B. Certificates Of Compliance:
1. No building or structure hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be occupied and used until
a certificate of compliance has been issued by the building inspector. The certificate of
compliance shall be issued only after the building inspector makes a finding that the building or
structure has been erected or structurally altered in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter and the building code, and in accordance with the building permit.
2. Certificates of compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building
permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or alteration of such buildings
shall have been satisfactorily completed. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
11-2-13: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
A. Public Hearing: Upon the application for a special use permit and prior to the council granting a
special use permit, the commission shall hold at least one public hearing in which interested
persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the commission
hearing thereon, notice of the time and place, and a summary of the proposal shall be published in
the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the city and the impact area. Notice
may also be made available to other newspapers, radio and television stations serving the city and
impact area for use as a public service announcement. Notice shall also be provided to property
owners and residents within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being
considered, and within any additional area that may be substantially impacted by the proposed
special use as determined by the commission. When notice is required to two hundred (200) or
more property owners or residents, alternate forms of procedures which would provide adequate
notice may be provided by local ordinance in lieu of mailed notice.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 297/315
B. Conditions: Prior to granting of a special use permit, the commission may recommend to the
council and the council may attach conditions to a special use permit including, but not limited to:
1. Minimizing adverse impact on other development.
2. Controlling the sequence and timing of development.
3. Controlling the duration of development.
4. Designing the exact location and nature of development.
5. Assuring that development is maintained properly.
6. Requiring provisions for on site and off site public facilities or services.
7. Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required in an ordinance.
8. Increasing the required lot size or yard size.
9. Limiting the length, width and height.
10. Increasing the number of off street parking and loading spaces.
11. Regulating or limiting the number of curb cuts.
12. Limiting the number, size and location of signs.
13. Requiring diking, fencing, screening or landscaping to protect nearby property or to enhance
the beauty of the city.
C. Further Studies; Other Conditions: Prior to granting a special use permit, council may require the
commission to perform studies of the social, economic, fiscal and environmental effects of the
proposed special use. A special use permit shall not be considered as establishing a binding
precedent to grant other special permits. A special use permit is not transferable from one parcel of
land to another. In the case of a use existing prior to the effective date of this chapter which is
classified in this chapter as a special or conditional use, any change in use or in lot area or any
alteration of the structure shall conform with the requirements dealing with special or conditional
uses herein. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
11-2-14: AMENDMENT OR REPEAL OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
A. Public Hearing: The commission, prior to recommending an amendment or the repeal of the
comprehensive plan to the council, shall conduct at least one public hearing in which interested
persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice
of the time and place and a summary of the amendments or repeal to be discussed shall be
published in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the city and the impact
area. The commission shall also make available a notice to other papers, radio and television
stations serving the City and impact area for use as a public service announcement. Following the
commission hearing, if the commission makes a material change in the Comprehensive Plan,
further notice and hearings shall be provided before the commission forwards the plan,
amendment, or repeal with its recommendation to the Council. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 298/315
B. Recommendations From Commission: The Council, prior to amendment or repeal of the
Comprehensive Plan, may conduct at least one public hearing using the same notice and hearing
procedures as the commission. The Council shall not hold a public hearing, give notice of a
proposed hearing, nor take action upon the plan, amendments, or repeal until the
recommendations have been received from the commission. (Ord. 797, 2-13-2018)
C. Further Notice And Hearing: Following the hearing by the Council, if the Council makes a material
change in the Comprehensive Plan, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the Council
adopts the change. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
D. Adoption By Resolution: No plan, amendment, or repeal shall be effective unless adopted by
resolution by the Council. (Ord. 797, 2-13-2018)
E. Petition For Amendment: Any person may petition the commission for an amendment to the
Comprehensive Plan at any time. The commission may recommend amendments to the
Comprehensive Plan to the Council to correct errors in the original Comprehensive Plan or to
recognize substantial changes in the actual conditions in the area. The commission may
recommend to Council at any time amendments to other ordinances authorized by this chapter and
by section 67-6509, Idaho Code. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
11-2-15: AMENDMENTS TO ZONING ORDINANCE:
The zoning districts provided for in this chapter may be amended as follows:
A. Submission To Commission: Requests for an amendment to this chapter shall be submitted to the
commission which shall evaluate the request to determine the extent and nature of the amendment
requested.
B. Council Adopt Or Reject: If the request is in accordance with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, the
commission may recommend and Council may adopt or reject the ordinance amendment under
the notice and hearing procedures provided in section 11-2-14 of this chapter; provided, that in the
case of zoning district boundary changes, additional notices shall be provided by mail to property
owners and residents within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being
considered, and within any additional area that may be impacted by the proposed change as
determined by the commission. When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property
owners or residents, alternate forms or procedures which would provide adequate notice may be
provided by local ordinance in lieu of mailed notice.
C. Request Not In Accordance With Adopted Comprehensive Plan: If the request is not in accordance
with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, the commission shall consider the same as an amendment
to the Comprehensive Plan pursuant to the requirements of section 11-2-14 of this chapter, and
submit its recommendation to Council. The Council may adopt or reject an amendment to the
Comprehensive Plan under the notice and hearing requirements provided in section 11-2-14 of this
chapter. After the plan has been amended, the zoning ordinance may then be amended as
provided for under subsection B of this section. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 299/315
11-2-16: VARIANCES:
Where there are unnecessary hardships because of the characteristics of the site, Council may grant
a variance modifying the requirements of this chapter as to lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, front
yard, side yard, rear yard, setbacks, parking space, height of buildings, and other ordinance provisions
affecting the size or shape of a structure or the placement of a structure upon lots, or the size of lots.
The Council shall seek the advice and recommendations of the commission prior to granting or
denying a variance. Prior to making its recommendations to Council, the commission shall hold at
least one public hearing in which all interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. Prior to
granting a variance, Council may hold at least one public hearing in which all interested persons shall
have an opportunity to be heard at least fifteen (15) days prior to all public hearings, notice of the time
and place, and a detailed description of the variance, shall be published in the official newspaper of
general circulation within the City and the impact area. Written notice shall also be provided to
property owners and residents within the land being considered, within three hundred feet (300') of the
external boundaries of the land being considered, and within any additional area that may be
substantially impacted by the proposed variance. A variance shall not be considered a right or special
privilege and may be granted only upon a showing of undue hardship because of the characteristics of
the site and upon a showing that the variance is not in conflict with the public interest. (Ord. 797, 2-13-
2018)
11-2-17: NOTIFICATION OF ACTION:
Within five (5) days after a decision has been rendered by the commission, the Chairman thereof shall
provide the applicant for the permit, special use, zoning change, or variance with notice of the action
taken on his request and the reasons therefor; also the City Clerk shall notify the applicant within five
(5) days of the action taken by the Council. (Ord. 787, 3-8-2016)
Chapter 3
AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS
11-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as OROFINO CITY AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 475, 1974)
11-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
AIRPORT: Orofino City Airport.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area.
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure, tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for, or is
otherwise hazardous to, the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 300/315
AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT: The point established as the approximate geographic center of the
airport landing area and so designated.
HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this Chapter and
shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
LANDING AREA: The area of the airport used for the landing, taking off or taxiing of aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any preexisting structure, tree, natural growth or use of land which is
inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter or an amendment thereto.
NONINSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway other than an instrument runway.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association,
or body politic, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian, or other
representative.
RUNWAY: The paved surface of an airport landing strip.
STRUCTURE: An object constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings,
towers, smokestacks and overhead transmission lines.
TREE: Any object of natural growth. (Ord. 475, 1974; amd. Ord. 589, 10-23-1984)
11-3-3: ZONES:
In order to carry out the provisions of this Chapter, there are hereby created and established certain
zones which include all of the land lying within the instrument approach zones, noninstrument
approach zones, transition zones, horizontal zones and conical zones.
Such areas and zones are shown on Airspace Zoning Map consisting of one sheet, prepared by
Hamilton and Voeller, Consulting Engineers and dated August, 1974, which is attached to Ordinance
475, on file in the office of the City Clerk, and made a part hereof. The various zones are hereby
established and defined as follows:
A. Noninstrument Approach Zone: A noninstrument approach zone is established at each end of all
noninstrument runways for noninstrument landings and take offs. The noninstrument approach
zones shall have a width of two hundred fifty feet (250') at a distance of two hundred feet (200')
beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of one thousand two
hundred fifty feet (1,250') at a distance of five thousand two hundred feet (5,200') beyond each end
of the runway, its center line being the continuation of the center line of the runway.
B. Transition Zones: Transition zones are hereby established adjacent to each noninstrument runway
and approach zone as indicated on the Zoning Map. Transition zones symmetrically located on
either side of runways have widths as shown on the Zoning Map. Transition zones extend outward
from a line one hundred twenty five feet (125') on either side of the center line of the noninstrument
runway, for the length of such runway plus two hundred feet (200') on each side; and are parallel
and level with such runway center line. The transition zones along such runway slope upward and
outward one foot (1') vertically for each seven feet (7') horizontally to the point where they intersect
the surface of the horizontal zone. Further, transition zones are established adjacent to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 301/315
noninstrument approach zones for the entire length of the approach zones. These transition zones
have variable widths, as shown on the Zoning Map. Such transition zones flare symmetrically with
either side of the approach zones from the base of such zones and slope upward and outward at
the rate of one foot (1') vertically for each seven feet (7') horizontal and conical zones.
C. Horizontal Zone: A horizontal zone is hereby established as the area inscribed by a radius of five
thousand feet (5,000') both sides of and parallel to the center line of said runway. The horizontal
zone does not include the noninstrument approach zones and the transition zones.
D. Conical Zone: A conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of
the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a distance of four thousand feet (4,000'). The
conical zone does not include the noninstrument approach zones and transition zones. (Ord. 475,
1974)
11-3-4: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to
grow, or maintained in any zone created by this Chapter to a height in excess of the height limit herein
established for such zones.
Such height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:
A. Noninstrument Approach Zones: One foot (1') in height for each twenty feet (20') in horizontal
distance beginning at a point two hundred feet (200') from and at the center line elevation of the
end of the noninstrument runway and extending to a point of five thousand feet (5,000') from the
end of the runway.
B. Transition Zones: One foot (1') in height for each seven feet (7') in horizontal distance beginning at
any point one hundred twenty five feet (125') normal to and at the elevation of the center line of
noninstrument runways, extending two hundred feet (200') beyond each end thereof, extending to
a height of one hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation which is one thousand feet
(1,000') above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits of
one foot (1') vertical height for each seven feet (7') horizontal distance measured from the edges of
all approach zones for the entire length of the approach zones and extending upward and outward
to the points where they intersect the horizontal or conical surface.
C. Horizontal Zone: One hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation or a height of one
thousand one hundred fifty feet (1,150') above mean sea level.
D. Conical Zone: One foot (1') in height for each twenty feet (20') of horizontal distance beginning at
the periphery of the horizontal zone, extending to a height of three hundred fifty feet (350') above
the airport elevation and two hundred feet (200') above the horizontal surface.
Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitations shall
prevail. (Ord. 475, 1974)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 302/315
11-3-5: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, no use may be made of land within any zone
established by this Chapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio
communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between
airport lights and other, result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport, impair visibility in the
vicinity of the airport or otherwise endanger the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft. (Ord.
475, 1974)
11-3-6: NONCONFORMING USES:
A. Regulations Not Retroactive: The regulations prescribed by this Chapter shall not be construed to
require the removal, lowering or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming
to the regulations as of the effective date hereof or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any
nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require change in the construction, alteration or
intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the
effective date hereof, and is diligently prosecuted.
B. Marking And Lighting: Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this Section, the owner of any
nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and
maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the City to
indicate to the airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained
at the expense of the City. (Ord. 475, 1974)
11-3-7: PERMITS:
A. Future Uses: Except as specifically provided in subsection A1, A2 and A3 hereunder, no material
change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted
or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been
applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the
permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use,
structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the
affirmative, the permit shall be granted.
1. In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and the conical zone, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure less than seventy five feet (75') of vertical height above the
ground, except when because of terrain, land contour or topographic features such tree or
structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zone.
2. In the area lying within the limits of the approach zones but at a horizontal distance of not less
than four thousand two hundred feet (4,200') from each end of the runways, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure less than seventy five feet (75') of vertical height above the
ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for
noninstrument approach zone.
3. In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal
zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy five feet (75') of
vertical height above the ground except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land
contour or topographic features would extend above the height limit prescribed for such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 303/315
transition zones.
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or
intending to permit any construction, alteration or growth of any structures or trees in excess of
any of the height limits established by this Chapter except as set forth in Section 11-3-4 of this
Chapter.
B. Existing Uses: No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an
airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree to be made or become higher or
become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date hereof or any
amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made.
Except as indicated, all applications for such permit shall be granted.
C. Nonconforming Uses Abandoned Or Destroyed: Whenever the City determines that a
nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than eighty percent (80%) torn
down, physically destroyed or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure
or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
D. Variances: Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth
of any tree, or use his property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this Chapter,
may apply to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a variance from such regulations. Such
variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the
regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would
not be contrary to the public interest but will do substantial justice and be in accordance with the
spirit of this Chapter.
E. Hazard Marking And Lighting: Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed
advisable to effectuate the purpose of this Chapter and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so
conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the City at its own
expense, to install, operate and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to
indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard. (Ord. 475, 1974)
11-3-8: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein.
Application for permits and variances shall be made to the City Attorney upon a form furnished by him.
Applications required by this Chapter to be submitted to the City Attorney shall be promptly considered
and granted or denied by him. Applications for action by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
be forthwith transmitted by the City Attorney. (Ord. 475, 1974)
11-3-9: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
When there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this Chapter
and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the
height of structures or trees, the use of the land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or
requirement shall govern and prevail. (Ord. 475, 1974)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 304/315
11-3-10: PENALTY:
Each violation of this Chapter or of any regulation, order or ruling promulgated hereunder shall
constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days or both such fine and imprisonment, and each day a
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 475, 1974)
Chapter 4
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
11-4-1: PURPOSE:
Idaho Code section 67-6526 requires that the governing board of the city adopt by ordinance a map
identifying an area of city impact within the unincorporated area of the county surrounding said city.
(Ord. 714, 12-23-2002)
11-4-2: CONSIDERATION:
The following factors were considered by the planning and zoning commission and the city council in
identifying the area of city impact for Orofino, Clearwater County, Idaho:
A. Trade area;
B. Geographical factors;
C. Areas that can be reasonably expected to be annexed to the city in the future;
D. Areas where extension of city services are possible and reasonable;
E. Areas where growth is occurring or growth is anticipated to occur;
F. Areas in which to encourage or discourage particular types of growth and development; and in
which the city may want to review future zoning. (Ord. 714, 12-23-2002)
11-4-3: GEOGRAPHIC AREA:
The official adopted geographic area of city impact is as follows:
Starting at the SE corner of the NE1/4 NE1/4 Section 12 T36N, R1E B.M.; thence South to the
common corner of Section 12 T36N, R1E B.M., Section 13 T36N, R1E B.M., Section 7 T36N, R2E
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 305/315
B.M., Section 18 T36N, R2E B.M.; thence East to the SE corner of SW1/4 Section 10 T36N, R2E
B.M.; thence North to the NE corner of NW1/4 of Section 34 T37N, R2E B.M.; thence West to the
common corner of Section 31 T37N, R2E B.M., Section 30 T37N, R2E B.M., Section 36 T37N, R1E
B.M., Section 25 T37N, R1E B.M.; thence South to the NE corner of the SE1/4 SE1/4 Section 36
T37N, R1E B.M.; thence West to the NW corner of the SW1/4 SW1/4 of Section 36 T37N, R1E B.M.;
thence South to the high water line of the Southern side of the Clearwater River; thence traveling in a
generally West by Northwesterly direction along the high water line of the Southern side of the
Clearwater River to a point at which said high water line intersects with the section line separation
Section 32 and Section 33 T37N, R1E B.M.; thence South to the SW corner of the NW1/4 NW1/4
Section 4 T36N, R1E B.M.; thence East to the SE corner of NE1/4 NE1/4 Section 4 T36N, R1E B.M.;
thence South to the common corner of Section 3,4,9, and 10, T36N, R1E B.M.; thence East to NW
corner of NE1/4 NE1/4 Section 12 T36N, R1E B.M.; thence South to the SW corner NE1/4 NE1/4
Section 12 T36N, R1E B.M.; thence to the point of beginning.
INCLUDING: all real property lying outside of the municipal boundaries of the city of Orofino, Idaho
within the unincorporated area of Clearwater County, Idaho and lying within the following sections:
Section 12, T36N, R1E B.M. NENE
Section 01, T36N, R1E B.M. entire section
Section 02, T36N, R1E B.M. south of the Clearwater River
Section 03, T36N, R1 B.M. south to the Clearwater River
Section 04, T36N, R1E B.M. North 1/2 of the North 1/2
Section 33, T37N, R1E B.M. south of the Clearwater River
Section 36, T37N, R1E B.M. South 1/2 of the South 1/2
Section 31, T37N, R2E B.M. entire section
Section 32, T37N, R2E B.M. entire section
Section 33, T37N, R2E B.M. entire section
Section 34, T37N, R2E B.M. W1/2
Section 03, T36N, R2E B.M. W1/2
Section 10, T36N, R2E B.M. W1/2
Section 09, T36N, R2E B.M. entire section
Section 08, T36N, R2E B.M. entire section
Section 07, T36N, R2E B.M. entire section
Including:
Section 04, T36N, R2E B.M. entire section
Section 05, T36N, R2E B.M. entire section
Section 06, T36N, R2E B.M. entire section
(Ord. 714, 12-23-2002)
11-4-4: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
The comprehensive plan and subsequent amendments thereof as officially adopted by Clearwater
County apply to the unincorporated portion of Clearwater County, lying within the area of city impact.
(Ord. 714, 12-23-2002)
11-4-5: ZONING AND SUBDIVISION ORDINANCES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 306/315
The zoning and subdivision ordinances and subsequent amendments thereto as officially adopted by
Clearwater County, shall apply to the unincorporated portion of Clearwater County, lying within the
area of city impact. (Ord. 714, 12-23-2002)
11-4-6: BUILDING CODE:
The building code 1997 UBC edition and subsequent amendments thereto as officially adopted by
Clearwater County, Idaho shall apply to the unincorporated portion of Clearwater County lying within
the area of city impact. (Ord. 714, 12-23-2002)
11-4-7: REVIEW AND COMMENT PROCEDURE:
Any request for development, zone change, conditional use permit, variance or subdivision in the
unincorporated portion of Clearwater County lying within the area of city impact shall be referred to the
city planning and zoning commission for review and comment. The city shall have a forty (40) day
period within which to respond to any request set forth above. If the city does not respond within forty
(40) days, the city forfeits its right to comment on the request and processing shall continue under the
county's administration. (Ord. 714, 12-23-2002)
11-4-8: ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION:
The administrative jurisdiction and plans and ordinances which apply to the area of city impact
delineated by the map incorporated herein shall be the duty of Clearwater County, which shall apply
the same plans and ordinances for the unincorporated areas of the county lying within the area of city
impact as those areas lying outside the area of city impact. (Ord. 714, 12-23-2002)
Chapter 5
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
11-5-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; FINDINGS; PURPOSE:
A. Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the State has, in the Idaho Code, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the City do
ordain as follows:
B. Findings Of Fact: The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation which results
in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 307/315
C. Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish its purposes, this Chapter includes
methods and provisions for:
1. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water
or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or
velocities;
2. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
3. Controlling the alterations of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective
barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
4. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damages;
5. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood
waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 612, 5-12-1987)
11-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable
application.
APPEAL: A request for a review of the Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this Chapter,
or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM). The base flood depths range from one foot (1') to three feet (3'); a clearly defined channel
does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be
evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one
percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equalled or exceeded in any
given year.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not
limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations located within the area of special flood hazard.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM): The official map on which the Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration
that includes flood profiles, the Flood Boundary - Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation, of
the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 308/315
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff surface waters from any source.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourses and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot (1').
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an
area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonresidential design
requirements of this Chapter found at subsection 11-5-5H of this Chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
the required utilities. For flood plain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one
hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does
not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date hereof.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and shall mean the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other
improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start shall mean
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundation
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: A. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either:
1. Before the improvement or repair is started; or
2. If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For
the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 309/315
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
B. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or
2. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historical Places or a State
Inventory of Historic Places.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this Chapter which permits construction in a
manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this Chapter. (Ord. 612, 5-12-1987)
11-5-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Lands To Which Chapter Applies: This Chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard
within the jurisdiction of the City.
B. Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of special flood hazard identified
by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific way and engineering report entitled The
Flood Insurance Study for the City of Orofino dated November, 1979, with accompanying Flood
Insurance Maps is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. The
Flood Insurance Study is on file at the office of the City Clerk.
C. Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or
altered without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations.
D. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter and another
ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflicts or overlaps, whichever imposes the
more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
E. Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the City Council; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
F. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability:
1. The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 310/315
occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This
Chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
2. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City, any officer or employee thereof, or
the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 612, 5-12-1987)
11-5-4: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Establishment Of Development Permit: A development permit shall be obtained before construction
or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection 11-5-3A of
this Chapter. The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes, as set forth in
Section 11-5-2, "Definitions" of this Chapter. Application for a permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Administrator, and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to
scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures.
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed.
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for
any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in subsection 11-5-5H of this Chapter.
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development.
B. Designation Of Administrator: The Building Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this Chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with
its provisions.
C. Duties And Responsibilities Of Administrator: The duties of the Administrator shall include, but not
be limited to:
1. Review of all permits to determine that the permit requirements of this Chapter have been
satisfied; and
2. Review of all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained
from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
D. Use Of Other Base Flood Data: When base flood elevation data have not been provided in
accordance with subsection 11-5-3B, "Basis for Establishing Areas of Special Flood Hazard", the
Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway
data available from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer subsections 11-5-5F,
"Specific Standards"; and 11-5-5J, "Floodways".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 311/315
E. Information To Be Obtained And Maintained: The following information shall be obtained and
maintained on file at the office of the City Clerk:
1. The actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved structures:
a. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level);
b. Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection A3 of this Section.
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Chapter.
F. Alteration Of Watercourses: The Administrator of this Chapter shall:
1. Notify adjacent communities and the Idaho Department of Water Resources prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Insurance Administration; and
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse
so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
G. Interpretation Of FIRM Boundaries: The Administrator shall make interpretation, where needed, as
to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears
to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in subsection H below.
H. Variance Procedure:
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be
erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided items in subsections I1
through I2 of this Section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half
(1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variances increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed
on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without
regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this Section.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result. Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant;
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense; create nuisances, cause fraud
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 312/315
on, or victimization of the public as identified in subsection I of this Section, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
4. Variances, as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program, are based upon the general
zoning law principal that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in
nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances.
They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such,
variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.
5. Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a
lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry floodproofing, where it can be determined
that such action will have low damage potential, comply with all other variance criteria except
subsection 11-5-5H of this Chapter and otherwise comply with subsection 11-5-5A of the
"General Standards".
6. Variances may be the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
7. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will
be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the
cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
I. Appeal Board: The Appeal Board, as established by the Mayor and Council of the City, shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this Chapter. The Appeal
Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement,
decision or determination made by the Administrator in enforcement or administration of this
Chapter.
Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision
to the Second Judicial District Court of Clearwater County, as provided in the Idaho Code. In
passing upon such applications, the Appeal Board shall consider all technical evaluation, all
relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this Chapter, and:
1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner;
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location where applicable;
6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or
erosion damage;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and flood plain management
program for that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 313/315
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transportation of the flood
waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, at the site;
11. The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, streets and bridges. (Ord. 612, 5-12-1987)
11-5-5: FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION, GENERAL STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring: All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. All manufactured homes must likewise be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods
and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to,
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA's "Manufactured Home Installation
in Flood Hazard Areas" guide book for additional techniques).
B. Construction Materials And Methods: All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. All new construction
and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize
flood damage. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment, and other
service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
C. Utilities: All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the system. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems, and discharge from
the systems into flood waters. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them, or contamination from them, during flooding.
D. Subdivision Proposals: All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. All subdivision
proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Where
base flood elevation has not be provided, or is not available from another authoritative source, it
shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at
least fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less).
E. Review Of Building Permits: Where elevation data are not available, applications for building
permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from
flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high
water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two
feet (2') above the grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.
F. Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards, base flood elevation data have been
provided as set forth in subsection 11-5-3B, "Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 314/315
Hazard", or subsection 11-5-4D, "Use of Other Base Flood Data".
G. Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood
elevation. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or
shall be designated to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect, or must meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
1. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;
2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade;
3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or devices; provided, that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
H. Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:
1. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
2. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy;
3. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this
subsection based upon their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications
and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the Administrator as set forth in subsection
11-5-4A3 of this Chapter.
4. Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for
space below the lowest floor as described in subsection G1 through G3 above.
5. Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums
will be based on rates that are one foot (1') below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building
constructed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below that level).
I. Manufactured Homes: All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within Zones
Al - A30, AH, and AE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of subsection A of this
Section.
J. Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 11-5-3B of this
Chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=1077 315/315
due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and have erosion
potential, the following provisions apply: (Ord. 612, 5-12-1987)
1. Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and
other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is
provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge; and (Ord. 613, 6-9-1987)
2. If subsection J1 above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this Section. (Ord. 612, 5-12-
1987)
11-5-6: AMENDMENTS:
The Council may from time to time amend, supplement or repeal the regulations of this Chapter in the
following manner: the Council, prior to adopting an amendment, supplement or repeal of this Chapter,
shall conduct at least one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be
heard. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time, place, and summary of the plan
to be considered shall be published in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the
jurisdiction. Following the Council meeting, if the Council makes a material change in this Chapter,
other than that published for the present hearing, further hearings shall be provided before the Council
adopts the amendment, supplement or repeal. (Ord. 612, 5-12-1987)
11-5-7: FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMITS:
Failure to obtain the necessary permits shall be a violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 612, 5-12-1987)
11-5-8: PENALTY:
The maximum penalty for the conviction of any violation of this Chapter shall be the same as the
maximum penalty set by the Idaho Code for misdemeanors. (Ord. 612, 5-12-1987)