6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 1/201
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Rigby, as supplemented, contains ordinances and resolutions up to and including ordinance 2018-593, passed February 15,
2018, and resolution 116-A, passed September 21, 2004. Ordinances and resolutions of the City adopted after said ordinance and resolution supersede
the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any
particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
CITY ORDINANCE NO. 480
OF THE CITY OF RIGBY, JEFFERSON COUNTY, IDAHO
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
THE CITY OF RIGBY, IDAHO MUNICIPAL CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Rigby, Idaho, as follows:
SECTION 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the City Code of the City of Rigby, Idaho prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc. containing
the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the
City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
SECTION 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement
service, provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or
deleting provisions of the official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of
which shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office is
regularly open.
SECTION 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official City Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official City Code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official City Code.
SECTION 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
SECTION 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
SECTION 6: This ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be recorded and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval
and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
Passed by the City Council of the City of Rigby on the 18th day of January, 2000.
CITY OF RIGBY
Attest:
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of Rigby. This City Code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the RIGBY CITY CODE and is hereby published by authority of the City Council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the City as provided in Section 1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating
thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this City Code by title in any legal documents. (1999 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 2/201
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section 1-2-1 of this Title. (1999
Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its
proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the
City Code. (1999 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so
authorized by the City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of
the Clerk. Any person having custody of a copy of the City Code shall make every effort to maintain said Code current as to the most recent ordinances
passed. Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered or made available to such person through
the office of the City Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the
City and shall be returned to the office of the City Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council. (1999 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement
ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the City; all
special ordinances; and zoning ordinances as amended, excepting as this Code may contain conflicting provisions, in which case this Code shall be
considered as amending such ordinance in respect to such conflicting provision only. (1980 Code § 1.2.1; amd. 1999 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this City Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1999 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall
conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance
takes effect.
B. Extend To All Repeals: This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Currently Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the City herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued
or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this City Code. (1999 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this City Code or any part thereof or any portion adopted by reference
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 3/201
therein is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity
or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof or any portion adopted by reference therein. The City Council hereby declares
that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1999 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
A. Whenever any word in any section of this Code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any
single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this Code by words importing the singular number only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the
opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of
this Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
B. The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been changed in the content of this Code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1999 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by implication.
CITY: The City of Rigby, County of Jefferson, State of Idaho.
CODE: The City Code of the City of Rigby.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the Council of the City of Rigby.
COUNTY: The County of Jefferson, State of Idaho.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
City of Rigby".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the City shall commence on October 1 of each year.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
INFRACTION: A civil public offense, not constituting a crime, punishable by a penalty and for which no incarceration may be imposed1.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense not defined as a felony or infraction under State law2.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the City, or any activity which by its perpetuation can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or persons
within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Rigby".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every
right or interest therein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 4/201
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
STATE: The State of Idaho.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by
such person's proper mark. (1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(1999 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
A. Misdemeanor: Unless specifically provided elsewhere, any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this Code deemed a
misdemeanor may be fined in a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any offense and may be confined in the County Jail for a
period of not more than six (6) months. Either or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed; and in addition thereto, any person so convicted
shall pay such costs as the court may assess.
B. Infraction: When the offense is designated as an infraction by any section or provision of this Code or by State law, it is punishable only by a penalty not
exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) and no incarceration may be imposed.
C. Federally Mandated Programs: Any city which is participating in a Federally mandated program, wherein penalties or enforcement remedies are
required by the terms of participation in the program, may enforce such requirements by ordinance, to include a criminal or civil monetary penalty not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for criminal offenses not to exceed six (6) months or to include both a fine and imprisonment
for criminal offenses. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Application Of Penalty Provisions:
1. The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate
section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed or where any action which
is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor unless otherwise provided. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues unless otherwise specifically
provided in this Code.
2. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code, and there shall be no fine
or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
B. One Recovery For Same Offense: In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code,
the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense;
provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. (1999
Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or
penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty unless the intention of the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1999 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 5/201
Chapter 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
1-5-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
A. Design: The Corporate Seal of the City shall be circular in form. It shall bear upon the space within the seal the words "City of Rigby, Idaho", and also
the words "Corporate Seal". (1980 Code § 1.4.1)
B. Adoption Of Seal: The seal hereinabove described is hereby adopted as the Corporate Seal of the City. (1980 Code § 1.4.2)
C. Custodian1: The City Clerk shall be custodian of the Corporate Seal of the City. (1980 Code § 1.4.3)
1-5-2: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The "Jefferson Star", a newspaper printed and published in the City weekly is hereby designated and constituted the official newspaper of the City. Such
writings as are required to be published under and by virtue of any law of the State, or any provision of this Code, shall be given publication in said official
newspaper. The City may also provide for additional publication in newspapers other than the official newspaper. The decision to provide additional
publications shall be in the Mayor's discretion or upon motion and approval of a majority of the City Council. (Ord. 500, 9-3-2002)
1-5-3: OFFICIAL DEPOSITORIES:
A. Designation Of Depositories; Duties Of Treasurer2: Zions Bank is hereby designated as the official depository of the City for the general operating
accounts of the City and is hereby ordered and required and directed to keep the monies belonging to, or in the care of, the City in the depository
herein named. It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to invest idle moneys in the City Treasury in any of the investments accounts allowed under Idaho
Code 50-1013. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
B. Surplus Or Idle Funds: Upon approval of the Mayor and Council, the Treasurer may be authorized to invest surplus or idle funds of the City as may be
authorized under the public depository law, Idaho Code title 57. (1980 Code § 1.6.2)
1-5-4: CITY LIMITS; MAP ON FILE:
A map of the City, kept current by the City Clerk at all times, drawn to a scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') shall, at all times, be kept on
file in the Office of the City Clerk, which map shall be designated as the official map of the City. The boundaries of the City, as shown on said map, shall
constitute the official City limits. Such map shall be deemed to be a part of this Code, as fully as if set forth herein, and shall be revised from time to time
when additions are brought into the City or other modifications are required. (1980 Code § 1.7; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1-6-1: ELECTION; QUALIFICATIONS:
A. Election: The city council and mayor shall be elected by the qualified electors of the city, said election of council members and mayor to be according to
the laws of the state, and for the period and in the manner provided by law. (1980 Code § 2.4.2; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Qualifications; Residency: All elective officers of the city shall be qualified electors and shall be residents of the city. (1980 Code § 2.2; amd. 1999
Code)
1-6-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The six (6) council members of the city and the mayor shall be elected at large and shall serve for four (4) years; one-half (1/2) of the council shall be
elected at each general election. (1980 Code § 2.4.3; amd. 1999 Code)
1-6-3: GENERAL DUTIES OF COUNCIL:
The duties, powers, and rights of council members are those prescribed by Idaho Code title 50, chapter 7 and ordinances of the city. (1980 Code § 2.4.1;
amd. 1999 Code)
1-6-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF MAYOR:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 6/201
A. Powers And Duties, Generally: The mayor shall:
1. Preside at all meetings of the council and shall have a vote on any issue when the council is equally divided, and not otherwise.
2. Have power to issue proclamations whenever he may deem it necessary to safeguard the public welfare.
3. Superintend and control all the officers and affairs of the city and shall execute the laws and regulations as they pertain to cities.
4. Have such appointive power as is vested in him by law.
5. Be an ex officio member of all committees. (1980 Code § 2.3.1)
6. Exercise all powers and fulfill all duties granted to him by the Idaho Code title 50, chapter 6. (1980 Code § 2.3.4; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Sign Contracts: The mayor is authorized and empowered to sign his name officially for and in behalf of the city on all contracts with the expressed
authorization of the council, including deeds, bonds, bills, notes, obligations and other agreements or documents to which the city is a party. (1980
Code § 2.3.2)
1-6-5: COMPENSATION:
The set compensation for the mayor shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month and for each council member three hundred dollars ($300.00)
per month. (Ord. 2011-551(a), 8-16-2011, eff. 1-1-2012)
1-6-6: COUNCIL PRESIDENT:
The city council shall, at its first meeting after election, proceed to organize by electing one of its number president of the council, who shall preside in the
absence of the mayor. The president shall be empowered with all the rights, powers and duties that the mayor has when present in his own person. (1980
Code § 2.4.4)
1-6-7: COMMITTEES:
A. Appointment By Mayor: The mayor shall, as soon as the council is organized, appoint from the members of the council such committees as are
necessary. Said committees shall consist of a chairman and at least one other member. These committees shall be as follows:
Finance
Parks
Public health and sanitation
Streets, alleys and ditches
Water and light
B. Necessity For Enlargement; Other Committees: Committees may be enlarged or other committees appointed as may be necessary from time to time.
(1980 Code § 2.4.5; amd. 1999 Code)
1-6-8: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: The official city of Rigby council meetings shall take place on the first and third Thursday of each month beginning at seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M. (MST) at Rigby City Hall. (Ord. 2014-568, 3-18-2014)
B. Special Meetings; Notice: Special meetings may be called at any time that is necessary by order of the mayor, or in his absence by the president of the
council when any emergency is imminent that will not allow delay. Special meetings may also be called by one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the
council. The notice of such special meeting shall be given to the council members by the chief of police setting forth its object of the call, and the city
clerk shall at such meeting make a minute of such call and the business transacted. (1980 Code § 2.5.2; amd. 1999 Code)
C. Open Meetings: All meetings of the council shall be open to the public; except, that executive sessions may be closed upon a vote of one-half (1/2) plus
one of the council members recorded in the minutes of the meeting by individual vote, pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-2345. (1999 Code)
D. Quorum: Meetings of the city council shall require a majority of said members to be present to do business. In case that a majority of said council fails
to attend the council meetings, methods to enforce their attendance may be applied as prescribed by law. (1980 Code § 2.5.3)
E. Agenda Of Meeting; Procedure: The mayor, or in his absence the president of the city council, shall call the meeting to order, have the calling of the roll
by the clerk, and the presiding officer shall announce whether or not a quorum is present. When a quorum is present, the following procedure shall take
place: (1980 Code § 2.5.4)
1st - Reading of minutes.
2nd - Reading petitions or other communications that may be before the meeting for consideration.
3rd - Reports of officers, standing committees or of special committees. Any business whether unfinished or otherwise, and allowance of bills.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 7/201
4th - Introducing of ordinances, resolutions, orders or other matters that require disposition.
5th - The mayor or other presiding authority shall have the right to set forth the order of business without debate.
6th - The mayor shall have the appointing power of all committees, corrections to any matter requiring attention and final adjournment. (1980 Code
§ 2.5.4; amd. 1999 Code)
F. Clerk Pro Tempore: In the absence of the city clerk, the presiding officer may appoint a clerk pro tempore, who for the time shall have all of the rights,
powers, privileges and duties that the clerk would have if present. (1980 Code § 2.5.5)
1-6-9: ORDINANCES:
A. Presentation In Writing: All ordinances of a general or permanent nature shall be in writing and presented to the mayor and city council at a regular
meeting or, in case of emergency, at a special meeting for its consideration. (1980 Code § 1.9.1)
B. Manner Of Procedure: Every ordinance shall be read on three (3) different days, two (2) readings of which shall be by title only and one reading of
which shall be in full, unless one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full Council shall dispense with the rule. In preparation, passage and
publication, ordinances shall contain no subject which shall not be clearly expressed in the title, and no ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or
amended unless all ordinances, which are intended to amend existing ordinances, shall have the words which are added to such ordinance underlined.
When the amendment is to strike out or repeal any part of any existing ordinance, the letter, figure, word or words stricken or repealed shall be printed
with a line through such letter, figure, word or words in the printed bill to indicate the part stricken or repealed. Provided, however, that when an
ordinance includes or consists of the repeal of an entire section or chapter, it shall not be necessary to print such repealed section or chapter. (1980
Code § 1.9.2)
C. Manner Of Adoption: All ordinances, resolutions, or orders of a general nature, or that are required for the payment of money, or the raising of revenue
for the City shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence of a majority of the elected Council members. (1980 Code § 1.9.3)
D. Signature: When any such ordinance is passed, it shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk and the date of the passage by the
Council shall be attached thereto. (1980 Code § 1.9.4)
E. Certificate: The City Clerk shall attach to each ordinance his certificate of the City. (1980 Code § 1.9.5)
F. Publication; Effective Date: All ordinances, before taking effect, shall be published in the official newspaper of the City1, and proof of publication filed
with the Clerk, except in emergencies when procedures prescribed in the Idaho Code must be followed. (1980 Code § 1.9.6)
G. Records: On the passage or adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or order to enter into control by the City Council or for any other general purpose,
the ayes and nays shall be shown on the minutes of the City Clerk. (1980 Code § 1.9.7)
H. Assistance Of City Attorney: Members of the Council desiring to create an ordinance shall have the assistance of the City Attorney in preparation of the
same. (1980 Code § 1.9.8)
Chapter 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-7-1: OATH OF OFFICE:
A. Taking Oath Required: Every elective officer of the City, and such other appointive officers as are appointed by the Mayor and City Council shall, before
entering in and upon their respective duties, subscribe and take the oath of office as follows:
I do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Idaho, and support and uphold all lawful
laws and ordinances of the City of Rigby, Idaho, and faithfully and impartially perform the duties of my office to the best of my ability.
B. Filing Of Oath And Bond: The oath of office and the bond when required shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk, except that the bond of the City
Clerk shall be filed with the Mayor. (1980 Code § 2.2.1; amd. 1999 Code)
1-7-2: BONDING OF OFFICIALS:
A. Bonding In General:
1. Bond Amounts: The City Clerk, City Treasurer, Public Works Director and Chief of Police, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices,
shall give to the City a good and sufficient bond, guaranteeing the faithful performance of the respective officials. The amount of the bonds shall be:
City Clerk $500 000.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 8/201
City Treasurer 500,000.00
Public Works Director 500,000.00
Chief of Police 500,000.00
(1980 Code § 2.13.1; amd. 1999 Code)
2. Premiums Paid By City: All bond premiums for any and all of the above named officials shall be paid by the City out of the general funds of the City.
The Mayor and Council shall be the sole judges of who shall give bonds and the amount thereof and the approval of the same. (1980 Code § 2.13.1)
B. Relationship To Bonding Company: It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to make provisions for the bonding of the City officials with the same reliable
bonding company. Said bonds shall run to the City, and be based upon the faithful performance of the officials in their respective positions. (1980 Code
§ 2.13.2)
1-7-3: SALARIES OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
The salaries of the appointive officers shall be as designated by the Council from time to time. (1980 Code § 2.1.2)
1-7-4: SUCCESSION IN OFFICE:
Upon the qualification of all elected or appointive officers, all books, papers, records, money and property of the City shall be delivered to the successor in
office as provided by law. Any person failing to comply with this Section shall be guilty of an offense and punishable, upon conviction, as provided in
Section 1-4-1 of this Title. (1980 Code § 1.8.3; amd. 1999 Code)
1-7-5: SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY STATEMENT:
A. Policy Established:
1. The City is committed to providing a safe work environment and to fostering the well-being and health of its employees. That commitment is
jeopardized when any City employee illegally uses drugs on the job, comes to work under their influence, or possesses, distributes or sells drugs in
the workplace. Therefore, the City has established the following policy:
a. It is a violation of City policy for any employee to possess, sell, trade, or offer for sale illegal drugs or otherwise engage in the illegal use of drugs
on the job.
b. It is a violation of City policy for anyone to report to work under the influence of illegal drugs.
c. It is a violation of City policy for anyone to use prescription drugs illegally. (However, nothing in this policy precludes the appropriate use of legally
prescribed medications.)
d. Violations of this policy are subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination.
2. It is the responsibility of the City's supervisors to counsel employees whenever they see changes in performance or behavior that suggest an
employee has a drug problem. Although it is not the supervisor's job to diagnose personal problems, the supervisor should encourage such
employees to seek help and advise them about available resources for getting help. Everyone shares responsibility for maintaining a safe work
environment and co-workers should encourage anyone who may have a drug problem to seek help.
3. The goal of this policy is to balance our respect for individuals with the need to maintain a safe, productive and drug-free environment. The intent of
this policy is to offer a helping hand to those who need it, while sending a clear message that the illegal use of drugs is incompatible with
employment by the City.
4. As a condition of employment, employees must abide by the terms of this policy and must notify the City in writing of any conviction of a violation of a
criminal drug statute occurring in the workplace no later than five (5) calendar days after such conviction.
B. CDL Licensees:
1. Operators with CDL licenses shall refrain from doing the following:
a. Driving with an alcohol concentration of .02 or greater;
b. Possessing or using alcohol while driving;
c. Drinking during the four (4) hours before coming to work;
d. Drinking within eight (8) hours following an on-the-job accident;
e. Driving if they refuse to take an alcohol or drug test; and/or
f. Driving if they have used a controlled substance.
2. The City will, for CDL and safety sensitive positions, conduct the following alcohol and drug tests:
a. Random Pre-Employment Tests: Newly hired employees must be given drug and alcohol tests before they drive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 9/201
b. Post-Accident Tests: Following a fatal accident or an accident where the employer's driver is cited for a moving violation, the City, as soon as
possible, must test surviving drivers for drugs and alcohol.
c. Random Tests: Each year the City will randomly test twenty five percent (25%) of its drivers for alcohol use and fifty percent (50%) of its drivers for
drug use. The selection of drivers for testing must be done scientifically.
d. Reasonable Suspicion Testing: If a supervisor, who has received training on the subject, has a reasonable suspicion that a driver is under the
influence, then he/she must require the driver to submit to a test.
e. Return To Duty Tests: Before an employee can return to work after testing positive for drugs or alcohol, he or she must be re-tested.
f. Follow-Up Tests: An employee who has needed drug or alcohol rehabilitation must have an unannounced follow-up alcohol and/or controlled
substance test.
C. Testing; City Agreement:
1. As part of the testing procedure the City agrees that there will be:
a. Privacy in collection techniques, confirmation of any positive test results, confidentiality, and scientifically-random selection of employees to be
tested; and
b. To notify employees being tested that the test is required by the DOT rules.
2. If an employee's test results shows an alcohol concentration between .02 and .04, the employee will not be allowed to perform safety-sensitive
functions for twenty four (24) hours or until a re-test shows that it has fallen below .02. If an employee has an alcohol concentration of .04 or greater
or has tested positive for controlled substances, then the City will take the following actions:
a. Tell the employee where he can go to evaluate and resolve drug and alcohol problems.
b. Require the driver to be evaluated by a substance abuse professional.
c. Subject the employee to a return-to-duty test.
3. The City must keep positive drug and alcohol test results for five (5) years; negative test results for one year. The City must also prepare an annual
calendar year summary of the results of its alcohol and drug tests.
4. The City shall:
a. Explain the DOT requirements to employees; and
b. Provide employees with copies of drug and alcohol policies. The City must identify: 1) a person who can answer questions; 2) who is subject to the
provisions; 3) what hours of the day an employee must be in compliance with the requirements; and 4) what is prohibited.
D. Compliance With Statute: The City shall comply with the provisions of 49 USC 31136 and 31302 et seq.; 49 USC 31502; 49 CFR 1.48, as it pertains to
controlled substance and alcohol abuse and testing. (1999 Code)
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK
1-7A-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The City Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council pursuant to Idaho Code title 50, chapter 2. He shall serve until he resigns
or is removed according to Idaho Code section 50-206. (1980 Code § 2.6.1)
1-7A-2: DUTIES:
A. General Duties: The duties of the City Clerk will be to keep a correct journal of the proceedings of the Council and to fulfill other responsibilities as
designated in Idaho Code title 50, chapter 2. He shall be ex officio auditor and City accountant. He shall attend all meetings of the City Council, collect
all funds due to the City, keep proper records of all transactions, issue licenses and collect for the same, draw warrants on the City Treasurer, and
perform all and every duty that is required of him either by ordinance, resolution, or order of the Council or of the laws of the State. (1980 Code § 2.6.2)
B. Keeper Of Seal1: The City Clerk shall be the keeper of the City Seal and shall affix the same on all instruments and papers, which by law or ordinance
are necessary to be attested. (1980 Code § 2.6.3)
C. Keeper Of Books: The City Clerk shall have charge of all books of the City Water Department, and shall furnish to each patron a monthly statement of
indebtedness and collect the same and turn all monies coming into his hands to the City Treasurer and his receipt given therefor. (1980 Code § 2.6.4)
D. Issuance Of Licenses: The Clerk shall prepare proper forms of licenses, to be used in all matters that require the same as prescribed by ordinance
within the corporate limits of the City, shall see to their signature and delivery to the parties entitled upon the payment of the sums of money due the
City for such licensees, and turn the funds over to the City Treasurer. (1980 Code § 2.6.5)
ARTICLE B. CITY TREASURER
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 10/201
1-7B-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The City Treasurer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council pursuant to Idaho Code title 50, chapter 2. He shall serve until he
resigns or is removed according to Idaho Code section 50-206. (1980 Code § 2.7.1)
1-7B-2: DUTIES:
A. General Duties: The duties of the City Treasurer will be to serve as custodian of all monies belonging to the City and to fulfill all other responsibilities as
designated in Idaho Code title 50, chapter 2. He shall keep a record of all outstanding bonds against the City showing the number, amount of each and
to whom said bonds were issued; and when any bonds are purchased, paid or cancelled, said record shall show the fact. In his annual report he shall
describe particularly the bonds issued and sold during the year, and the term of the sale with each and every item of expense thereof. (1980 Code
§ 2.7.2)
B. Guardian Of Funds1: The City Treasurer shall keep all money in his hand belonging to the City in such bank as the Mayor and City Council shall
determine; provided, that such bank shall be in the City. Said bank shall safeguard the monies thus delivered to it by posting a good and sufficient
bond, penal in nature, running to the City and the City Treasurer thereof, in an amount to be approved by the City Council which from time to time shall
examine the securities pledged for the security of the sums on deposit with such bank, as aforesaid. (1980 Code § 2.7.3)
C. Keeper Of Books: The Treasurer shall keep accurate books of account showing all sums of money received by him and the disbursement thereof. He
shall cash all warrants properly drawn upon the City Treasury when the condition of the funds will permit, and settle with the City Clerk for all funds
from any and all sources received by him, naming the source and amount received. (1980 Code § 2.7.4)
ARTICLE C. CITY ATTORNEY
1-7C-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM; OATH:
The Mayor with the consent of the City Council shall appoint a City Attorney to hold office at the discretion of the Council. Before entering upon the duties
of his office as such City Attorney, he shall take the official oath of office. (1980 Code § 2.11.1; amd. 1999 Code)
1-7C-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The City Attorney shall be a duly licensed attorney with the right to practice in all courts of the State. (1980 Code § 2.11.2)
1-7C-3: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the City Attorney, and he shall:
A. Appear in Magistrate Court when required and prosecute all actions for offenses against the laws and ordinances of the City.
B. Attend to all legal business of the City and prosecute or defend all actions in which the City is a party thereto, except when an insurance company is
involved.
C. Draw and examine and pass upon all ordinances, documents and legal papers submitted to him,.
D. Give legal advice to the various officers of the City.
E. Attend meetings of the Council.
F. Give written opinions when so desired.
G. Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the City Council. (1980 Code § 2.11.3; amd. 1999 Code)
ARTICLE D. PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR
1-7D-1: APPOINTMENT; OATH:
The Director of Public Works shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. He shall take the oath of office. (1980 Code § 2.12.1;
amd. 1999 Code)
1-7D-2: DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 11/201
A. General Duties:
1. The Public Works Director shall have charge and supervision of all streets, alleys, sidewalks, and thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the City
and serve as water master.
2. It shall be his duty to supervise all work and improvements done thereon, to have charge of all repairs to ditches, canals, crossings, or culverts, or
otherwise.
3. He shall have charge of the distribution of all irrigation water within the City limits.
4. He shall make a report to the City Council of his activities when so desired by the Council and the Mayor of the City. (1980 Code § 2.12.2; amd. 1999
Code)
B. Supervision Of City Waterworks: The Public Works Director shall control, operate and superintend the City waterworks, including wells, pumps, motors,
pump houses, tools, tanks, pipe lines, laterals, openings, or connections made up to and including the street valve at the curb. He shall lay out, inspect,
and supervise all trench work and connections or additions made to any water mains, to have full power and control; have charge of all tools,
equipment of all kinds in order to effectually carry out the duties of his office; and shall perform all duties that come under his supervision as may be
required of him by ordinance or resolution of the Council. (1980 Code § 2.12.3; amd. 1999 Code)
C. Supervision Of Irrigation Water1:
1. Distribution Of Water:
a. The Public Works Director shall assume complete and absolute control of the distribution of all irrigation water used for irrigation of land within the
City.
b. He shall prepare a schedule of terms for the inhabitants of the City who are landowners or who own water stock in any canal company available to
the City, or water turned over to the City to be held in trust thereby, or any person entitled to the use of said irrigation waters.
c. He shall give to each user or owner of property or water owner a certificate stating such time for users to take the water for irrigating purposes, the
length of time to be used, the name of the party to take the water from, and the party to whom to turn the water to on and after the time limit has
expired; and such certificate so delivered shall be the sole and only authority of each landowner or user of irrigation waters for the right to use the
irrigation waters under the control of the City. (1980 Code § 2.12.4; amd. 1999 Code)
2. Maintenance Of Water Supply:
a. The Public Works Director shall turn all water from the canal that supplies the City with irrigation water, and by which it is distributed to the users
and inhabitants of the City; clean out, keep in repair and properly look after the headgates, stops and other devices that are used and laterals that
are needed, and shall have the right to lock all headgates if necessary.
b. He shall compute the expenses incurred by and incident to the control and distribution of the irrigation water within the City, including assessments
levied by the canal company furnishing such water to the City; and make up a list and assess the owners and users of said irrigation water in
proportion to the land owned or used by them and the property watered.
c. For any landowner or user of said water who refuses to pay the same, his part of the use of said water shall be denied him or her until payment is
made; and any interference with said rules and regulations shall be punished as provided in Title 5 of this Code. (1980 Code § 2.12.5; amd. 1999
Code)
3. Collection Of Monies: All monies collected from water users on account of assessments or from any other source for the use of the irrigation water
system of the City shall be kept in a separate fund and the expense incurred in said irrigation system shall be paid out of said fund as provided for
the payment of bills in other cases. (1980 Code § 2.12.6; amd. 1999 Code)
D. Examination Of Surveys: Before any new additions to the City shall be annexed thereto, the Public Works Director shall check all surveys of such
additions, and report any errors for the correction thereof, before said additions shall be approved by the Council and admitted as part of the City. (1980
Code § 2.12.7; amd. 1999 Code)
E. Maintenance Of Roadways:
1. The Public Works Director shall have complete supervision of, and it shall be his duty to superintend, all streets, alleys, public parks, sidewalks,
bridges, culverts and other Municipal works within the City.
2. He shall keep the public places in good repair, and places clean of rubbish at any place where rubbish may accumulate to cause overflow of water
used for irrigation, grade all streets and alleys, collect all dues for installing any water or sewage connection, and perform all and other duties that
may be required by the City Council, the Council member responsible for streets. (1980 Code § 2.12.8; amd. 1999 Code)
F. Other Duties:
1. The Public Works Director shall supervise the numbering of all houses and buildings upon the streets and avenues within the corporate limits of the
City.
2. He shall also install all street signs or beacons that may be put up from time to time on the streets of the City.
3. He shall perform any and all other duties that are required by law or ordinance of the City. (1980 Code § 2.12.9; amd. 1999 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 12/201
Chapter 8
CITY ELECTIONS
1-8-1: METHOD OF ELECTIONS:
The elections for city officials shall be conducted in all respects and in the manner required by the laws of the state for the conducting of elections in cities,
with such modifications as are necessary for the full effect of such elections to be in force in the city. (1980 Code § 1.8.2)
1-8-2: TIME FOR ELECTIONS:
There shall be held in the city the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November of every biennial year, an election for the purpose of electing council
persons or mayor, according to the provisions of Idaho Code title 50, chapters 6 and 7. (1980 Code § 1.8.1)
1-8-3: HOURS POLLS OPEN:
The polls for all general and special city elections shall be open from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. Mountain time and remain open until eight o'clock (8:00)
P.M. Mountain time. (Ord. 519-2005, 4-5-2005)
1-8-4: REGISTRATION INFORMATION PROVIDED TO COUNTY:
A. Registration Files: The city shall provide voter registration files concerning the city including, but not limited to, those involving the positions of mayor
and city council, and any other special elections.
B. Local Registrar: The county clerk shall appoint each city clerk and each elected official as designated by the governing authority as an at large registrar.
This section shall not impact in any way any decision by the city to contract or not to contract under Idaho Code section 34-1401 for the conduct of
elections. (Res., 2-15-1994)
Chapter 9
CITY FINANCES
1-9-1: CLAIMS AGAINST CITY:
A. Filing Requirement: Any person having a claim against the City shall file such claim in writing upon blanks provided for that purpose with the City Clerk
at least one day prior to the regular meeting of the City Council. (1980 Code § 1.10.1)
B. City Council Action On Claim: All claims filed as above shall be acted upon at the first regular meeting of the City Council subsequent to the time of filing
same. Any claim that is subject to question may be referred to the department head for investigation and report. All claims shall state the nature of the
claim supported by an affidavit of the claimant, setting forth that said claim is correct, and no part thereof has been paid. The Council may in its
discretion disallow the claim, and no claim that is rejected shall again be considered by the Council, save in those cases wherein the merits of the case
become apparent. (1980 Code § 1.10.2; amd. 1999 Code)
C. Waiver By Acceptance: When a claim is once submitted to the Council and allowed in part only, and a warrant ordered drawn for the portion of the claim
allowed, an acceptance of the said warrant by the claimant shall be considered a settlement in full of said account, and no further allowance shall be
granted. (1980 Code § 1.10.3)
D. Payment From Treasury: All claims allowed against the City shall be paid by check drawn upon the City Treasury, and said check shall be signed by the
Mayor and City Clerk. A Council person is also able to sign in the absence of one of the above. All checks shall be numbered consecutively. Said
checks shall also state the particular fund upon which drawn. (1980 Code § 1.10.4; amd. 1999 Code)
E. Record Of Claims: The Clerk shall keep a register of all checks drawn on the Treasury showing the number and date of the check, name of payee, for
what purpose drawn, and the fund upon which drawn, the date of presentation, the date of payment, and the amount of payment paid. (1980 Code
§ 1.10.5; amd. 1999 Code)
1-9-2: BUDGET AND ANNUAL APPROPRIATION:
A. Preparing Budget:
1. Estimate Expenditures: The City Council shall, prior to passing the annual appropriation ordinance, prepare a budget, estimate the probable amount
of money necessary for all purposes for which an appropriation is to be made, including interest and principal due on the bonded debt and sinking
fund, itemizing and classifying the proposed expenditures by department, fund, or service as nearly as may be practicable, and following all other
rules prescribed by State law. (1980 Code § 1.11.1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 13/201
2. Estimate Anticipated Revenue: To support such proposed expenditure, the Council shall prepare an estimate of the total revenue anticipated during
the ensuing fiscal year for which a budget is being prepared, classifying such receipts by source as nearly as may be possible and practicable, and
following all other rules prescribed by State law. The proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year shall list expenditures and revenues during each of
the two (2) previous fiscal years by fund and/or department. (1980 Code § 1.11.1; amd. 1999 Code)
3. Entry Into Journal: Following the tentative approval of the revenues and expenditures estimated by the Council, the same shall be entered at length
in the journal of proceedings. (1980 Code § 1.11.1)
B. Public Hearing:
1. Notice Of Hearing: Prior to certifying to the County Commissioners, a notice of time and place of public hearing on the budget, which notice shall
include the proposed expenditures by fund and/or department, including the two (2) previous fiscal years, and a statement of the estimated revenue
of the City for the ensuing fiscal year, shall be published twice at least seven (7) days apart in the official newspaper. (1980 Code § 1.11.2; amd.
1999 Code)
2. Testimony Of Interested Persons: At said hearing any interested person may appear and show cause, if any he has, why such proposed budget
should or should not be adopted. (1980 Code § 1.11.2)
C. Annual Appropriation Bill:
1. Adoption Of Ordinance: The City Council shall, prior to the commencement of each fiscal year, which shall commence on October 1 of each and
every year, pass an ordinance to be termed the annual appropriation ordinance, which in no event shall be greater than the amount of the proposed
budget, in which the corporate authorities may appropriate such sum or sums of money as may be deemed necessary to defray all necessary
expenses and liabilities of such corporation, not exceeding in the aggregate the amount of tax authorized to be levied during that year, in addition to
all other anticipated revenues.
2. File Ordinance With State: Such ordinance shall specify the object and purposes for which such appropriations are made and the amount
appropriated for each object or purpose. Said ordinance shall be filed with the office of the Secretary of State. (1980 Code § 1.11.3)
D. Amendments To Appropriation Bill:
1. Amendment Due To Increase In Outside Grants: The City Council may, by the same procedure as used in adopting the original appropriation
ordinance at any time during the current fiscal year, amend the appropriation ordinance to a greater amount than that adopted, if after the adoption of
the appropriation ordinance, additional revenue will accrue to the City during the current fiscal year as a result of increase in State or Federal grants
or allocations.
2. Amendment By Election: No further appropriation, except as herein provided, shall be made at any other time within such fiscal year unless the
proposition to make each appropriation has been first sanctioned by a majority of the legal voters of the City, either by petition signed by them equal
in number to a majority of the number who voted at the last general City election, or approved at a special election duly called therefor, and all
appropriations shall end with the fiscal year for which they are made. (1980 Code § 1.11.4)
E. Surplus Funds: All monies in the City Treasury at the end of the fiscal year, save those in special funds, shall revert into the General Fund of the City.
(1980 Code § 1.11.5)
1-9-3: CONTROL OF CITY TREASURY:
A. Control By Mayor And City Council: All monies and funds belonging to or controlled by the City shall be under the direct jurisdiction of the Mayor and
City Council, and they shall make such rules and regulations concerning said monies and funds as in their judgment may be necessary for the
safeguarding and protection of the same, that is not inconsistent with public depository laws of the State. (1980 Code § 1.12.1)
B. Compliance With Idaho Law: Deposits of City funds and collection and spending of public monies are controlled and governed as far as practicable by
the laws of the State. (1980 Code § 1.12.2)
C. Duties Of Clerk And Treasurer: The City Council shall require of the City Clerk and City Treasurer to keep all monies belonging to the City as aforesaid,
or which may come into their hands by virtue of their offices, to be deposited for safekeeping in some bank doing business within the City and of
responsible standing in the financial world1. (1980 Code § 1.12.3)
D. Bonding Of Bank: Before any monies belonging to the City shall be deposited in any bank in the City, the Clerk and Treasurer shall require such bank to
execute a good and sufficient bond to be approved by the City Council, and of par value of the funds so deposited. (1980 Code § 1.12.4)
E. Limit On Deposit: The City Clerk or the City Treasurer shall not have on deposit in any bank, at any time, more than the par value of the security, nor
more than ninety percent (90%) of the penalty of the bond given by said bank. (1980 Code § 1.12.5)
F. Restrictions On Spending: The Mayor and City Council shall have no power to appropriate, issue or draw any order or warrant on the Treasury for
money unless the same has been appropriated or ordered by ordinance, or the claim for payment of which such order or warrant is issued has been
allowed, and the appropriations for the class or object of which such claim is payable has been made and entered in the yearly budget and yearly
appropriation measure. (1980 Code § 1.12.6)
G. Restrictions On Special Assessments: All monies received on special assessments shall be kept by the City Treasurer as a special fund to be applied
for the payment of the improvement for which said assessment was made and said money shall be used for no other purposes unless to reimburse for
money expended for such improvements. (1980 Code § 1.12.7)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 14/201
H. Emergency Funding:
1. Funding Beyond Appropriation: An improvement to be paid out of the General Fund shall not exceed in any one year the amount provided for such
improvement in the general appropriation and annual appropriation bill; provided, however, if by act of God, or any untoward emergency or accident
occurs in which the City Council had no control, in that event, the City Council, by the vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full
Council, may vote the necessary order to repair the damage done or in the necessity for such expenditure regardless of the annual appropriation bill.
2. Borrowing Authorized:
a. In the event of casualty or accident, the City Council may order the Mayor and Finance Committee to borrow a sufficient sum to provide for the
expense necessary to be incurred in making any repairs or restoration of improvements, for a space of time not exceeding the close of the next
fiscal year, which sum and the interest shall be added to the amount authorized to be raised in the next general tax levy and embraced therein.
(1980 Code § 1.12.8)
b. Should any judgment be obtained against the corporation, the Mayor, under the sanction of the City Council, may borrow for a space of time not
exceeding the close of the next fiscal year, a sufficient amount to pay the same, which sum and interest shall in like manner be added to the
amount authorized to be raised in the general tax levy of the next year and embraced therein. (1980 Code § 1.12.8; amd. 1999 Code)
I. Publication Of Expenditures:
1. Duty Of Treasurer: The City Treasurer shall cause to be published for at least one insertion in the official newspaper within the City during the first
part of January, April, July and October of each and every year an abstract of statements and of receipts and expenditures of the City giving the
source from which received, to what purpose applied, and to whom.
2. Failure To Comply: Failure to comply with the above subsection lays the City Treasurer liable to be guilty of a misdemeanor, and punishable under
the laws of the State. (1980 Code § 1.12.9)
Chapter 10
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
1-10-1: LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE:
The purpose for establishing an area of City impact is to identify a logical urban fringe area adjoining the City. The urban fringe area is realizing, or will
realize, growth and development pressures that must be planned and managed in an orderly fashion. The area of City impact recognizes trade area,
geographic factors and the potential delivery of public services as being associated with the City and comprised of areas that may reasonably be annexed
to the City in the near and distant future. (Ord. 443, 12-20-1994, eff. after 12-31-1994)
1-10-2: GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
A. Area Described: The officially adopted and agreed upon area of City impact for Rigby is established by this Section, and is set forth on the map,
attached to Ordinance 442 on file in the office of the City Clerk, entitled "Area of City Impact for Rigby, Idaho", and marked Exhibit A , and as described
herein:
At a point beginning at the intersection of 200 North and 3800 East, thence North to 400 North, thence East to 3900 East, thence North to the dry bed
of the Snake River, thence East following the dry bed to the Jefferson County Lake and exempting therefrom the Lake and associated properties,
thence South from the intersection of the dry bed and U.S. 20, thence along U.S. 20 to the Lewisville Canal, thence following said Canal East to 4100
East, thence South to the Burgess Canal, thence West along the Canal to 4000 East; thence South along 4000 East to 200 North, thence West along
200 North to the point of beginning.
B. Conflict Between Map And Description: In the event of a discrepancy between the Official Map and the legal description, the Map shall control, subject
to any other provisions of this Chapter. In the event of any ambiguity, the Map and description shall be read together to effectuate the will of the
governing body. (Ord. 442, 10-25-1994)
1-10-3: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
The Comprehensive Plan and subsequent amendments thereto as officially adopted by Jefferson County shall apply to the area of City impact within the
unincorporated area of Jefferson County. (Ord. 443, 12-20-1994, eff. after 12-31-1994)
1-10-4: SUBDIVISION ORDINANCES:
The Subdivision Ordinance, and subsequent amendments thereto as officially adopted by Jefferson County, shall apply to the area of City impact within
the unincorporated area of Jefferson County. (Ord. 443, 12-20-1994, eff. after 12-31-1994)
1-10-5: ZONING ORDINANCES:
The Zoning Ordinance, Zoning Map, and subsequent amendments thereto as officially adopted by Jefferson County, shall apply to the area of City impact
within the unincorporated area of Jefferson County. (Ord. 443, 12-20-1994, eff. after 12-31-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 15/201
1-10-6: PROPERTY ADJOINING ROADS:
In the situations where the boundary is a road, the impact area shall include housing adjoining and/or contingent to either side of the road itself. Property
on the outside of the impact area not adjoining the road shall not be considered as within the impact area. In cases where other landmarks are used, the
impact area shall contain all property adjoining and inside the impact area. (Ord. 442, 10-25-1994)
1-10-7: COUNTY ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Enforcement Of County Ordinances: Jefferson County shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the County's ordinances listed in
Sections 1-10-3, 1-10-4 and 1-10-5 of this Chapter and shall receive all permit fees within the unincorporated area for inspection performed to
recapture direct costs of inspections, administration, legal publications, and other costs arising from the process. Appeal and hearing procedures shall
follow those adopted by Jefferson County presently and in the near future.
B. Review Of Amendments By City: Amendments to the Jefferson County Comprehensive Plan, requirements for preliminary and final plats or the vacation
thereof, and request for zone changes involving property located in the area of City impact within the unincorporated area of Jefferson County being
proposed for nonagricultural development of any type shall be provided to the City Council for review prior to implementation.
C. Execute Development Agreements: The authority to enter into and execute development agreements with a subdivider and to accept required bonding
or other form of security to guarantee construction of required street improvements involving plats located within the area of City impact within the
unincorporated area of Jefferson County shall rest with Jefferson County. However, the City shall be given notice of an application sufficient to provide
input at any hearing.
D. Street Maintenance: Maintenance of public streets located in the unincorporated area of City impact shall be the exclusive responsibility of Jefferson
County.
E. City Membership On County Planning And Zoning Commission: The City shall appoint one member to the Jefferson County Planning and Zoning
Commission to represent the area of City impact. The representative shall reside within the area of City impact or City limits and shall be reappointed
upon any vacancy by citizens also residing within the area of City impact or City. (Ord. 443, 12-20-1994, eff. after 12-31-1994)
1-10-8: RENEGOTIATION:
The area of City impact shall be reviewed by the City and Jefferson County after one year and shall be renegotiated at any time upon the request of either
party hereto. Renegotiation shall begin thirty (30) days after written request by either the City or County and shall follow procedures for the original
negotiation, as set forth in Idaho Code section 67-6526. (Ord. 443, 12-20-1994, eff. after 12-31-1994)
1-10-9: NOTIFICATION:
Both the City and County shall notify the other in writing at least once a month of any building permits issued within the City impact area so that proper
action may be taken. Jefferson County shall notify the City in writing fifteen (15) days prior to any action on: zoning changes, variances, or special use
permits. (Ord. 443, 12-20-1994, eff. after 12-31-1994)
Chapter 11
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
1-11-1: TAKING OF PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT DUE PROCESS:
A. Process Adopted: The City Council will evaluate whether proposed regulatory or administrative actions may result in the unconstitutional taking of
private property without due process of law and hereby adopts the process provided by the Attorney General to accomplish this action. This process
will be utilized, effective immediately, to evaluate all proposed regulatory or administrative actions taken by the City to assure that such actions do not
result in unconstitutional taking.
B. Private Property Rights Protected: The City wishes to ensure that land use policies, restrictions, conditions and fees do not violate private property
rights, adversely impact private property values or create unnecessary technical limitations upon the use of the property which will constitute an
unconstitutional taking of private property rights. In order to evaluate each related action, the City will ask the following questions of that action:
1. Does the regulation or action result in the permanent or temporary physical occupation of the property.
2. Does the regulation or action require a property owner to dedicate a portion of property or grant an easement.
3. Does the regulation deprive the owner of all economically viable uses of the property.
4. Does the regulation have a significant impact on the owner's economic interest.
5. Does the regulation deny a fundamental attribute of ownership.
6. Does the regulation serve the same purpose that would be served by directly prohibiting the use or action; and does the condition imposed
substantially advance that purpose. (Res. 25, 7-6-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 16/201
Chapter 12
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
1-12-1: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED:
The City adopts the Rigby Comprehensive Plan to be used as a guide for land use and development decisions in Rigby, Idaho. (Res. 70, 6-16-1998)
Chapter 13
PUBLIC HEARINGS
1-13-1: HEARING PROCEDURES:
A. The presiding officer shall call the meeting to order and identify the purpose of the hearing along with identifying the parties and notification that cell
phones and pagers are not allowed, except law enforcement and emergency personnel;
B. The presiding officer shall then inform those present of the manner in which the meeting shall be conducted;
1. Order Of Presentation:
a. The proponent shall go first and have fifteen (15) minutes to present the request unless additional time is approved by the agency conducting the
hearing.
b. Those supporters of the project shall be heard next and shall be limited to five (5) minutes per presentation unless expanded by the agency
conducting the hearing.
c. Any of those who are uncommitted to the issue may next address their concerns and such comments shall not exceed five (5) minutes.
d. If there is an entity speaking on behalf of an organized opposition, that entity shall similarly have fifteen (15) minutes to present its argument.
e. Those who are in opposition should then be heard and such comments shall not exceed five (5) minutes per presentation unless expanded by the
agency conducting the hearing.
f. A rebuttal shall be allowed for the proponent which shall be limited to five (5) minutes unless expanded by the agency conducting the hearing.
g. Rebuttal information will be received in opposition or support thereof with each limited to two (2) minutes each unless expanded by the agency
conducting the hearing.
h. The governing board may ask questions of the proponent or opponent of the project.
i. Any or all parties who wish to participate for or against shall be asked to "sign in" in order to participate.
j. No person shall be allowed, other than in rebuttal, to address the governing board more than once without the approval of the board.
k. No cell phones or pagers shall be allowed.
2. Manner Of Presentation:
a. Those speaking shall come forward and shall be entitled to the silence of the audience/board.
b. Those addressing the board shall identify themselves by name, residence and/or mailing address.
c. All oral information presented shall be recorded.
d. All exhibits, including petitions, plats, diagrams, etc., shall be marked and become the property of the city. It is advised that exhibits be submitted
seventy two (72) hours prior to the hearing.
e. If written testimony is to be allowed, that form would be allowed into evidence as long as properly identified. One page maximum. If longer, it shall
be submitted seventy two (72) hours prior to the hearing.
f. The person conducting the hearing shall have the authority to continue or adjourn the hearing as necessary.
g. There shall be no spontaneous or planned displays of emotion.
h. The hearing shall be conducted in an area which is ADA accessible and reasonable accommodations shall be made.
i. All persons shall have equal access to the hearing process.
3. Miscellaneous:
a. The public may bring in tape recorders and the media may attend. Flash photography is disruptive and shall not be allowed once the hearing
begins.
b. Copies of the information may be provided in accord with the public records law upon writing to city clerk.
c. The governing board is not allowed to visit the land or property at issue, nor shall the governing board take evidence except as outlined herein.
d. If there is a threat of violence, reasonable security measures shall be taken and meeting may be adjourned.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 17/201
e. An outline of the agenda of the hearing and method of conducting the hearing shall be made available to the public.
C. At the conclusion, the presiding officer shall note the time and declare the hearing closed. The officer shall then announce, if possible, when the
decision shall be rendered.
D. A copy of the resolution codified herein shall be made available to all interested parties. (Res. 101, 4-15-2003)
Chapter 14
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM PROCEDURE
1-14-1: PURPOSE:
The city of Rigby is required to provide direct legislation through the referendum and initiative process. Idaho Code section 50-501 provides the minimum
requirements. The city excludes from this section bond and recall elections. It also specifically exempts modification of a budget ordinance by initiative or
referendum as the city and its contracts would possibly subject the city to potential liability. (Ord. 515, 12-7-2004)
1-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
DATE OF PASSAGE: The day the ordinance is signed by the mayor and shall be inclusive of the first day for purpose of determining time frame.
ELECTOR: Individuals whose name is listed on the voter list maintained by the Jefferson County clerk record office.
ELIGIBLE ELECTION DATE: Elections may be held on four (4) dates each year pursuant to Idaho Code section 34-601. They are as follows: a) first
Tuesday in February; b) fourth Tuesday in May; c) first Tuesday in August; d) Tuesday following the first Monday in November.
INITIATIVE: The process whereby the citizens pass legislation in the form of an ordinance.
REFERENDUM: The process whereby citizens revoke ordinances duly passed by the city council. (Ord. 515, 12-7-2004)
1-14-3: PROCESS:
An initiating petition shall be filed with the office of the Rigby city clerk. The number of signatures shall be equal to twenty percent (20%) of the total
number of electors who cast votes at the last general election in the city. The number of electors last voting shall be determined by reference to the actual
poll list maintained by the Rigby city clerk. Upon receipt of the petition the city clerk shall review the petition within ten (10) working days. The clerk shall
compare the purported signatures with that of the registered elector. Each rejected signature shall be drawn through with ink. In addition to checking for
authenticity the clerk shall review the signatures for additional concerns including, but not limited to:
A. Erasures;
B. Undecipherable signatures;
C. Signatures not properly identified by all information required on the petition;
D. Duplicate signatures;
E. Signatures of those who have requested in writing to have their names removed;
F. Signatures may also be voided if the petition is not in substantial compliance with the procedural requirements pertaining to form of petition or lacking
proper verification.
All voided signatures shall be interlineated. All valid signatures will be indicated by a check mark or similar mark indicating it has been reviewed. The
review of the petition may be performed by the clerk or deputy clerk. Within seventy two (72) hours of the review, the clerk shall indicate the additional
number of signatures required, if any. Once filed, the petition shall remain the property of the city clerk. However, copies may be provided to anyone
requesting such, but shall be stamped "copy" before release and cannot be submitted as an original. (Ord. 515, 12-7-2004)
1-14-4: PROCESS IF INSUFFICIENT PETITION:
A. If the petition is insufficient, the sponsor shall have thirty (30) days from the written notice to perfect the petition, i.e., acquire the requisite number of
valid signatures and submit such to the city clerk by five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the thirtieth day, or if such falls on a weekend or holiday, by five o'clock
(5:00) P.M. on the next business day.
B. Upon receipt of the additional signatures, the clerk shall review the signatures in a similar manner and time frame as set forth above. Should the petition
again fail, the petitions shall be declared null and void ab initio.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 18/201
C. A second petition dealing with essentially the same subject matter cannot be filed until at least ninety (90) days has elapsed since the date of mailing of
the notice that the prior petition had failed. (Ord. 515, 12-7-2004)
1-14-5: FORM OF PETITION:
The initiative or referendum petition for city officers shall be in substantially the following form:
Direct legislation Petition
To the honorable ..., City Clerk for the City of Rigby;
We the undersigned citizens and registered electors of the City of Rigby, respectfully demand that the following be made part of the laws of the City of
Rigby; if a referendum, that the following provision of law be stricken from the laws of the City of Rigby. That the direct legislation is necessary for the
following reasons, to-wit: (setting out the reasons for direct legislature in not more than 200 words); that a special election therefore be called; that we,
each for himself say: I am a registered elector of the City of Rigby, my residence, post office address, and the date I signed this petition are correctly
written after my name.
Signature Printed name Residence
And Street number
City or
post office
Date
(Here follow twenty numbered lines for signatures.)
The direct legislation for special district officers shall be in substantially the following form:
Each and every signature sheet of each petition containing signatures shall be verified on the face thereof in substantially the following form by the person
who circulated said sheet of the petition, by his or her affidavit thereon, as a part thereof:
State of Idaho)
: ss
County of Jefferson)
I, ________________________, swear, under penalty of perjury, that every person who signed this sheet of the foregoing petition signed his or her name
thereto in my presence. I believe that each has stated his or her name in my presence. I believe that each has stated his or her name and the
accompanying required information on the signature sheet correctly, and that the person was eligible to sign this petition.
Signature _______________________________________
Post Office Address ____________________________
________________________________
Subscribed and sworn to before me this ____________________ day of ___________ , 20____.
(Notary Seal)___________________
Notary Public
Residing at: _______________________________
Before or at the time of beginning to circulate all petitions for direct legislation and sheets for signatures shall be printed on a good quality bond or ledger
paper, on pages eight and one-half inches (81/2") in width by thirteen inches (13") in length, with a margin of one and three-fourths inches (13/4") at the top
for binding, and the sheets for signatures shall have numbered lines thereon from one to twenty (1-20) for signatures. The petition shall be prepared in
sections, with each section numbered consecutively. Each section of a petition must have a printed copy of the petition as the first page, and each section
shall have attached to it not more than ten (10) sheets for signatures. (Ord. 515, 12-7-2004)
1-14-6: TIMING OF ELECTION:
The election shall take place at the nearest date as set forth in section 1-14-2 of this chapter which falls more than forty five (45) days after the clerk orders
the election. (Ord. 515, 12-7-2004)
1-14-7: REVIEW OF PETITION:
The proponent of the legislation shall submit the initial petition with not less than twenty (20) names. The clerk shall review those names and the petition.
Within five (5) days, the clerk in writing, shall indicate if the petition is acceptable, and if unacceptable, indicate why. The clerk shall retain this petition but
the approved names shall count toward the twenty percent (20%) of the number of electors voting at the last general election. If the form is not accepted
none of the signatures shall be counted. Once accepted, the proponent shall have sixty (60) days, as defined in this chapter to collect the necessary
signatures. (Ord. 515, 12-7-2004)
1-14-8: ELECTION:
The election shall be conducted pursuant to the general election laws of this state. (Ord. 515, 12-7-2004)
1-14-9: REFERENDUM; ADDITIONAL LIMITATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 19/201
No petition for referendum, whether initiating or otherwise, shall be filed until sixty (60) days have expired from the date of passage of the ordinance. (Ord.
515, 12-7-2004)
1-14-10: FORM OF BALLOT:
The ballot at any direct legislation election shall be headed "Initiative or Referendum" and on the ballot shall be printed in not more than two hundred (200)
words the reason for demanding the legislation in the petition, and in not more than two hundred (200) words the city justification of its course in office.
Then the question of whether the direct legislation shall be placed on the ballot in a form substantially similar to the following:
[ ] FOR THE REFERENDUM OR INITIATIVE
[ ] AGAINST THE REFERENDUM OR INITIATIVE
(Ord. 515, 12-7-2004)
Title 2
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Chapter 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-1-1: APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; TERMS:
A. Appointment: Members of the City Planning and Zoning Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the City
Council.
B. Residency:
1. Representing City: All members of the City Planning and Zoning Commission representing the City shall have resided in the City for two (2) years
prior to their appointment and must remain a resident of the City during their service on said Commission.
2. Representing Area Of City Impact: Members appointed to the Planning and Zoning Commission representing the area of City impact outside the
boundaries of the City shall have resided in Jefferson County for two (2) years prior to their appointment and must remain a resident of the County
during their service on said Commission and reside within the area of City impact.
C. Terms Of Office:
1. The term of office of each appointive member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be four (4) years. The existing Planning and Zoning
Commission members and their terms of office are hereby confirmed. The terms of office for the additional newly appointive members shall be four
(4) years.
2. At the next meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall, following passage and publication of Sections 2-1-1 and 2-1-2 of this Chapter,
establish a staggered sequence of terms based upon time spent on the Commission and shall designate each seat numerically or alphabetically so
that a record can be kept as to terms and when various seats are up. In the event that the Planning and Zoning Commission members cannot agree,
terms shall be determined by lot.
D. Filling Vacancies: Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of the terms shall be filled by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
Members shall be selected without respect to political affiliation, race, sex, or creed. (Ord. 473, 5-18-1999)
2-1-2: MEMBERSHIP:
A. Number Of Members: The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of eight (8) voting members, including the chairman of said Commission.
Seven (7) of the eight (8) members shall be City residents with one Commission member residing in the impact area as required by Idaho Code section
67-6526.
B. Proportion Of Members: The proportion between City members and impact area members shall be reviewed at a minimum of after each national
census or at such earlier time as may be set by resolution of the City Council. In the event that the Commission be expanded to maintain proportionality
the Planning and Zoning Commission may increase such as may be required to the maximum of twelve (12) members. An increase of more than
twelve (12) shall be by ordinance. Said Planning and Zoning Commission shall operate as an eight (8) member Planning and Zoning Commission.
Such representation shall, as nearly as possible, reflect the proportion of the population living within the City as opposed to the population living within
the area of City impact but outside the City.
C. Vote Of Chairman: The chairman or acting chairman shall have no vote except in the case of a tie. (Ord. 475, 5-18-1999)
2-1-3: COMPENSATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 20/201
Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be entitled to receive such mileage and per diem compensation as may be provided by the City
Council by resolution. (1980 Code § 3.2.3)
2-1-4: ORGANIZATION:
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect its own chairman and create and fill such other offices as may be determined to be necessary. The
Commission shall have the authority to establish subcommittees, advisory committees, or neighborhood groups to advise and assist in carrying out its
responsibilities under this Chapter and pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6501 et seq. (1980 Code § 3.2.4)
2-1-5: MEETINGS, RULES AND RECORDS:
A. Bylaws: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt bylaws consistent with this Chapter and Idaho Code section 67-6501 et seq., for the
transaction of the business of the Commission.
B. Records: A record or minutes of meetings, hearings, resolutions, studies, findings, permits and actions taken by the Commission shall be maintained.
C. Open To The Public: All meetings and records shall be open to the public.
D. Meetings: At least one regular meeting shall be held each month for not less than nine (9) months in a year.
E. Quorum: A majority of the voting members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. (1980 Code § 3.2.5)
2-1-6: BUDGET AND STAFFING:
A. Receive And Expend Funds: Upon approval of the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission may accept, receive, and expend funds, grants
and services from the Federal government or agencies and instrumentalities of State or local governments or from civic and private sources and may
contract with these entities to provide information and reports as necessary to secure aid. All expenditures by the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be within the amounts appropriated or budgeted by the City Council.
B. Hire Employees, Advisors: The Commission is authorized to employ or hire employees and technical advisors, including but not limited to, legal
assistants, planners, engineers, and architects as are deemed necessary for its work and consistent with their budgetary limitations. (1980 Code
§ 3.2.6)
2-1-7: DUTIES:
A. Conduct Hearings, Surveys: The Planning and Zoning Commission, as a part of the overall planning process, shall provide for citizen meetings,
hearings, surveys, or other methods to obtain advice on the planning process, the Comprehensive Plan and its implementation. Pursuant to this duty,
the Commission is also authorized to conduct informational meetings and consult with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, and civic,
educational, professional, or other organizations.
B. Comprehensive Plan: The Commission shall conduct a comprehensive planning process designed to prepare, implement and review and update a
Comprehensive Plan. Said Comprehensive Plan and its process of preparation, implementation, review, and update shall be accomplished in
accordance with this Chapter and the provisions of Idaho Code section 67-6501 et seq.
C. Review Of Maps, Plats And Replats: All maps, plats and replats of land which require the approval of the City Council, or any official or employee
thereof, shall first be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its review and the Commission shall have a reasonable time, to be fixed by
the City Council in accordance with law, within which to examine such maps, plats or replats before returning the same to the applicant with their
suggestions or forwarding said materials to the City Council with their recommendations.
D. Powers Pursuant To State Law: The Commission shall have any and all powers and duties enumerated in Idaho Code section 67-6501 et seq., as now
constituted and as may hereinafter be amended. (1980 Code § 3.2.7)
Chapter 2
RECREATION BOARD
2-2-1: DECLARATION OF PUBLIC BENEFIT:
Providing adequate recreation, health, or additional education facilities for the public use is hereby declared to be a public benefit, use and purpose which
enhances the value and quality of life in which materially assists in correcting or eliminating many social ills such as delinquency, crime, excessive use of
alcohol, drug abuse and discrimination. (Ord. 497, 8-20-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 21/201
2-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a different meaning plainly is required in this chapter:
BOARD: The group of trustees who are appointed by the mayor and city council of the city of Rigby to be on the Rigby recreation board.
CENTER: The Rigby recreation center.
CITY COUNCIL: The legislative body of the city of Rigby.
MAYOR: The elected chief municipal officer of the city.
NONPARTISAN: Not controlled or influenced by any single political party.
PARK: The various city parks that are cared for and maintained by the city of Rigby.
RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES: Shall include all manner of physical exercise. The activities shall include, but not be limited to: baseball, football,
basketball, hiking, tennis, pool, swimming, golf, table tennis, skating, soccer, gymnastics, and weight training.
SKATE PARK: The location of the Rigby skate park which is located on the southwest portion of the city. (Ord. 497, 8-20-2002)
2-2-3: BOARD OF TRUSTEES; MEMBERS:
There is hereby created a Rigby recreation board composed of five (5) board members, at least one of which must reside in the Rigby city area of impact.
All other members of the board shall reside within the city of Rigby itself, unless there is a finding by the board that qualified individuals could not be found
within the confines of the city of Rigby. It is further recommended that at least one of the members, at the time of appointment, be between the age of
sixteen (16) and eighteen (18) years and shall serve a one year term. The board members shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council
for the terms of office provided in this chapter. Any three (3) members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business.
Appointment to the board shall be made solely upon the ability of such appointees to serve the interests of the people, without regard to sex, age, race,
nationality, religion, disability or political affiliation. A member of the city council shall not be one of the appointed trustees of the board, but each year the
council shall appoint one of its members to be a liaison to the board, without voting rights. (Ord. 497, 8-20-2002)
2-2-4: TERM OF OFFICE:
The initial appointment of board members shall be for terms of one, two (2), three (3), four (4), and five (5) years respectively. Subsequent appointments
shall be made for five (5) years from the date of appointment, and until their successors are appointed. Each board member may serve no more than two
(2) full terms of office. Terms shall run from January 1 until December 31. On the initial term of office for 2002, a year shall be from the date of passage
until December 31, 2002.
The officers of the board shall consist of a president and vice president to be selected by the board from among its members, to serve as such officers for
one year; provided that the president of the board shall be ineligible to succeed himself for consecutive terms of office. The board shall also designate a
secretary who need not be a member of the board. The secretary shall keep correct minutes of the proceedings of the board (including, but not limited to,
any discussions regarding bills or the encumbrance of funds), shall have custody of the records of the board, except those in the custody of the city, and
shall perform all other duties which are provided or directed by the board. The president shall be the executive officer of the board and shall preside at all
meetings, and perform all the duties which are provided and or necessary by this chapter. The vice president shall act in the absence of the president and
shall perform all other duties. (Ord. 497, 8-20-2002)
2-2-5: COMPENSATION:
Pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-210, all members and the officers thereof shall serve without salary or compensation, but their actual and necessary
expenses shall be allowed by the city. The city shall provide the necessary and suitable equipment and supplies to enable the board to properly transact
and attend to its business. (Ord. 497, 8-20-2002)
2-2-6: VACANCIES:
The board shall report all vacancies to the council within five (5) working days. All such appointments shall be made in the same manner as appointments
are originally made. Appointments to complete an unexpired term shall be for the remainder of the term only. Any board member may be removed by the
city council and may be removed in such manner as they were appointed, as per Idaho Code section 50-210. (Ord. 497, 8-20-2002)
2-2-7: MEETINGS:
The board shall meet at least once per month unless required to meet more frequently. One meeting shall be designated as the annual meeting. The
purposes of the annual meetings are to elect the officers of the board, to establish a regular meeting date, and to review, amend, repeal or adopt bylaws,
policies and procedures. Special meetings may be held from time to time as the board may determine, but written notice thereof shall be given to the
members at least two (2) days prior to the day of the meeting. A quorum shall consist of the three (3) voting members but a smaller number may adjourn.
All meetings are to be held pursuant to the open meeting law and shall be in such a facility as to accommodate those individuals who may suffer from
disabilities. The secretary shall be responsible for preparing an agenda in a timely manner, and provide notice thereof to the city. The meetings shall occur
at a set date and time each month as set by resolution. The board shall report at least once each year, or more frequently at the council's discretion. (Ord.
497, 8-20-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 22/201
2-2-8: ANNUAL APPROPRIATIONS:
The board shall prepare and adopt an annual budget, stating anticipated revenues and expenditures, indicating what support and maintenance of the
various entities under the control of the recreation board will be required for review and approval by the city council for the ensuing year. The budget shall
be prepared in a timely manner so that such budget may be incorporated in the municipal budgeting procedures.
All funds shall be in the custody of the city treasurer or clerk unless otherwise provided by city ordinance, and shall be used only for recreation purposes.
The board shall have control of the expenditures. Money shall be paid for recreation purposes, only upon properly authenticated vouchers of the board.
The board shall not make expenditures or incur indebtedness in any year in excess of monies appropriated by the city for the recreation purposes. The
board shall assist in any auditing as is required by the city and make available any information it may have.
Notice of the budget hearing shall be posted at least ten (10) days prior to the date of said meeting in at least one conspicuous place in each recreation
facility, a copy of the notice shall also be published in the official newspaper of the city of Rigby at least ten (10) days prior to the review by the recreation
board. The place, hour and day of such hearing shall be specified in such notice as well as the place where such budget may be examined prior to such
hearing. A full and complete copy of the proposed request to the city council for budget is to be made available to the public. (Ord. 497, 8-20-2002)
2-2-9: POWERS AND DUTIES:
In addition to any powers provided by law, the recreation board shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To establish bylaws and mission statement for its own governance;
B. To establish policies and rules of use for the governance of the various recreation facilities under its control; to exclude from the use of the facilities any
persons who violate such rules;
C. To have control, superintendence and charge of all recreation facilities and any land or lots hereinafter purchased, leased, devised and bequeathed to
the city for park and recreation purposes, and as such to direct the improvements of said grounds;
D. To study the economic and physical conditions and problems with the maintenance, operation, management, control and use of the public park grounds
facilities and buildings within the city;
E. To propose and promulgate rules and regulations for the control and regulation of the use of the public park grounds, buildings and playground;
F. To represent the public interest in making suggestions and recommendations for the development, use and expansion of needed and required
playground and other recreation leisure program activities;
G. To represent the public interest in making recommendations for the employment of the recreation coordinator, and for the use and control of the
recreation facilities of the city;
H. To suggest and recommend such rules and regulations necessary and desirable to carry out the intent of this chapter and improve and correlate the
problems of governmental administration of all recreation and leisure programs of the city;
I. To propose plans, recommendations and suggestions for the future growth, development and regulation of the recreation facilities of the city;
J. To maintain legal records of all of the board's business; to exercise such other powers not inconsistent with law, necessary for the orderly and efficient
management of the recreation facilities;
K. With the approval of the city, the recreation board shall have the following authority: 1) to acquire real property by purchase, gift, devise, lease or
otherwise; 2) to own and hold real and personal property and construct the buildings for the use and purposes of the city; 3) to sell, exchange or
otherwise dispose of real or personal property when no longer required; and to insure the real and personal property of the recreation facility; 4) to
accept or decline gifts of money or personal property in accordance with policy and under such terms as may be a condition of the gift; 5) to hire,
supervise and evaluate the recreation coordinator.
All rules and regulations formulated, proposed and promulgated by the recreation board shall be approved and ratified by the council and after such
approval and ratification shall have the force and effect of ordinance. All rules and regulations of the board now in effect shall remain in full force and
effect until amended, altered or repealed. It is explicitly noted that it is the recreation board's responsibility to suggest a fee structure for the use of all
recreation facilities. The ultimate adoption of the fee schedule shall be by resolution of the Rigby city council. The surplus property as found in
subsection K, item 3) of this section, shall be sold at public auction consistent with city practices. Any real property shall be sold pursuant to Idaho
Code section 50-1401 et seq., as amended. (Ord. 497, 8-20-2002)
2-2-10: RECREATION COORDINATOR:
The mayor shall nominate and the city council shall appoint the recreation coordinator who shall serve at the pleasure of the city. The coordinator shall
advise the board, implement policy set by the board, supervise all staff and shall acquire materials, equipment and supplies. The coordinator shall attend
all board meetings but shall not vote.
With the recommendation of the coordinator, the recreation board shall hire other employees that may be necessary for the operation of the recreation
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 23/201
facilities in accordance with city policies and procedures. These employees shall be employees of the city and subject to the city's personnel policies and
classifications unless otherwise provided by ordinance. In making hiring decisions, the budget shall be considered and no appointment shall be made
which would exceed that budgeted amount. (Ord. 497, 8-20-2002)
2-2-11: DONATIONS:
Donations or gifts for the benefit of the recreation facilities shall be budgeted along with the other accounts and shall be used only for recreation purposes.
Money or other funds which are donated or given to the recreation board may be expended by the board only in accordance with the city budget process.
(Ord. 497, 8-20-2002)
2-2-12: BUDGET YEAR:
The recreation board shall have its recommended budget to the city of Rigby prior to August 1 of each year. The recommended budget shall be submitted
to the office of the mayor and copy also to the liaison between the city council and the recreation board. The recreation coordinator shall make himself
available to answer any questions that the city council may have in regards to the proposed budget. The actual fiscal year shall be that of the city. (Ord.
497, 8-20-2002)
2-2-13: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE:
Any aggrieved person may appeal from a decision of the Rigby recreation board to the city council of the city of Rigby. Said appeal shall be made in writing
within ten (10) days to the Rigby city clerk who shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next meeting. The appeal shall state the person or organization
appealing and contain a brief narrative of the reasons for appeal.
If the decision appealed from was made by the city council, the appeal shall be to the council for reconsideration in the manner set forth in this section.
(Ord. 497, 8-20-2002)
Chapter 3
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
2-3-1: DECLARATION OF PUBLIC BENEFIT:
Providing transportation facilities for the public use is hereby declared to be a public benefit, use and purpose which enhances the value and quality of life
in that it materially assists in responsible development. (Ord. 516, 1-4-2005)
2-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a different meaning plainly is required in this chapter:
CITY COUNCIL: The legislative body of the various cities.
COMMISSION: The board of county commissioners for Jefferson County, Idaho.
MAYOR: The elected chief municipal officer of the various cities.
NONPARTISAN: Not controlled or influenced by any single political party.
TRANSPORTATION: Not only vehicular traffic, but pedestrian, bicycle, aircraft and public transportation. Specifically excluded are snowmobiles or any off
road vehicles or mechanized skateboard and similar vehicles.
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION: The group of commission members who are appointed by the mayor and city council of the cities and Jefferson
County commissioners to be on the Rigby/Jefferson County transportation commission.
TRANSPORTATION CONCERNS: Includes both present and future transportation and traffic issues. (Ord. 516, 1-4-2005)
2-3-3: BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS; MEMBERS:
A. Meetings: There is hereby created a Rigby/Jefferson County transportation commission composed of fifteen (15) members. Rigby shall have a standing
member as the cognizant agency.
1. The remaining seven (7) incorporated cities shall select a representative for the transportation commission from either their respective city council or
planning and zoning commission.
2. Jefferson central fire district shall have its fire chief as a member.
3. There are two (2) organized law enforcement departments, Jefferson County sheriff's department and Rigby police department. Both shall appoint
their own representative.
4. Similarly, cities shall appoint a public works director to represent the cities along with the county road and bridge supervisor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 24/201
5. A layperson shall also be appointed - one from the incorporated areas and one from without.
6. There are three (3) school districts within Jefferson County and Jefferson County school district 251 shall choose a representative and shall be
responsible for keeping other school districts apprised of the works of the transportation commission.
7. The combined body shall choose one developer to represent construction.
8. The chamber of commerce shall have a representative.
9. The Jefferson County planning and zoning shall have a representative.
10. There shall also be two (2) individuals representing business.
11. City of Rigby planning and zoning shall have a representative.
B. Quorum; Appointment: Any eight (8) members of the transportation commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business.
Appointment to the transportation commission shall be made solely upon the ability of such appointees to serve the interests of the people, without
regard to sex, age, race, nationality, religion, disability or political affiliation. A member of any city council shall not be one of the appointed members of
the transportation commission, but each year the council may appoint one of its members to be a liaison to the transportation commission, without
voting rights.
C. Purpose For Involvement:
1. Transportation plans and programs typically benefit from an effective community involvement effort. Community involvement legitimizes a plan or
program as issues and concerns are acknowledged, and community members gain a sense of participation and accomplishment, regardless of
whether they agree with the ultimate outcome of the process.
2. Participation by community members provides a more comprehensive decision making process than technical staff alone can achieve. Effective
public involvement requires educating the citizens regarding transportation needs and the benefits and costs of potential alternatives. Informed
citizens can better assist elected officials in reaching sound decisions supported by the community. Thus, community members become a part of the
planning process as well as the solution.
3. Individual projects are more likely to be accepted and supported by the community if community members are given the opportunity to have an
active role in shaping the decisions embodied in a plan or program. This can have essential time and cost savings when limited transportation
resources and numerous transportation problems exist. (Ord. 518-2005, 3-15-2005)
2-3-4: TERM OF OFFICE:
The initial appointment of transportation commission members shall be for terms of one, two (2), three (3), four (4), and five (5) years respectively.
Subsequent appointments shall be made for five (5) years from the date of appointment, and until their successors are appointed. Each transportation
commission member may serve no more than two (2) full terms of office. Terms shall run from January 1 until December 31. On the initial term of office for
2005, a year shall be from the date of passage until December 31, 2005.
The officers of the transportation commission shall consist of a president and vice president to be selected by the transportation commission from among
its members, to serve as such officers for one year; provided that the president of the transportation commission shall be ineligible to succeed himself for
consecutive terms of office. The transportation commission shall also designate a secretary who need not be a member of the transportation commission.
The secretary shall keep correct minutes of the proceedings of the transportation commission (including, but not limited to, any discussions regarding bills
or the encumbrance of funds), shall have custody of the records of the transportation commission, except those in the custody of the city or county, and
shall perform all other duties which are provided or directed by the transportation commission. The president shall be the executive officer of the
transportation commission and shall preside at all meetings, and perform all the duties which are provided and are necessary by this chapter. The vice
president shall act in the absence of the president and shall perform all other duties. The president shall not vote except in case of a tie. (Ord. 516, 1-4-
2005)
2-3-5: CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT:
The traffic commission is committed to developing and maintaining an effective citizen participation process. In order to accomplish this commitment, the
public involvement process should be guided by the following principles:
A. It is the right and responsibility of citizens to be involved in the transportation planning process.
B. Citizens should be educated about the needs and issues and encouraged to participate in finding solutions.
C. Early and timely involvement of citizens is necessary to build community agreement on the needs and solutions before alternatives are proposed.
D. Agreement on the final product is a desirable goal, but agreement does not mean one hundred percent (100%) unanimity by all parties. Negotiation and
compromise are essential ingredients to building agreement.
E. The process by which a decision is reached is just as important as the product. Citizens should be satisfied with the opportunity to be significantly
involved.
F. After decisions are made, actions should follow to maintain confidence in the community involvement process.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 25/201
G. The process of community involvement is not a onetime step. The manner in which the public is involved may change as the process progresses. (Ord.
516, 1-4-2005)
2-3-6: COMPENSATION:
Pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-210, all members and the officers thereof shall serve without salary or compensation, but their actual and necessary
expenses shall be shared equally by the cities and county. The cities and county shall provide the necessary and suitable equipment and supplies to
enable the transportation commission to properly transact and attend to its business. The transportation commission shall have authority to contract for
professional input not to exceed any budget. (Ord. 516, 1-4-2005)
2-3-7: VACANCIES:
The transportation commission shall report all vacancies to the appropriate council or commission within five (5) working days. All such appointments shall
be made in the same manner as appointments are originally made. Appointments to complete an unexpired term shall be for the remainder of the term
only. Any transportation commission member may be removed by the city councils or commission and may be removed in such manner as they were
appointed, as per Idaho Code section 50-210.
ADA stipulates involving the community, particularly those with disabilities, in the development and improvement of services including transit routes, rail
transit planning, highway planning (sidewalks, ramps, street crossings and parking) as well as facility planning. (Ord. 516, 1-4-2005)
2-3-8: MEETINGS:
The transportation commission shall meet at least once per month unless required to meet more frequently. One meeting shall be designated as the
annual meeting. The purpose of the annual meetings is to elect the officers of the transportation commission, to establish a regular meeting date, and to
review, amend, repeal or adopt bylaws, policies and procedures. Special meetings may be held from time to time as the transportation commission may
determine, but written notice thereof shall be given to the members at least two (2) days prior to the day of the meeting. A quorum shall consist of the eight
(8) voting members but a smaller number may adjourn. All meetings are to be held pursuant to the open meeting law and shall be in such a facility as to
accommodate those individuals who may suffer from disabilities. The secretary shall be responsible for preparing an agenda in a timely manner, and
provide notice thereof to the cities and county. The meetings shall occur at a set date and time each month as set by resolution. The transportation
commission shall report at least once each year, or more frequently at the council's and commission's discretion.
The state of Idaho has specific laws defining "open meetings" under Idaho Code 67-2340 through 67-2347. The law states "...it is the policy of this State
that the formation of public policy is public business and shall not be conducted in secret". Paragraph 67-2342 states "all meetings of a government body
of a public agency shall be open to the public and all persons shall be permitted to attend any meeting except otherwise provided by this act".
The transportation commission can be grouped into four (4) general categories: a) existing transportation conditions; b) assumptions about land use,
population and employment growth, travel patterns, roadway capacity and funding to establish future transportation conditions; c) projected transportation
conditions and needs; d) project selection and prioritization to meet the projected needs. All four (4) categories of the transportation commission are
subject to public participation and comment. (Ord. 516, 1-4-2005)
2-3-9: ANNUAL APPROPRIATIONS:
The transportation commission shall prepare and adopt an annual budget, stating anticipated revenues and expenditures, indicating what support and
maintenance of the various entities under the control of the transportation commission will be required for review and approval by the city councils and
commission for the ensuing year. The budget shall be prepared in a timely manner so that such budget may be incorporated in the municipal budgeting
procedures.
The costs associated with the transportation commission shall be prorated by population multiplied by the number of members of the transportation
commission. The fire district and school district shall be responsible for the average cost.
All funds shall be in the custody of the Rigby city treasurer or clerk unless otherwise provided by city or county ordinance, and shall be used only for
transportation commission purposes. The transportation commission shall have control of the expenditures. Money shall be paid for transportation
commission related purposes, only upon properly authenticated vouchers of the transportation commission. The transportation commission shall not make
expenditures or incur indebtedness in any year in excess of monies appropriated by the city. The transportation commission shall assist in any auditing as
is required by the city or county and commission and make available any information it may have.
Notice of the budget hearing shall be posted at least ten (10) days prior to the date of said meeting in at least one conspicuous place in each city and
county facility, a copy of the notice shall also be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the review by the transportation
commission. The place, hour and day of such hearing shall be specified in such notice as well as the place where such budget may be examined prior to
such hearing. A full and complete copy of the proposed request to the city council and commission for the budget is to be made available to the public. The
notice shall be published two (2) times before the hearing in the "Jefferson Star". (Ord. 516, 1-4-2005)
2-3-10: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION:
In addition to any powers provided by law, the transportation commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To establish bylaws and a mission statement for its own governance;
B. To study the economic and physical conditions and problems with the maintenance, operation, management, control and use of the various roads,
bridges and interchanges within the city and county;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 26/201
C. To propose and promulgate rules and regulations for the control and regulation of the use of the roads giving consideration to engineering data and all
rules and regulations used or relied upon by the Idaho department of transportation;
D. To represent the public interest in making suggestions and recommendations for the development, use and expansion of needed roads, bike or walk
ways;
E. To suggest and recommend such rules and regulations necessary and desirable to carry out the intent of this chapter and improve and correlate the
problems of governmental administration of transportation within the city and county;
F. To propose plans, recommendations and suggestions for the future growth, development and regulation of the transportation facilities within the city and
county;
G. To maintain legal records of all the transportation commission's business; to exercise such other powers not inconsistent with law, necessary for orderly
and efficient management;
H. With the approval of the city or commission if outside the city, the transportation commission shall have the following authority: 1) to require input of the
transportation commission prior to action on any subdivision or where a new business will impact the traffic flow by the addition of ten (10) or more
jobs; 2) to accept or decline gifts of money or personal property in accordance with policy and under such terms as may be a condition of the gift.
All rules and regulations formulated, proposed and promulgated by the transportation commission shall be approved and ratified by the councils and
commission and after such approval and ratification shall have the force and effect of an ordinance. All rules and regulations of the transportation
commission now in effect shall remain in full force and effect until amended, altered or repealed. Any surplus property found shall be sold at public
auction consistent with city practices and the revenue shared equally between city and county. Any real property shall be sold pursuant to Idaho Code
section 50-1401 et seq., as amended. (Ord. 516, 1-4-2005)
2-3-11: ACCESS TO INFORMATION:
The transportation commission shall have access to planning and zoning information and shall receive cooperation from the public works department.
Similarly, the transportation commission shall receive input from law enforcement prior to rendering an opinion. (Ord. 516, 1-4-2005)
2-3-12: BUDGET YEAR:
The transportation commission shall have its recommended budget to the public entities prior to August 1 of each year. The recommended budget shall be
submitted to the office of the mayor and county commissioners and a copy to the liaison between the city council and the transportation commission. The
actual fiscal year shall be that of the cities, i.e., October 1 of each year through September 30 of each year. (Ord. 516, 1-4-2005)
2-3-13: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE:
Any aggrieved person may appeal from a decision of the transportation commission to a joint city-county board. Said appeal shall be made in writing within
ten (10) days to the Rigby city clerk who shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next meeting. The appeal shall state the person or organization
appealing and contain a brief narrative of the reasons for appeal.
If the decision appealed from was made by the joint action, the appeal shall be to the council for reconsideration in the manner set forth in this section.
(Ord. 516, 1-4-2005)
Chapter 4
PARKS AND RODEO DEPARTMENT AND PARKS AND RODEO COMMITTEE
2-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DIVISION:
The parks and rodeo department is hereby established as an administrative division of the city of Rigby, "hereinafter `city'". (Ord. 2012-555, 5-1-2012)
2-4-2: MANAGEMENT1:
The parks and rodeo department shall be managed by the parks and rodeo director, under the supervision and control of the mayor and council. The
director may be compensated for services as approved by the mayor. The director shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by a vote of at
least four (4) members of the council. The director may be removed by the mayor, with or without cause, subject to a confirming vote of at least four (4)
members of the council, or by the council on its own initiative upon a unanimous vote thereof. (Ord. 2012-555, 5-1-2012)
2-4-3: DUTIES:
The department shall have the following duties:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 27/201
A. The parks and rodeo director shall act as chair of the parks and rodeo executive committee.
B. The parks and rodeo director shall supervise the maintenance, operation and control of the city rodeo grounds, horse barns and surrounding fields
owned by the city, excluding adjoining athletic ball field and memorial park.
C. The parks and rodeo director shall establish and administer all budgets for the operation of the department and collection of all revenues accruing to the
city on account of facilities or lands owned by the city. (Ord. 2012-555, 5-1-2012)
2-4-4: FINANCIAL RECORDS:
The financial records and transactions of the parks and rodeo committee shall be provided to the city for inclusion in the annual audit of the city. (Ord.
2012-555, 5-1-2012)
2-4-5: PARKS AND RODEO EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of the parks and rodeo executive committee shall be to assist in the management of the city owned rodeo grounds; organize and
program all rodeo related activities involving general public participation in a comprehensive and diversified program for the betterment of the rodeo
grounds and facilities.
B. Appointment: The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint a parks and rodeo executive committee of five (5) members.
C. Terms: Executive committee members appointed shall serve terms of three (3) years. Terms for the first year of operation shall be determined by
random lot drawing with two (2) members serving two (2) year terms and three (3) years thereafter. Terms shall expire on December 31 of the
appointed term.
D. Vacancies: The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint a qualified person to fill the unexpired term of the committee member in the
event of a vacancy.
E. Compensation: Committee members shall serve without compensation, except that expenses for equipment, travel and supplies necessary for the
committee to transact its business shall be allowed by the council.
F. Organization: The committee shall elect a vice chair, secretary, and treasurer as provided for in the committee rules and regulations.
G. Rules And Regulations: The committee shall adopt bylaws for governing. These rules and regulations shall be ratified by the city council and shall act
as the rules of the committee.
H. Duties: The committee shall work with the director of the parks and rodeo committee toward development of a comprehensive, balanced plan of
activities utilizing the rodeo grounds in conjunction with the adjoining county owned fairgrounds. The committee shall have the authority to appoint
subcommittee members to assist in the various activities involved in the operation of the rodeo grounds and facilities. At least one member for the
executive committee shall serve on any subcommittee. Subcommittee members shall be confirmed with at least four (4) members of the executive
committee. Said appointment of subcommittee members need not be confirmed by the mayor or city council. (Ord. 2012-555, 5-1-2012)
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
3-1-1: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this Code shall be made in writing to the City Clerk, unless otherwise specifically provided by law.
Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be
paid; and each application shall contain such additional information as may be required by the issuing official. (1999 Code)
3-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this Code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or establishment or for doing business or engaging
in any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if, by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he
holds himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business or occupation in the City. (1999 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 28/201
3-1-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept on file by the City Clerk. (1999 Code)
3-1-4: SIGNATURES:
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk in absence of any provision to the contrary. (1999 Code)
3-1-5: INSPECTIONS OR INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where laws of the City necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such
permit or license, the City Clerk shall refer such application to the proper officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time of
such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10)
days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. For the protection of health, the Public Works Director, or such other person as he may assign, shall
make or cause to be made any such inspections relative to the construction of buildings or other structures. All other investigations, except where
otherwise provided, shall be made by the Chief of Police or by some other officer designated by the Mayor. (1999 Code)
3-1-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the calendar year of the City, where no provision to the contrary is made. (1999 Code)
3-1-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no permit shall be issued for any thing or act if the premises and building to be used for the
purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the City. (1999 Code)
3-1-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed business or occupation or of any permitted act may be changed, provided ten
(10) days' notice thereof is given to the City Clerk; provided, the building requirements of this Code are complied with. (1999 Code)
3-1-9: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact. (1999 Code)
3-1-10: POSTING OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the City to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such
business at all times. (1999 Code)
3-1-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; HEARING:
Any license or permit, for a limited time, may be revoked by the Mayor and City Council during the life of such license or permit for the violation by the
licensee or permittee of any provision relating to the license or permit, the subject of the license or permit, or the premises occupied; such revocation may
be in addition to any fine imposed. The Mayor and the City Council shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of business, the closing of the
premises, and the suspension of any business license or permit for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days.
A. Hearing: Within ten (10) days after the City officials have so acted, the Mayor shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the
license or permit should be revoked.
B. Notice Of Hearing: Notice of hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint
and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the licensee or permittee by certified mail at his last known address or personally served
at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.
C. Hearing Procedures: At the hearing, the licensee or permittee shall be permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine
witnesses. The Mayor shall preside and shall render the decision and recommendation.
D. Causes For Revocation: Business licenses and permits issued under the ordinances of the City, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the
Mayor and City Council after notice and hearing as provided in subsections B and C of this Section for any of the following causes:
1. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the license or permit;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 29/201
2. Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions or State law relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or
permit, or the premises occupied;
3. Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
4. Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the City.
5. Refusal to permit an inspection or investigation or any interference with a duly authorized City officer or employee while in the performance of his
duties in making such inspections, as provided in this Code. (1999 Code)
3-1-12: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A. Right To Appeal: Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the City to issue a license or permit or by the revocation of a license or permit shall have the
right to appeal the City's decision to the City Council. Such appeal shall be requested by submitting a written request to the Mayor within five (5) days
of the action of the City which is appealed.
B. Council Consideration: The City Council shall consider the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting, at which time the applicant shall be entitled to
present his appeal orally or in writing. The Council shall act on the appeal within seven (7) days of the hearing and shall either uphold the action of the
City or shall direct the issuance of a license or permit which the City has denied or the reissuance of a license or permit which the City had revoked.
(1999 Code)
Chapter 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
ARTICLE A. BEER SALES
3-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
BEER: Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, malt, and/or other ingredients in drinkable water.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, copartnership, association, corporation, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of beer to the consumer. (1980 Code § 5.2.1; amd. 1999 Code)
3-2A-2: GENERAL STATEMENT OF LAW:
Beer containing not more than six percent (6%) of alcohol by weight may be sold and distributed in the City and possessed therein in the manner and
under the conditions prescribed in this article and not otherwise. It shall be unlawful to sell, dispose of or possess for the purpose of sale, beer of any kind
or character of an alcoholic content greater than in this article set forth, or in any manner not permitted herein. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
3-2A-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; CONDITIONS; INVESTIGATION:
A. License Required; Application: Before any retailer shall sell, dispose of or possess for the purpose of sale any beer under the provisions of this article,
he shall first apply in writing to the City Clerk, for a license fee hereinafter described.
B. Conditions For Issuance: Upon such application and payment of the fee prescribed, the City Clerk shall issue such license; provided, that the Clerk shall
not issue any license to one not a citizen of the United States, a citizen of the State, and a bona fide resident of the City. Provided, further, said license
shall be placed in a conspicuous place on the premises wherein beer is sold; and provided further, that the City Clerk shall not issue any license until
such license has been approved by the City Council at its regular meeting date. Provided, further, that it is hereby declared unlawful for any person to
sell beer without first having acquired the same from some bona fide dealer who is licensed under the laws of the State to wholesale beer to patrons
duly licensed within the State. (Ord. 392, 1-3-1984)
C. License Term; Issuance Or Denial; Hearing On Revocation: All licenses shall be granted by the Mayor and City Council for a twelve (12) month period,
beginning October 1 and ending September 30. A full year's license fee shall be collected after October 1. The City Council shall grant or deny the
application within thirty (30) days of the time it is filed with the City Clerk. Prior to any revocation or suspension, the licensee shall be afforded a hearing
according to Idaho Code section 23-1016. Whenever the Mayor and City Council deny an application, they shall specify in writing:
1. The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
2. The reason for the denial; and
3. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal thereof. (Ord., 10-24-2012, eff. retroactive to 10-1-2012)
D. Record Of Proceedings: In all cases where the City Council is considering applications for licenses, transfers, or renewals thereof, a transcribable,
verbatim record of the proceedings shall be made. If the applicant for a license, transfer or renewal is denied, a transcribable, verbatim record of the
proceedings shall be kept for a period of not less than six (6) months after a final decision on the matter. Upon written request and within the time
period provided for retention of the record, any person may have the record transcribed at his expense. The City Council shall also provide for the
keeping of the minutes of the proceedings. Minutes shall be retained indefinitely or as otherwise provided by law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 30/201
E. Investigation; Recommendation Of Police Chief: No license shall be granted hereunder until there has been an investigation by the Police Department
of all applicants hereunder. After investigation, the applications will be forwarded to the City Council with a recommendation from the Chief of Police. If
the Chief of Police recommends that an application be denied, he shall state in writing:
1. The statutes or ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
2. The reason for denial; and
3. The action, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal thereof. (Ord. 392, 1-3-1984)
3-2A-4: LICENSE FEE:
A. Fees Established: The license issued under this article shall carry a license fee as follows:
1. Bottled Beer Only: The City Clerk shall receive from any person who intends to sell carryout bottled beer only, the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per
year.
2. Bottled And Draft Beer: Wherein bottled and draft beer are sold, or draft beer only, the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year shall be
received by the Clerk.
3. Modification And Proration Of Fees: These fees may be modified by the City Council. Effective January 1, 2013, the above fees shall be prorated for
a nine (9) month period ending September 30, 2013.
B. Expiration Date: Said licenses shall all expire on September 30 in the year issued. Retail licenses for the selling of beer in the City shall be dated from
the first of the year in which issued. (Ord., 10-24-2012, eff. retroactive to 10-1-2012)
3-2A-5: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
No license herein issued shall be transferable, and the place where beer is sold shall be described with common certainty giving the name of the building,
street, or other pertinent information. (Ord. 420, 10-1-1991)
3-2A-6: REFUSAL OF LICENSE; APPEAL:
The City Council hereby reserves the right to refuse any and all applications, and its actions shall be final and conclusive. However, if any person making
application for a license to sell beer is refused a license on the grounds that he is guilty of an offense that, to the City Clerk or the City Council, is
detrimental to the public peace and quiet of the City, the aggrieved person may make application to the District Court of the district in which the City is
located for a review of the case, and for a final disposition of the matter. (1980 Code § 5.2.7)
3-2A-7: HOURS OF SALE:
A. Beer: The hours that beer, other than packaged beer, can be sold by any licensee shall be from ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. (Ord.
2016-586, 1-5-2017)
B. Packaged Beer: It shall be unlawful to sell, dispense, or give away packaged beer to be consumed off premises between the hours of one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., inclusive. Packaged beer to be consumed off premises may be sold between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and one o'clock
(1:00) A.M. Beer sold to be consumed on the premises shall be subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section. (Ord. 420, 10-1-1991)
C. Certain Holidays: No beer shall be served on Christmas Day, Memorial Day and Thanksgiving Day. (Ord. 2016-586, 1-5-2017)
3-2A-8: POSSESSION IN PARKS PROHIBITED:
A. Prohibited Sale: It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or otherwise, to sell, deliver, give away or have in his possession for the purpose
of selling or giving away, any beer or other intoxicant, within any public park, public building or public street of the City; provided, that this section shall
not apply to the orderly stocks of beer in the hands of dealers if, and provided further that, said dealers and licensees are not attempting to violate any
of the provisions of this article or any section thereof.
B. Exception: A permit to sell beer only may be granted upon approval of the City Council, for the sale of beer to be consumed in a specified area upon the
Rigby Rodeo grounds during special events. Beer possessed or consumed outside the specified area will be deemed prohibited, and individuals
possessing or consuming it will be charged with the infraction set forth in section 3-2A-12 of this article. Applicants must comply with laws and
regulations set forth by the Idaho State Liquor Board. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
3-2A-9: SALE TO MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer to any minor under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to any person in a state of intoxication. (1980 Code
§ 5.2.8; amd. 1999 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 31/201
3-2A-10: OBSTRUCTING VIEW OF SALE:
No retailer shall serve or sell beer behind screens, curtains, booths or any other device that will obstruct the public view in serving or sale of beer. (1980
Code § 5.2.9)
3-2A-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE; APPEAL:
A. Council Authority: If any licensee who shall have in his possession a license issued by the City shall thereafter be convicted of the violation of any law of
the State or ordinance of the City relative to the illegal selling of beer or other intoxicants or the unlawful possession of beer or such other intoxicants,
then the Mayor and City Council, in their discretion, after notice and hearing as provided in subsection 3-2A-3C of this article, shall revoke the license
of any such licensee, until such time as it appears wise to reissue the same. (1980 Code § 5.2.10; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Appeal: Any person who is aggrieved by the action of the City Council in suspending his license to sell or possess beer, and when notified by the City
Clerk that such action has been taken, said licensee may appeal his case and have the same reviewed by the District Court as provided by statute in
such cases. (1980 Code § 5.2.11)
3-2A-12: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction for a first offense with a one hundred dollar ($100.00) penalty, an
infraction with a two hundred dollar ($200.00) penalty for a second offense, and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor upon conviction of a third offense within a
three (3) year period, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
ARTICLE B. LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
3-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases used in this article, the definition of which is not herein given, shall be given the ordinary and commonly understood and accepted
meaning. The following words and phrases used in this article shall be given the following interpretations:
BARTENDER: Any person, whether agent, servant, employee, licensee, or in any other capacity, who pours, mixes, prepares, serves or delivers any liquor
by the drink upon licensed premises.
INTERDICTED PERSON: A person to whom the sale of liquor is prohibited under the laws of the state of Idaho.
LICENSE: A license issued by the city council of the city of Rigby to a qualified person, under which it shall be lawful for the licensee to sell and dispense
liquor by the drink at retail, as provided by this article.
LICENSEE: The person to whom a license is issued under the provisions of this article and/or as provided in Idaho Code section 23-902 et seq.
LIQUOR: All kinds of liquor sold by and in the state liquor store of the state of Idaho.
PERSON: Every individual, partnership, corporation, organization, or association holding a retail liquor license, whether conducting the business singularly
or collectively.
PREMISES: The building and contiguous property owned, or leased or used under a government permit by a licensee as part of the business
establishment in the business of sale of liquor by the drink at retail, which property is improved to include decks, docks, boardwalks, lawns, gardens, golf
courses, ski resorts, courtyards, patios, poolside areas or similar improved appurtenances in which the sale of liquor by the drink at retail is authorized
under the provisions of law. (1980 Code § 5.3.1; amd. 1999 Code)
3-2B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
A. License Issuance To Qualified Persons: The city council, at regular or special meetings, may issue licenses to qualified applicants as herein provided,
whereby the licensee shall be authorized and permitted, in the city, to sell liquor by the drink at retail, and, upon the issuance of such license, the
licensee therein named shall be authorized to sell liquor at retail by the drink in the city, but only in accordance with the provisions of this article and
Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9, as may be amended. (1980 Code § 5.3.2)
B. Annual Fee: Each licensee licensed under the provisions of this article shall pay an annual license fee in advance to the city of three hundred seventy
five dollars ($375.00) per annum. Effective January 1, 2013, the above fees shall be prorated for a nine (9) month period ending September 30, 2013.
(Ord., 10-24-2012, eff. retroactive to 10-1-2012)
3-2B-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Each applicant for a license shall file with the city clerk an application in writing, verified by an affidavit, setting forth the following facts: (1980 Code § 5.3.4)
A. That such applicant is the lawful holder of a license issued by the director of law enforcement of the state pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code title
23, chapter 9, as amended. (1980 Code § 5.3.4; amd. 1999 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 32/201
B. Description of premises for which license is sought and its location, and the name of the owner of said premises.
C. The names and addresses of all persons who will have any financial interest in any business to be carried on in the licensed premises, whether such
interest results from open loans, mortgages, conditional sales contracts, silent partnerships, trusts, or any other basis than open trade accounts
incurred in the ordinary course of business, and the amounts of such interests.
D. The name and address of the applicant, which shall include all members of a partnership or association and the officers, members of the governing
board and ten (10) principal stockholders of a corporation.
E. If, during the period of any license issued hereunder, any change shall take place in any of the requirements of subsection A, B, C or D of this section,
the licensee shall forthwith make a verified report of such change to the city clerk. (1980 Code § 5.3.4)
3-2B-4: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION:
A. Investigation Authorized: Upon the receipt of an application for a license under this article, accompanied by the necessary license fee, the city council
may make such investigation of all matters pertaining thereto as it shall deem proper.
B. Council Determination: If the council shall determine that the contents of the application are true, that such applicant is qualified to receive a license,
that his premises are suitable for the carrying on of the intended business, and that the requirements of this article have been met and complied with, a
license shall issue; otherwise, the application shall be denied and license fee refunded. (1980 Code § 5.3.5)
3-2B-5: FORM AND CONTENTS OF LICENSE; TERM; POSTING:
A. Contents Of Application: Every license issued under the provisions of this article shall set forth the name of the person to whom issued, the location by
street and number, or other definite designation, of the premises. If issued to a partnership, the names of the persons constituting the partnership shall
be therein set forth; if issued to a corporation or association, the names of the principal officers and the governing board shall be set forth therein.
B. License Conditions:
1. Such license shall be signed by the licensee and shall be nontransferable.
2. Every license issued under the provisions of this article is separate and distinct and no person except the licensee therein named shall exercise any
of the privileges granted thereunder and all licenses are applicable only to premises in respect to which they have been issued.
3. No person shall be granted more than one license in any one year.
4. No partnership, association or corporation holding a license under this article shall have as a member, officer or stockholder any person who has a
financial interest of any kind in, or is a member of, another partnership or association or an officer of another corporation holding a license in the city
for the same year. (1980 Code § 5.3.6)
C. License Term: All licenses shall expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on September 30 of the year following for which issued. (Ord., 10-24-2012, eff.
retroactive to 10-1-2012)
D. Posting Of License: Such license shall at all times be kept posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises. (1980 Code § 5.3.6)
3-2B-6: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
A. Licenses Not Issued To Certain Persons: No license shall be issued to:
1. An individual who is not a citizen of the United States or who has not been a bona fide resident of the state for at least one year next preceding the
granting of such license; or to a partnership unless all members are citizens of the United States and have been residents of the state for at least one
year; or to a corporation or association unless the same is organized under the laws of the state or qualified under the principal officers, and
members of the governing board are citizens of the United States and residents of the state for at least one year.
2. Any person, or any one of its members, officers, or governing board, who has been convicted of any violation of the laws of the United States, the
state of Idaho, or any other state of the United States relating to the importation, transportation, manufacture or sale of liquor; or who has been
convicted of any felony, or who has paid any fine or completed any sentence of confinement for any felony within five (5) years prior to the date of
making application for a license.
3. A person who is engaged in the operation or interested therein, of any house or place for the purpose of prostitution or who has been convicted of
any crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency or morality.
4. A person whose license issued under this article has been revoked; an individual who was a member of a partnership or association which was a
licensee under this article and whose license has been revoked; an individual who was an officer, member of the governing board or one of the ten
(10) principal stockholders of a corporation which was a licensee under this article and whose license was revoked; a corporation, one of whose
officers, members of the governing board or ten (10) principal stockholders was a licensee under this article and whose license has been revoked;
any association or partnership, one of whose members was a member of a partnership or association licensed under the provisions of this article and
whose license has been revoked; a corporation, one of whose officers, members of the governing board, or ten (10) principal stockholders was a
member of a partnership or association licensed under the provisions of this article and whose license was revoked.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 33/201
5. Any officer or employee of the state of Idaho, counties or municipalities of the state.
6. Any officer, agent or employee of any distillery, winery, brewery, or any wholesaler, or jobber of liquor or malt beverages.
7. A person who does not hold a retail beer license issued under the laws of the state.
8. A person licensed as a bartender under this article and whose permit as bartender has been revoked.
9. A person not of good moral character.
B. Disqualification Of Licensee; Revocation Of License: Any license held by any licensee disqualified under the provisions of this section from being issued
a license, shall forthwith be revoked by the city council. (1980 Code § 5.3.7)
3-2B-7: BARTENDERS; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord., 10-24-2012, eff. retroactive to 10-1-2012)
3-2B-8: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:
All licensed premises shall be maintained in a sanitary condition according to the requirements of Idaho Code title 39, chapter 16, as amended. (1980
Code § 5.3.8)
3-2B-9: PREMISES OPEN TO INSPECTION:
A. Visibility Of Premises:
1. Obstructing Front Of Premises: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any type of obstruction which would prohibit or obscure free
examination of the licensed premises from the front above four feet six inches (4'6") above the sidewalk, except the door constituting said front
entrance.
2. Lighting Of Exterior Approaches: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to prohibit or obscure the free examination of the licensed premises by the
failure to have said licensed premises lighted so as to make the whole thereof clearly visible from the exterior approaches to said licensed premises.
3. Covering Windows: It shall also be unlawful to have, permit or suffer any type of painting or decoration, venetian blind, or any other type of covering
upon or about the windows of licensed premises which would in any way obscure an examination of the licensed premises from the front entrance at
all times, whether during the hours of sale of liquor or during the hours when liquor cannot be sold.
B. Right Of Entry By Police: Any duly authorized police officer of the City shall have the right at any time to make an examination of the premises of any
licensee to ascertain whether the laws of the State and the ordinances of the City are being complied with, and it shall be unlawful to refuse such officer
the right of admittance to said premises. (1980 Code § 5.3.11)
3-2B-10: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Distance From Schools And Churches: No license shall be issued for any premises in any neighborhood which is predominantly residential, or within
three hundred feet (300') of any public school, church, or any other place of worship, measured in a straight line to the nearest entrance to the licensed
premises; provided, that this limitation shall not apply to any duly licensed premises that at the time of licensing did not come within the restricted area
but subsequent to licensing came therein.
B. Unanimous Council Approval Required: No premises shall be licensed under this article from which the former occupant has been evicted for the
reason or purpose of licensing said premises except upon the unanimous vote of the City Council approving the issuance of the license. (1980 Code
§ 5.3.9)
3-2B-11: HOURS OF SALE:
No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, or given away upon any licensed premises during the following hours:
A. Certain Holidays: No liquor shall be served on Christmas Day, Memorial Day and Thanksgiving Day.
B. Other Days: On any day between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. (Ord. 2016-586, 1-5-2017)
3-2B-12: UNDERAGE PERSONS; RESTRICTIONS:
A. Underage Person Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to enter, remain in, or loiter in or about any
premises or place licensed for the sale of liquor by the drink at retail; and it shall also be unlawful for any licensee, or any person in charge of said
licensed premises, either expressly or impliedly, or without the consent of said licensee, or any person on duty while employed by the licensee, to
permit or allow any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to enter in, remain in, or loiter in or about such licensed premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 34/201
B. Posting Of Signs Required:
1. Each licensee is required to, and it shall be unlawful for such licensee not to, post signs at each entrance to said licensed premises, prohibiting
persons under the age of twenty one (21) years from entering, remaining in, or loitering in such licensed premises. The wording of said signs shall be
as follows:
Admittance of persons under twenty one (21) prohibited by law.
2. Such signs shall be of a size sufficient to accommodate the foregoing words in lettering at least one inch (1") in height and shall be painted or
stenciled in the language and in the size specified above on the door or doors to the licensed premises, and shall be of such color and style as to be
clearly visible and legible from the exterior approaches to said licensed premises to which said restrictions are applicable.
C. Restaurants Excepted: Nothing in this section pertaining to the prohibition of persons under twenty one (21) years from entering, remaining in, or
loitering in or about the licensed premises shall be applicable to a licensee who has filed his sworn statement with the Director of Law Enforcement of
the State claiming his premises constitute and are operated as a restaurant and desire that the restrictions of this section shall not apply to the rest of
said premises and have been so classified by the Director of Law Enforcement of the State. (1980 Code § 5.3.13; amd. 1999 Code)
D. Purchase By Unqualified Person: Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or other person, who knowingly misrepresents his or her
qualifications for the purpose of obtaining liquor from such licensee shall be equally guilty with such licensee and shall, upon conviction thereof, be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (1980 Code § 5.3.15; amd. 1999 Code)
3-2B-13: SALES TO CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED:
No licensee or his employed agents, servants, or bartenders shall sell, deliver or give away, or cause or permit to be sold, delivered, or given away any
liquor to:
A. Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years;
B. Any person actually, apparently or obviously intoxicated;
C. A habitual drunkard;
D. An interdicted person. (1980 Code § 5.3.14; amd. 1999 Code)
3-2B-14: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Council Authority; Hearing; Notice: The right shall be, and it shall remain at all times, vested in the city council to revoke or cancel the license of any
person licensed hereunder for any violation of this article; and upon verified complaint filed with the city council, the city council shall, by written notice,
cause such alleged offender to appear before the council, and be heard upon such complaint. A copy of such complaint shall be served with such
notice, and the day and hour for the hearing, which shall be at least five (5) days thence, shall be specified in such notice, and such hearing shall be
had in the council chambers, unless a different place shall be specified in such notice. If, at said hearing, upon the taking of evidence on behalf of the
city and such alleged offender, it shall appear to the city council that cause exists for the cancellation or revocation of such license, the same may be
canceled or revoked without further process of law, and upon such cancellation or revocation, no refund of any unexpired portion of the license fee
shall be made to the licensee. The fact of such revocation shall immediately be certified to the director of law enforcement of Idaho by the city clerk,
and, if any conviction is had hereunder in the municipal police court of the city, a certified copy of the judgment therein shall be immediately certified to
said state director.
B. Court To Notify State: The municipal police court in which a judgment of conviction against any licensee has been had shall forthwith certify a copy
thereof to the director of law enforcement of Idaho. (1980 Code § 5.3.16; amd. 1999 Code)
3-2B-15: PENALTY:
Any violations of the provisions of this article, the penalty for which is not, by Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9, made an indictable misdemeanor or felony
shall be unlawful; and any person violating such provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor hereunder and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1980 Code § 5.3.17; amd. 1999 Code)
ARTICLE C. WINE SALES
3-2C-1: SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This Article shall be known and cited as the RIGBY CITY WINE ORDINANCE. The purpose of this Article is to provide for the issuance of wine licenses
and licensing fees; to provide regulations; and to establish procedures for renewal, suspension, revocation or termination of such licenses. (Ord. 415, 3-
25-1992)
3-2C-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 35/201
All words and phrases used in this Article, the definitions of which are not herein given, shall be given their ordinary, commonly understood and accepted
meanings. The following words and phrases used in this Article shall be given the following interpretations:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, copartnership, association, corporation or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
PREMISES: A building in which the retail sale of wine is authorized.
RETAIL WINE LICENSE: A license authorizing a person to sell wine at retail for consumption off the licensed premises.
RETAILER: A person to whom a retail wine license has been issued.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than sixteen percent (16%) alcohol by volume obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar
content of fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar whether or not the other ingredients are added. (Ord. 415, 3-25-1992; amd. 1999 Code)
3-2C-3: STATE LIQUOR DISPENSARY; EXCEPTION:
Nothing contained in this Article shall prohibit the State Liquor Dispensary from acting pursuant to the Idaho Alcoholic Beverages Act1. (Ord. 415, 3-25-
1992; amd. 1999 Code)
3-2C-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell wine at retail for consumption off the premises within the boundary of the City until a license is granted by the City
Council as provided by this Article. (Ord. 415, 3-25-1992)
3-2C-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Prior to the issuance of a license, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk an application, in writing, signed by the applicant and containing information
and statements relative to the applicant and the premises where wine is to be sold. The application shall be verified by the affidavit of the applicant before
a person authorized to administer oaths.
A. Contents Of Application: In addition to setting forth the qualifications required by other provisions of this article, the applicant must show:
1. A detailed description of the premises for which a license is sought, its location and street address.
2. The names and addresses of all persons who will have any financial interest in any business to be carried on in or upon the licensed premises,
whether such interest results from open loans, mortgages, conditional sales contracts, trusts or any other basis other than open trade accounts
incurred in the ordinary course of business, and the amounts of such interest.
3. If the premises to be licensed are not owned by the applicant, then a certified copy of the lease by which he will occupy the premises showing that
the owner consents to the sale of wine on such premises.
4. The name and address of the applicant which shall include all members of a partnership or association, or the officers and members of the
governing board and the principal stockholders of a corporation.
B. Licensee To Report Changes To Clerk: If, during the period of any license issued hereunder, any change shall take place in any of the requirements of
this section, the licensee shall forthwith make a verified report of such change to the city clerk. (Ord. 415, 3-25-1992)
C. False Statements; Penalty: If any false statement is made in any part of an application, or any subsequent report, the applicant, or applicants, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 415, 3-25-
1992; amd. 1999 Code)
D. Payment Of License Fee: Each application shall be accompanied by the required license fee which shall be returned to the applicant if the city council
refuses to issue the license. (Ord. 415, 3-25-1992)
3-2C-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Review And Consideration By Council And Police: The city council shall duly consider and evaluate all new applications and renewal applications for a
license to sell wine at retail, and after so evaluating shall determine to grant or deny each application in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Prior to said determination, new applications shall be submitted to the police chief for review, and his assessment of each application shall be
considered by the city council prior to its decision.
B. Issuance Of License; Posting Required: If the city council so orders, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant, which license shall at all times
be prominently displayed in the place of business of the licensee and shall be issued only for the particular premises therein described.
C. Separate License For Each Premises: Separate licenses shall be required for each premises, except that retailers holding valid licenses for the retail
sale of liquor by the drink may sell wine for consumption on or off the licensed premises. (Ord. 415, 3-25-1992)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 36/201
3-2C-7: REASONS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
No license shall be issued to an applicant who, at the time of making application:
A. Is not twenty one (21) years of age or older if the applicant is an individual.
B. Is not the bona fide owner of such business.
C. Is not a citizen of the United States, or has not been a bona fide resident of the state for at least thirty (30) days preceding the date of the application for
a license; provided, that if the applicant is:
1. A partnership, all members shall be citizens of the United States, at least one of the partners shall have been a bona fide resident of the state for
thirty (30) days prior to the date of application and shall be twenty one (21) years of age or older. (Ord., 10-24-2012, eff. retroactive to 10-1-2012)
2. A corporation or association, it must be organized under the laws of the state or qualified under the laws of the state to do business in the state and
the person is, or will be, the manager of the corporation's or association's business of selling wine, be a citizen of the United States, and said
manager of the corporation or association shall have been a bona fide resident of the state for at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of application.
D. Within three (3) years immediately preceding the date of filing the application, the applicant has been convicted, or if the applicant is a partnership,
corporation or association and any of its employees, officers or members of the governing board or body, have been convicted or paid any fine, has
reviewed a deferred sentence or withheld judgment, has suffered the forfeiture of a bond for failure to appear, or has completed any sentence of
confinement for the violation of any law of the state, any other state, or of the United States regulating, governing or prohibiting the sale, manufacture,
transportation or possession of alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquors.
E. Within five (5) years immediately preceding the filing of the application the applicant has been convicted of any felony or paid any fine or completed any
sentence of confinement therefor within said time.
F. Within three (3) years next preceding the date of filing the application, the applicant has had any license provided for herein, or any license or permit
issued to the applicant pursuant to the laws of this state, or any other state, or of the United States, to sell, manufacture, transport or possess alcoholic
beverages or intoxicating liquors, revoked.
G. Has engaged in the operation, or has interest in, or any of its employees, officers or members of its governing board or body have been so engaged in
the operation, or have interest in, any house or place for the purpose of prostitution.
H. Was a member of a partnership or association whose license has been revoked by this county, the state, or any city and county of the state; was an
employee, officer or member of the governing board, or one of the principal stockholders of a corporation and whose license has been revoked by this
county, this state or any city and county of this state; is a partnership or association one of whose members was licensed and whose license was
revoked by this county, this state or any city and county of this state; is a corporation one of whose employees, officers or members of the governing
board, or one of the principal stockholders, whose license has been revoked by this county, this state or any city and county of this state; is a
corporation one of whose employees, officers or members of the governing board, or one of the principal stockholders was a member of a partnership
or association whose license was revoked by this county, the state or any city or county of this state; is a partnership or association one of whose
members was an officer, a member of the governing board, or one of the principal stockholders of a corporation whose license has been revoked; or is
a corporation one of whose employees, officers, or any members of a governing board, or one of the principal stockholders, was an employee, officer
or member of the governing board or one of the principal stockholders of a corporation whose license was revoked by this county, the state or any city
or county of this state. (Ord. 415, 3-25-1992)
3-2C-8: LICENSE FEES:
A. Fees Established: License fees, to be collected by the city clerk, and the city may alter or amend these rates by resolution of the city council, shall be as
follows:
For a retail wine license only, where wine is sold in closed containers, with no consumption on the premises - per annum $110.00
For wine by the drink license only, where wine is sold by the individual glass or open bottle at retail for consumption on the premises only
- per annum
135.00
In no event shall the license fee for sale of wine by the drink or sale of wine at retail exceed a total of 200.00
Effective January 1, 2013, the above fees shall be prorated for a nine (9) month period ending September 30, 2013.
B. Proration Of Fees: If a license is issued after October 1 the annual fee shall be prorated from date issued to September 30 for the time license is in use.
(Ord., 10-24-2012, eff. retroactive to 10-1-2012)
3-2C-9: CONTINUANCE OF QUALIFICATIONS:
A retail licensee must continue throughout the license period to have all of the qualifications and none of the disqualifications provided for in this article.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 37/201
(Ord. 415, 3-25-1992)
3-2C-10: EXPIRATION, RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
A. Term Of License; Filing Renewal Form: All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall expire at one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on October 1
of the year following the year in which the license is issued. Renewal of the license shall be on forms prescribed and furnished by the city clerk.
Renewal forms shall be submitted together with the required license fee and an affidavit verifying that the information contained in the original
application is unchanged, or if there are material changes, indicating such changes.
B. Renewal Applications: Renewal applications must be received by the City Council no sooner than September 1 and no later than October 1; provided,
however, any licensee holding a valid license who fails to file an application for renewal of his license, during such time, shall not be permitted to sell or
dispense wine. (Ord., 10-24-2012, eff. retroactive to 10-1-2012)
3-2C-11: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A. Council Approval: No license may be transferred to another person, including an executor, administrator, or trustee in bankruptcy of the estate of the
licensee, unless the transferee shall first have obtained the approval of the City Council to such transfer upon application containing substantially the
same information required of an applicant for a license. If the transferee possesses all of the qualifications and none of the disqualifications for such a
license, the Council shall approve the transfer, which approval shall be attached and made a part of the license. Prior to a decision on a denial or
approval of said transfer by the City Council, the City police shall review the transfer application and his assessment shall be considered by the City
Council before they make their determination.
B. Transfer Fee: The fee for each transfer of a retail wine license shall be five dollars ($5.00), which fee shall accompany the application for a transfer.
C. Compliance With County Zoning Ordinance: Application to transfer a license from one location to another shall be made to the City Council on forms
prescribed and furnished by the City Clerk. Such a transfer shall not be approved unless the application procedure for a new license has been
complied with. In addition, before an existing license may be transferred to a new location, the applicant must satisfy all requirements of the Jefferson
County zoning ordinance. (Ord. 415, 3-25-1992)
3-2C-12: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Near Schools Or Churches: No retailer's license shall be issued to any person to sell beer, wine or liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises
where any part of the room, or other place, for such sale or consumption is:
1. Within a radius of three hundred feet (300') of any part of a public school; nor
2. Within a radius of three hundred feet (300') of any room within which the regular religious or Sunday school services of a duly organized and
established religious sect are, or within which a hospital or nursing home is, conducted and were or was so conducted prior to issuance of such
license.
B. Exception: This limitation shall not apply to any duly licensed premises that at the time of licensing did not come within the restricted area, but
subsequent to licensing, came therein. (Ord. 415, 3-25-1992)
3-2C-13: OPERATING HOURS:
A. Wine: The hours that wine, other than packaged wine, by the drink can be sold by any licensee shall be from ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to one o'clock
(1:00) A.M.
B. Packaged Wine: It shall be unlawful to sell, dispense, or give away packaged wine to be consumed off premises between the hours of one o'clock
(1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., inclusive. Packaged wine to be consumed off premises may be sold between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. Wine sold to be consumed on the premises shall be subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section.
C. Certain Holidays: No wine by the drink shall be served on Christmas Day, Memorial Day and Thanksgiving Day. (Ord. 2016-586, 1-5-2017)
3-2C-14: INSPECTIONS, ACCESS TO PREMISES:
The City police shall have the right at any time to enter in and upon such licensed premises, and it shall be unlawful to refuse any City officer admittance to
or access to such premises for the purpose of police patrol, regulation and inspection of such premises. (Ord. 415, 3-25-1992)
3-2C-15: PROHIBITED ACTS, CONDITIONS:
A. Prohibited Sales: It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for any person to sell, deliver or give away, or cause or permit to be sold,
delivered or given away, any wine to:
1. Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, proof of which shall be a valid driver's license or an identification issued by the Department of
Law Enforcement of the State.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 38/201
2. Any person apparently or obviously intoxicated.
3. Any interdicted person as defined by the laws of the State.
B. Minors:
1. Any person who shall procure wine for any person under twenty one (21) years of age, or any person under twenty one (21) years of age who shall
purchase, attempt to purchase, or otherwise procure, consume or possess wine shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
2. Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, who shall by any means represent to any person licensed to sell wine at retail, or to any agent or
employee of such retail licensee, that he or she is twenty one (21) years or more of age, for the purpose of inducing such retail licensee, his agent or
employee to sell, serve or dispense to him or her shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
3. Any person who shall by any means represent to any person licensed to sell wine at retail or to his agent or employee, that any other person is
twenty one (21) years or more of age, when in fact such other person is under the age of twenty one (21) years, for the purpose of inducing such
retail licensee, his agent or employee, to sell, serve or dispense wine to such other person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
4. Whenever any person licensed to sell wine, or his agent or employee, shall have reasonable cause to doubt that any person who attempts to
purchase or otherwise procure wine from or through such retail licensee, his agent or employee, is twenty one (21) or more years of age, such retail
licensee, his agent or employee, shall require such person to execute a certificate that he is twenty one (21) or more years of age, and to exhibit
acceptable proof of age and identity. The form of such certificate, the manner in which it shall be executed, the record to be kept thereof, shall be the
responsibility of the retail licensee, his agent or employee, with respect to the execution of said certificate, and a determination of what shall
constitute acceptable proof of the age and identity shall be in accordance with the provisions of Idaho Code title 23, chapter 10. (Ord. 415, 3-25-
1992; amd. 1999 Code)
3-2C-16: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
If the City Council shall find that a licensee has made any false material statement in the application for a license, or did not have, or has not retained, the
qualifications for a retailer, or has acquired a disqualification for a retailer, or is in violation of any of the prohibitions of Idaho Code title 23, chapter 10, the
City Council shall suspend, revoke or refuse to renew such retailer's license.
A. No pleading shall be necessary, and any hearing before the City Council shall be informal.
B. The procedure for notice, hearing, contest and appeal shall be as provided by Idaho Code title 23, chapter 10.
C. In addition, the City Council shall consider a petition for revocation of a valid existing license submitted by at least seventy five percent (75%) of the
resident owners of property, or if not occupied and inhabited by a resident owner, the occupant of such property, within a radius of one thousand feet
(1,000') of any part of the premises upon which wine is sold for consumption.
D. If, after review of said petition for revocation of license, the City Council determines that the allegations in said petition are true and correct, the Council
may take the appropriate action to revoke that existing license. The criteria to be used by the City Council to revoke pursuant to such a petition shall be
the same as provided in this section. (Ord. 415, 3-25-1992)
3-2C-17: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 415, 3-25-1992; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 3
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
3-3-1: UNINVITED PEDDLERS PROHIBITED:
A. Definition: Peddlers are described as City, County, State or agricultural businesses. All other types of peddlers are prohibited from going in and upon
private residences in the City of Rigby.
B. License Required: The practice of going in and upon private residences in the City by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient
vendors of merchandise not having been requested or invited so to do by the owners or occupants of said private residences for the purpose of
soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and/or disposing of, and/or peddling or hawking the same is declared to be a nuisance
and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor, unless a valid license is obtained from the City of Rigby with said license not to exceed thirty (30)
days from issuance. The application for said license shall include the identification of all sales agents who will be in the City, and what days the sales
agents will be in the City. The application shall also include the company the agents work for, and the name and contact information of their manager or
superior. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
3-3-2: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the sale, or soliciting of orders for the sale of, milk, dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs and other farm
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 39/201
and garden produce so far as the sale of the commodities named herein is now authorized by law. (1980 Code § 5.4.3)
3-3-3: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be unlawful, and any person so violating such provisions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor hereunder
and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1980 Code § 5.4.2; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 4
PAWNBROKERS, JUNK DEALERS, SECONDHAND STORES
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
Within the meaning of this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
JUNK DEALER: One who regularly purchases and sells pieces of old cable, old cordage, old iron or other metal, used glass, old or used auto tires,
supplies or accessories, or any other used articles of a similar nature.
PAWNBROKER: One who engages in the business of lending or advancing money on the security of personal property pledged or deposited in his
possession.
SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METAL DEALER: Any person who engages in buying or selling old gold, silver, platinum or other precious metal or
secondhand articles containing any of such metals; provided, however, that the following persons shall not be considered a secondhand precious metal
dealer:
A. A person who in the ordinary course of business, buys or sells such precious metals in an uncast state primarily for use in any manufacturing or
photographic developing process, dental restoration or repair or use in jewelry manufacture or repair;
B. A person who, in the ordinary course of business and in conjunction with the sale of new goods or merchandise, accepts or receives secondhand
articles containing such precious metals, as consideration for said sale, and who thereafter disposes of the same in the same form as such articles
existed at the time of its receipt.
SECONDHAND STOREKEEPER: One who regularly purchases and sells articles of personal property, previously possessed and used by another,
including one who makes a business of exchanging one or more articles of used personal property, for another article of used personal property; provided,
however, that this Chapter shall not apply to persons engaged in the business of purchasing and selling secondhand or used automobiles; provided,
further that this Chapter shall not apply to persons who conduct or sponsor a "garage sale" as provided for in Chapter 5 of this Title. (1980 Code § 5.7.1;
amd. 1999 Code)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, or carry on, the business of a pawnbroker, junk dealer, secondhand storekeeper or secondhand precious
metal dealer within the City limits without first procuring a license to conduct such business as hereinafter provided. (1980 Code § 5.7.2)
3-4-3: LICENSE FEES:
Any person engaging in the following listed businesses in the City shall procure a license therefor and shall pay the following designated license fees, per
year:
Pawnbroker $50.00
Secondhand storekeeper or secondhand precious metal dealer 30.00
Junk dealer 50.00
(1980 Code §§ 5.7.3, 5.7.4, 5.7.5)
3-4-4: RECORDS OPEN FOR INSPECTION:
A. Junk And Secondhand Dealers: All junk dealers, secondhand storekeepers and secondhand precious metal dealers shall daily keep the following
written records:
1. An accurate description of all personal property purchased.
2. The name, residence, age, general description, signature, driver's license number, or social security number, of the person from whom any article of
personal property is purchased or received.
3. Date when such property was purchased or acquired.
4. The date when such property is disposed of, and the name and address of the person receiving the same. (1980 Code § 5.7.6)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 40/201
B. Pawnbrokers: All pawnbrokers licensed under this Chapter must daily keep the following written records:
1. An accurate description of all personal property the security upon which money is loaned or advanced.
2. The name, residence, age, general description, signature, driver's license number, or social security number, of the person from whom any article of
personal property is purchased or received.
3. The date when such property is disposed of, and the name and address of the person receiving the same.
C. Police Authority To Inspect: Such records must be kept open for inspection by a sworn police officer during business hours, and no proprietor or keeper
of such places of business shall refuse to permit any officer, having authority to do so, to inspect such records. (1980 Code § 5.7.7)
3-4-5: RETENTION OF PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this Chapter to sell, trade, rent or otherwise dispose of any property acquired for the purpose of resale or
other conveyance, for a period of fifteen (15) days from the date of receiving the same. (1980 Code § 5.7.8)
3-4-6: PURCHASES RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to accept or receive in the ordinary course of business for the purpose of resale or other conveyance, any personal
property from any persons under the age of eighteen (18) or any persons under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or any controlled substance. (1980 Code
§ 5.7.9)
3-4-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Misdemeanor: It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to withhold access to records from any police officer or officer of the law within the State; and it
shall also be a misdemeanor to violate the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Forfeiture Of License: In addition to the statutory penalties set forth for the violation of misdemeanors within the State, any junk dealer, pawnbroker, or
owner of a secondhand store may forfeit his license upon a conviction for the violation of this Chapter. (1980 Code § 5.7.10)
Chapter 5
YARD SALES
3-5-1: THREE DAY LIMITATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell new or used goods or items upon their yard surrounding their residence for a continuous period in excess of three
(3) days. Any yard or garage sale shall be limited to three (3) days and if exceeding such shall be treated as an infraction for a first offense with a one
hundred dollar ($100.00) penalty, an infraction with a two hundred dollar ($200.00) penalty for a second offense, and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
upon conviction of a third offense within a three (3) year period, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
Code. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
3-5-2: TOTAL CALENDAR DAYS RESTRICTED:
Yard sales may be conducted more than one time per year but in no event shall the total days of sale upon any residential premises exceed five (5) days
in any calendar year. (1980 Code § 8.5.2)
3-5-3: MANNER OF SALE:
Yard sales shall be conducted in such a manner as to not create an offensive odor or atmosphere, and shall not be noticeably unsightly, or in any manner
cause or create a public nuisance or menace to public health. (1980 Code § 8.5.3)
3-5-4: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1980 Code § 8.5.4; amd. 1999 Code)
Title 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 41/201
Chapter 1
FIRE PROTECTION
4-1-1: JEFFERSON CENTRAL FIRE DISTRICT:
The city is hereby annexed into the Jefferson central fire district for purposes of fire protection and quick response unit services. A copy of the agreement
of annexation is attached to ordinance 496 and is incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 496, 8-6-2002)
Chapter 2
NUISANCES
4-2-1: DEFINITION:
Anything which is injurious to the health or morals, or is indecent or offensive to the senses or to free use of property, so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or which unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use in the customary manner of any stream, basin, or any
public park, square, street or highway, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1980 Code § 6.5.1; amd. 1999 Code)
4-2-2: DUMPING TRASH:
Any person within the corporate limits of the City who shall dump, deposit, or place any trash, refuse, matter or filth, or any other substance liable to
produce disease, or who shall dump any tin cans, rags, waste, paper and trash on any lot, street or alley within the corporate limits of the City shall be
deemed to have committed a public nuisance and, upon conviction, shall be guilty of an infraction with a three hundred dollar ($300.00) penalty, the
second offense within a year being a misdemeanor, unless the same creates a nuisance or blocks traffic, which shall be a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
4-2-3: ANIMALS:
A. Disposal Of Animal Excretion: Every owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any house, stable, stall or apartment in which any kind of domestic animals
are kept or slaughtered, or any place connected therewith wherein any offal, manure or liquid discharge of any animal shall collect or accumulate, shall
cause such offal, manure or liquid discharge to be removed, and shall at all times keep such buildings in a clean and sanitary manner and free from all
offensive smells. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a public nuisance and shall be dealt
with as provided in this chapter. (1980 Code § 6.5.3; amd. Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
B. Carcass Of Dead Animals: Any person who shall allow the carcass of any dead animal to remain within the limits of the City for any unreasonable
length of time shall be deemed guilty of an offense and punished as an infraction for the first offense of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00); an
infraction for the second offense punishable up to three hundred dollars ($300.00) and a misdemeanor for the third offense all occurring within a three
(3) year period of time. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
4-2-4: FIRE HAZARDS:
A. Duty Of Fire Chief To Inspect: When any building or structure is reported to the Fire Chief as insecure, unsafe or dangerous to life or property, or in such
a state that it interferes with the general safety of the public health, said Fire Chief and his assistants shall make a thorough inspection and make their
report to the City Council. If the Council believes such building to be in a dangerous condition, the Chief of Police shall be instructed to notify the owner
of the dangerous condition of said building. If the owner fails to comply with such order, said building shall constitute a public nuisance and the owner
thereof shall be guilty of maintaining a public nuisance; and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined as prescribed in this chapter. Also, the City may
proceed to abate the same as prescribed by law.
B. Condemnation Of Fire Hazard By City Council: If the City Council desires to proceed to destroy said premises, the following form of resolution shall be
passed by the Council.
Resolution
Whereas, it has come to the attention of the City Council of the City of Rigby, Idaho, that the building or structure upon the following described real
estate within the corporate limits of the City of Rigby, Idaho, (describe the land) is in such a dilapidated condition and so poorly constructed and in such
disrepair the building may collapse and menace the safety of persons and property in the City of Rigby, Idaho. On account of the increase of fire hazard
to adjoining property, and to such extent that said building has been for a long time past and is now a nuisance. Now therefore, be it resolved by the
City Council of Rigby, Idaho, that the building or structure now upon the lands above described is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for the
reason and upon the grounds that said building is dilapidated and such a state of repair that it menaces the safety of persons and property in Rigby,
Idaho, on account of increased fire hazard thereby created, and it is hereby ordered by the City Council of the City of Rigby, Idaho, that said building or
structure upon the above described lands be forthwith removed from said real estate, as aforesaid, and the Chief of Police is hereby authorized and
requested to execute the orders of the City Council as provided by law.
(1980 Code § 6.5.4; amd. 1999 Code)
4-2-5: ABATEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 42/201
A. Inspection Of Premises: Any officer or employee of the City may inspect the premises and make a written report of findings together with photographs
whenever practicable.
B. Summary Abatement; Notice:
1. Any owner or occupant, or any person who erects, contrives, causes, continues, maintains, or permits a public nuisance, shall, not later than fifteen
(15) days after being notified by written notice, abate, remove or cause to be removed, the declared public nuisance.
2. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace,
morals or decency, notice may be served on the owner, occupant or the person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove
such nuisance within twenty four (24) hours. Said notice shall state that unless such nuisance is so abated, the City will cause the same to be abated
and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the same.
C. Cost Of Abatement:
1. Abatement By City; Lien Against Property: In the event of the failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the City may perform
or cause to be performed, the work required by this chapter, at the expense of the property owner, and the City shall have a lien therefor upon the
property chargeable therewith until paid.
2. Tax Assessed Against Property: If the City shall so direct, the cost of such work shall be fixed as a tax against such property and the same shall be
included in the next assessment roll thereafter made, and be enforced and collected in the same manner and at the same time as other taxes.
3. Foreclosure Of Lien; Other Remedies: The City Council may, however, foreclose such lien by appropriate legal proceedings, or may collect the cost
of such work from the owner of the property or other person liable therefor, through a civil action, or may pursue any other remedy authorized by law
or the provisions of this Code. (1999 Code)
4-2-6: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or any section thereof, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1980 Code § 6.5.5; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 3
JUNK; INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
4-3-1: JUNK STORAGE:
A. Definition: The term "junk" is defined as articles that have outlived their usefulness in their original form, such as car bodies, parts of machinery, and
iron, material, glass, paper, bottles or any other articles which may generally be regarded as having little value, worthless or merely trash that may be
treated or prepared so as to be used again in some form.
B. Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep any old articles or materials which may be classified as junk adjacent to any
schoolhouse, church, public park, public grounds, business building or residences without providing proper and tight buildings for the storage of the
same with the first violation being an infraction with a one hundred dollar ($100.00) penalty, second violation being an infraction with a two hundred
dollar ($200.00) penalty, and the third and subsequent violations being infractions with a three hundred dollar ($300.00) penalty.
C. Notice Of Violation:
1. Failure To Comply: In the event any person shall store or keep any old articles or materials which may be classified as junk adjacent to any
schoolhouse, church, public park, public grounds, business buildings or residences without first providing proper and tight buildings for the storage of
the same, the City Clerk shall prepare a notice to be served upon the person in charge of the property directing such person in possession to either
take said materials from said premises or to provide proper buildings for the storage of the same within ten (10) days of the date of the notice and
report the performance to the City Clerk.
2. Service Of Notice: Such notice shall be served by the Chief of Police or any other police officer of the City by delivering a written copy thereof to the
person in possession of the said junk materials, or his agent, if such owner or agent can be found within the City, but if not found within the City, then
if his place of residence be known, by mailing a copy of the notice to such owner at his place of residence or posting at the residence.
D. Penalty: Any person who shall fail to remove junk from the premises or to provide proper buildings for the storage of the same within ten (10) days after
the receipt of notice to comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of the first violation being an infraction with a one hundred dollar
($100.00) penalty, second violation being an infraction with a two hundred dollar ($200.00) penalty, and the third and subsequent violations being
infractions with a three hundred dollar ($300.00) penalty. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
4-3-2: INOPERATIVE VEHICLES; RESTORATION PERMIT:
A. Vehicle Storage; Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity to store or keep any inoperative and/or unlicensed vehicle normally
operated on public highways, in an area visible to the general public without first obtaining a restoration permit from the City. The permit shall be affixed
to the said vehicle under restoration in the lower right-hand corner of the windshield of said vehicle so that it may be readily and easily seen. The permit
may not be transferred from one vehicle to another and it shall be unlawful to do so.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 43/201
B. Fee And Expiration Of Permit: The permit shall be free but must be reapplied for yearly. The permit shall expire on the next calendar year following the
date of issuance of the permit.
C. Notice Of Violation:
1. Failure To Comply: In the event any person shall fail to comply with the provisions of this section, the City Clerk shall prepare a notice to be served:
a. Upon the owner of the vehicle as shown by the records of the State Department of Motor Vehicles to the address shown on said record; or
b. If the owner cannot be determined by the Department of Motor Vehicles records or cannot be located, the notice may be served upon the person
in charge of the vehicle.
2. Directions Of Notice: The notice shall direct such person to either remove the vehicle or obtain the required permit within ten (10) days of the date of
the notice and report the performance to the City Clerk.
3. Manner Of Serving Notice: Said notice may be served either:
a. By the Chief of Police or other police officer(s) as designated by the City, by delivering a written copy thereof to the owner of the vehicle as shown
by the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles if said person is available within the City; if not, by delivering a copy thereof to the person in
charge of the vehicle or his agent, or in the alternative;
b. By mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail to the owner at the address shown by the Department of Motor Vehicles or such other address as
may be known to the City; or if the owner's address is unknown, by mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail to the person in charge of the
vehicle, or by posting the notice on the residence of said person.
D. Penalty: Any person who shall fail to comply with this section by obtaining a permit for any and all inoperative or unlicensed vehicles or providing
storage inside a building for the same shall be guilty of an infraction with a one hundred dollar ($100.00) penalty, the second violation being an
infraction with a two hundred dollar ($200.00) penalty, and the third and subsequent violations being infractions with a three hundred dollar ($300.00)
penalty. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
Chapter 4
WEEDS AND SHRUBS
4-4-1: DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER:
A. Trimming Grass: Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall trim all grass on property owned or occupied by him so that said
premises will not be offensive to the sight and depreciate the value of adjacent property.
B. Removal Of Weeds: Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall cut, remove and destroy all offensive and noxious weeds or plants
on property owned or occupied by him.
C. Care Of Hedges And Shrubbery: Any owner, agent, tenant, or occupant of any real property shall trim all hedges and shrubbery adjacent to public
sidewalks so that no part of said hedges and/or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk.
D. Care Of Trees: Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall trim all trees on property owned or occupied by him, overhanging the
sidewalks, streets, or alleys, so that the branches thereon will not interfere with pedestrian or public travel.
E. Penalty: Upon conviction, the defendant shall be guilty of an infraction for the first offense punishable up to one hundred dollars ($100.00); an infraction
for the second offense punishable up to three hundred dollars ($300.00) and misdemeanor as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this Code for the third
offense. All offenses must occur within a three (3) year period of time. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
4-4-2: NOTICE OF DERELICTION OF DUTY:
A. Unkept Property As Public Nuisance: The maintenance of a yard or premises with untrimmed grass, offensive and noxious weeds or plants, untrimmed
hedges and shrubbery that extend over any part of a public sidewalk, and untrimmed trees that interfere with pedestrian or public travel are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. Grass shall be cut; offensive and noxious weeds or plants shall be cut, removed and destroyed; hedges and
shrubbery extending over any part of a public sidewalk shall be trimmed; and trees interfering with pedestrian or public travel shall be trimmed by the
owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property when notified to do so by the Chief of Police of the City, as hereinafter provided.
B. Police Chief To Serve Notice:
1. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to notify the owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property within the City limits, where untrimmed
grass is growing, where offensive and noxious weeds or plants are growing, where untrimmed hedges and shrubbery extend over any part of a
public sidewalk, and where untrimmed trees interfere with pedestrian or public travel, to trim, cut, remove or destroy the same.
2. Said notice shall describe the location of the property as nearly accurate as can be; shall specify ten (10) days in which said grass, weeds, hedges,
shrubbery and trees shall be trimmed, cut, removed or destroyed; and shall be served upon the owner, agent, tenant or occupant in charge of such
property, if such owner, agent, tenant or occupant can be found. If such owner, agent, tenant or occupant cannot be found, then service will be made
by posting a copy of said notice on said premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 44/201
3. Said notice shall be sent out each year on or before the fourth Monday of each and every May by registered letter and anytime later in the year if
necessary according to plant growth, or posted on the property of the same. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
4-4-3: REMEDY AGAINST PROPERTY OWNER:
If the owner, agent, tenant or occupant in charge fails to comply with said notice after ten (10) days, the Chief of Police will order the said work done at the
expense of the City, and the same shall be charged against and be a lien on the property until paid. Said lien shall be filed the same as is provided for filing
liens for sidewalks or other special improvements against property. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
4-4-4: PENALTY:
Any person who shall fail to trim, cut, remove, or destroy grass, weeds, hedges, shrubbery and trees, as provided under the terms of this chapter, after ten
(10) days by the notice provided for herein, and shall otherwise fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction with a one
hundred dollar ($100.00) penalty, the second violation being an infraction with a two hundred dollar ($200.00) penalty, and the third and subsequent
violations being infractions with a three hundred dollar ($300.00) penalty. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
Chapter 5
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
4-5-1: SCOPE OF CHAPTER:
This Chapter shall apply to all properties and areas of the City, including apartments, trailer courts, and all other dwelling units, retail stores, banks, and all
other commercial establishments. (1980 Code § 8.2.1)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the
singular number include the plural number.
APPROVED CONTAINER: Only those containers which have been approved by the Public Works Director as to type and make.
ASHES AND CLINKERS: The residue from fire used for cooking, heating or burning of trash after combustion has entirely ceased and the residue has
entirely cooled.
COLLECTOR: Includes the person holding a license or contract with the City, or employed and thereby authorized and designated by the City to collect,
handle, transport and dispose of refuse.
GARBAGE: Includes waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, and wastes from the handling and storage of
produce.
OWNER AND OCCUPANT: The terms "owner" and "occupant" whenever herein used may be used interchangeably and shall include every person in
possession, charge, or control of any flat, dwelling, rooming house, apartment, or trailer where refuse is created or accumulated.
PERSON: Includes any person, firm, partnership, association, institute, company, corporation, or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The authorized employee or employees of the City, or some individual designated by the Council as having authority to
enforce this Chapter.
REFUSE: Includes "garbage" and "trash" as defined herein.
SHALL: Whenever the word "shall" appears in this Chapter, it shall be construed as being mandatory.
TRASH: A. The term "trash" shall include wastes other than garbage such as tin cans, bottles, dust, ashes, clinkers, paper, pasteboard, cardboard or
wooden boxes, lumber scraps and shavings, leaves, weeds, cuttings from trees, lawns, shrubs and garden, or other similar waste materials produced in
normal course of every day living.
B. The term "trash" shall not include recognized construction wastes, industrial wastes, or by products, carcasses of dead animals, appliances,
furniture, automobile parts and bodies, and bodies, and other similar items. (1980 Code § 8.2.2; amd. 1999 Code)
4-5-3: USE OF SYSTEM REQUIRED:
Every person who is an owner or occupant of premises for residential or commercial purposes within the City limits shall use the refuse collection and
disposal system herein provided and shall deposit or cause to be disposed of in accordance with this Chapter all refuse which is accumulated on such
premises; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any owner from transporting and disposing of refuse accumulated on his
own premises, subject to all regulations herein contained. (1980 Code § 8.2.3)
4-5-4: CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 45/201
A. City To Provide: Every person using or occupying any building, house or structure within the corporate limits, for residential purposes, shall be provided
and maintained approved containers of sufficient number and size to hold all refuse accumulating on the premises. The collector will empty and return
only approved containers. (1980 Code § 8.2.6; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Use Of Containers:
1. Liquid Drained From Refuse: All refuse must be placed in "approved containers", as defined in Section 4-5-2 of this Chapter. In residential areas, all
refuse that is mixed with water or other liquids shall be drained and shall be well wrapped in paper before being placed in containers. (1980 Code
§ 8.2.7)
2. Weight Limitation; Lid Required: No free liquids shall be placed in the container. Lids of such containers shall not be removed except when
necessary to place or remove refuse, and the lid or cover of every refuse container shall at all times be kept securely in place, and no refuse
container shall be so overloaded that the lid or cover cannot be properly kept in place. (1980 Code § 8.2.7; amd. 1999 Code)
4-5-5: GRASS, LEAVES AND YARD WASTE:
A. Placement; Size Restrictions: Grass, leaves, weeds, clippings from trees and shrubs, paper and other dry trash may be placed in cardboard cartons,
baskets, or wooden boxes, provided the contents are prevented, by securely covering, from being blown, spilled, or removed by persons, wind, or
animals. Each carton, basket or box, including contents, shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight and shall not exceed ten (10) cubic feet in volume.
When used, such containers shall not be returned to the premises, but will be removed with the contents by the collector.
B. Brush Bundles: Brush may be tied with heavy cord or twine in bundles not to exceed two and one-half feet (21/2') in length or fifty (50) pounds in weight.
(1980 Code § 8.2.8)
4-5-6: COMPOST PILES:
Compost piles may be maintained for fertilization purposes, and matter used for fertilization purposes only, may be transported, kept and used; provided,
that the same shall not cause obnoxious odors to the neighborhood. (1980 Code § 8.2.9)
4-5-7: CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS OR LAWN RENOVATION DISPOSAL:
A. Disposal By Contractor: Dirt or earth debris from construction or lawn renovation, rocks, stones, automobile bodies and parts, washing machines,
refrigerators, hot water tanks, stoves, tree trunks, and stumps, and other similar materials, dead animals, furniture, building materials such as mortar,
plaster, scrap lumber, broken concrete, and brick shall be collected and disposed of by the building contractor, person, owner, or occupant of the
premises.
B. Waste Oil From Garages: Waste oils and lubricants from garages, service stations, machine shops and other similar establishments shall be disposed
of by the person at an authorized collection agency. (1980 Code § 8.2.11; amd. 1999 Code)
4-5-8: COLLECTION OF REFUSE:
A. Schedule Of Collection Times; Hours: Refuse shall be collected from all residential premises within the city at least once each week. Premises wherein
large accumulations of refuse occur may be classified separately with more frequent collection from such premises. The council shall establish a
schedule of collection. Pick up shall be between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on scheduled pick up day.
B. Placement Of Containers:
1. All refuse containers shall be placed at the street curb or at the inside edge of the curb (no sidewalk placement) on the morning of the day scheduled
for collection; and the empty containers shall be withdrawn from the front of the premises as soon after collection as possible on the same day.
2. No refuse containers, refuse burners, or piles of refuse shall be placed in or upon the alley right of way. (1980 Code § 8.2.10; amd. 1999 Code)
4-5-9: FEES AND CHARGES:
A. Fees Set By Council: The city council shall assess each residence and/or occupied premises within the city upon which refuse accumulates, and charge
it reasonable monthly collection fees for services rendered. Said charges may be amended from time to time, as reasonable, by resolution of the city
council. (1980 Code § 8.2.20; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Method Of Collection: Fees shall be carried on the water bills, wherever applicable, and the city clerk is authorized and directed to discontinue water
service to any premises where the entire water bill is not paid, in the same manner that service is discontinued for nonpayment of water service.
C. Payment; Delinquency: All fees shall be paid by the person responsible for the same at the office of the city clerk within ten (10) days after receipt of a
statement, and if not paid, the same shall become delinquent. (1980 Code § 8.2.20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 46/201
D. Fees And Charges Enumerated: Effective November 1, 2007, the sanitation collection fees shall be as follows unless amended by resolution, and after
any notice on hearings required by law. (Res., 12-6-1994, eff. retroactive to 12-1-1994; amd. 1999 Code; Res. 108, 9-24-2004; Res. 116-A, 9-21-2004;
Ord. 531, 10-2-2007)
1. Residential Pick Up: The following charges are based on one pick up per week and may not be reduced even if customers request pick up at less
than once per week: (Res., 12-6-1994, eff. retroactive to 12-1-1994)
MONTHLY CHARGES
90 Gallon Container
Base Rate $9.77, Each Additional Pick Up $2.50
Number Of Containers: 1 2 3 4 5 6
Number Of Pick
Ups Per Week
1 $ 9.77 $19.54 $ 29.31 $ 39.08 $ 48.85 $ 58.62
2 17.33 34.66 51.99 99.44 86.65 103.98
3 24.86 49.72 74.58 99.44 124.30 149.16
4 32.40 64.80 97.20 129.60 162.00 194.40
5 39.94 79.88 119.82 159.76 199.70 239.64
(Ord. 531, 10-2-2007)
2. Commercial Pick Up: Commercial customers shall have the option of using a ninety (90) gallon container, but will be subject to the minimum charge
as set out in subsection D1 of this section. (Res., 12-6-1994, eff. retroactive to 12-1-1994)
MONTHLY CHARGES
300 Gallon Container
Base Rate $19.54, Each Additional Pick Up $2.50
Number Of Containers: 1 2 3 4 5 6
Number Of Pick
Ups Per Week
1 $19.54 $39.08 $ 58.62 $ 78.16 $ 97.70 $117.24
2 27.08 54.16 81.24 108.32 135.40 162.48
3 34.61 69.22 103.83 138.44 173.05 207.66
4 42.13 84.26 126.39 168.52 210.65 252.78
5 49.66 99.32 148.98 198.64 248.30 297.96
(Ord. 531, 10-2-2007)
3. Rate For Garbage Truck Use: For the purposes of the mutual aid agreement, the city shall charge any other municipal entity the rate of sixty five
dollars ($65.00) per hour for use of the city's garbage truck for the purpose of refuse pick up. (Res., 12-17-1992; amd. 1999 Code)
4. Temporary Use Of Container; Rate:
a. City residents may request from the public works department, a three hundred (300) gallon refuse container on a temporary basis. The container
will be allowed for a residential use for a period of one week. This may be extended only upon written permission of the public works department.
b. The resident shall be responsible for placing the container in an area which is accessible to the city refuse collection vehicle. (Res. 74, 1-19-1999,
eff. 2-1-1999)
c. The resident shall be charged the rate of four dollars ($4.00) per container per week in addition to the normal monthly billing. Pick up in addition to
the normal once per week schedule shall result in an additional charge of one dollar fifty cents ($1.50) for each additional pick up. (Res. 74, 1-19-
1999, eff. 2-1-1999; amd. Res. 108, 9-24-2003; Res. 116-A, 9-21-2004)
4-5-10: NONRESIDENTIAL PREMISES AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY UNITS:
The public works director shall determine from time to time the approximate average garbage service, by number of containers and by number of pick ups
provided for single-family dwelling units. This shall be deemed "the average single-family dwelling unit equivalents" and by multiplying said equivalent
factor by the applicable rate for single-family dwelling units. (1980 Code § 8.2.19; amd. 1999 Code)
4-5-11: COLLECTION AND HAULING FRANCHISE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 47/201
Any person desiring a franchise for the collection and disposal of refuse shall make application to the city council. The council shall make and cause to be
made such investigation as it may consider necessary in order to determine whether or not the public convenience and necessity requires the granting of
such franchise. Any franchise so granted shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter. (1980 Code § 8.2.14; amd. 1999 Code)
4-5-12: LICENSING AND CONTRACTING:
A. Council Authority: The mayor and council have the sole authority:
1. To license, contract or perform all services pertaining to collection and disposal of refuse under this chapter.
2. To establish reasonable fees for refuse collection and disposal services.
3. To enter into contracts with one or more contractors.
4. To establish reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct and operation of such licensee or contractor.
B. Bond: The council may require of any such collector or contractor a bond in a reasonable amount, the condition of which shall be the satisfactory
performance of the contract. (1980 Code § 8.2.15)
4-5-13: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION:
All appropriate officers of the city shall have the right of ingress or egress to any premises for the purpose of inspecting all places and containers where
refuse is accumulated or kept. (1980 Code § 8.2.16)
4-5-14: REFUSE ACCUMULATION; DEPOSITS:
A. Offensive Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or to suffer to accumulate in or about any yard, lot, place or premises, or upon any
street, alley, or sidewalk adjacent to such lot, yard, place or premises owned or occupied by such person, any refuse so as to cause such yard, lot,
premises, or the street, alley, or sidewalk adjacent thereto, to be or remain in such condition as to cause or create an offensive odor or atmosphere, be
offensive as noticeably unsightly, or create an insect or rodent harborage, or thereby, in any manner, to be or become, or cause or create, a public
nuisance or a menace to public health within the limits of the city.
B. Depositing Or Burying Illegally: No person shall deposit refuse on or below the surface of the ground other than in a manner prescribed herein. No
person shall deposit or bury any refuse in or upon a public alley, street, other public area, or upon the premises of another person, whether or not the
refuse is in an approved refuse container. No refuse of any kind shall be thrown, swept or pushed into the street in front of any residence. The owner of
the premises shall be responsible for the disposal of all such refuse. (1980 Code § 8.2.4)
4-5-15: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS; SPILLING REFUSE PROHIBITED:
The actual producers of refuse, or the owners of premises upon which refuse is accumulated, who desire personally to collect and dispose of refuse,
persons who desire to dispose of waste materials not included in the definition of refuse or materials not acceptable for collection, and collectors of waste
and refuse from outside of the City who desire to haul over the streets of the City shall use a vehicle so equipped and operated as to prevent refuse from
being blown, dropped or spilled therefrom and offensive odors escaping therefrom. (1980 Code § 8.2.5)
4-5-16: MEDDLING WITH CONTAINERS PROHIBITED:
The meddling with refuse containers, in any pilfering, scattering contents and junking in any alley or street within the City limits is prohibited. (1980 Code
§ 8.2.12)
4-5-17: SANITARY LANDFILL:
The disposal of all refuse collected, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be in the City approved sanitary landfill, and under the supervision of
the Landfill Director. (1980 Code § 8.2.17; amd. 1999 Code)
4-5-18: SALVAGING PROHIBITED:
Any material disposed of at the sanitary landfill is the property of the City, and no person is allowed to separate and collect, carry off or dispose of the
same except under the authority and direction of the Mayor and City Council. (1980 Code § 8.2.13)
4-5-19: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction for the first violation with a one hundred dollar ($100.00)
penalty and a misdemeanor for any subsequent offense within a calendar year and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 48/201
Chapter 6
FIREWORKS
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
FIRECRACKER: Any container which shall hold an explosive which can be discharged by means of igniting a fuse or by concussion for the purpose of
making a noise for celebrations.
FIREWORKS: Shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannon, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, fire balloons (balloons of a type
which have burning material of any kind attached thereto or which require fire underneath to propel them), firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, rockets,
Roman candles, fountains, wheels, dago bombs, sparklers, and other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any combustible or
explosive substance for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, explosion or detonation.
Exempted from this part are all toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes and toy guns and similar devices such as party poppers or party favors in which paper
caps containing not more than twenty-five hundredths (0.25) grain of explosive compound per cap are used and such caps whether single, roll or tape type
and model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling of recoverable aero model rockets. (1980 Code
§ 7.1.1; amd. 1999 Code)
4-6-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; ISSUANCE:
A. Possession, Sale, And Discharge: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, give away or discharge any "firecrackers" or "fireworks" as
hereinabove defined in the City without first obtaining a written permit from the City Council permitting the possession, sale, giving away or discharge of
such firecrackers or fireworks as hereinafter provided. The permit is required only for the sale of "fireworks" and "firecrackers" but not required for the
possession or discharge of the same. The discharge should only occur on allowable holidays such as the 4th of July, the 24th of July, and national
holidays between the hours of sunup to fifteen minutes past twelve o'clock (12:15) A.M. A violation of this section shall be an infraction punishable up
to one hundred dollars ($100.00).
B. Public Display Or Exhibition: The City Council shall issue written permits for the public display or exhibition of fireworks within the City limits under such
restrictions as may be prescribed from time to time for the purpose of public display or exhibition of such fireworks or firecrackers. Such permit shall be
in writing, specifying the time and place for the giving of such public display, or exhibition, and prescribing the conditions governing the conduct of the
same. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
4-6-3: PENALTY:
Any person who shall possess, sell, give away or discharge any "firecrackers" or "fireworks" as defined above without a written permit, as prescribed
herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1980 Code
§ 7.1.4; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 7
OPEN BURNING
4-7-1: DEFINITION:
"Open burning" means the burning of materials outdoors where the products of combustion are not directed through a duct, passage, smokestack or
chimney. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
4-7-2: GENERAL RESTRICTIONS:
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, no person shall allow, suffer, cause or permit the open burning of materials which omit
toxic contaminants or large volumes of smoke, particles or odors such as garbage, rubber, plastic, heavy petroleum products, dead animals, grass
clippings and similar materials.
B. No person shall allow, suffer, cause or permit any open burning operation which does not fall into at least one of the categories of section 4-7-3 of this
chapter. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
4-7-3: ALLOWABLE CATEGORIES OF OPEN BURNING:
A. Fires Allowed:
1. Fires used for the preparation of food, campfires, and fires for recreational purposes, under control of a responsible person.
2. Fires used for control or alleviation of fire hazard or for weed control when no reasonable alternative control method exists.
3. Fires used in the training of organized firefighting personnel.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 49/201
4. Properly operated industrial flares for combustion of flammable gases.
5. Fires used by a public school governmental unit of the City, State, or the United States of America, or by any business or professional office to
destroy correspondence or other materials of a confidential nature; provided, that fires used to destroy such materials shall be in an incinerator
properly constructed to eliminate fire hazards; and also provided, any public school, governmental unit of the City, State, or the United States of
America, or business or professional office employing the provisions of this subsection shall, insofar as reasonable, separate confidential materials
from other materials which shall not be destroyed by open burning.
B. Domestic Household: The exemptions of this section shall not apply to a domestic household, because it is deemed feasible for a domestic household
to mutilate confidential material and because of the difficulty of enforcement of this chapter if the exceptions herein contained were of a general nature.
(Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
4-7-4: PENALTY:
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction with a one hundred dollar ($100.00) penalty, the second
violation being an infraction with a two hundred dollar ($200.00) penalty, and the third and subsequent violations being infractions with a three hundred
dollar ($300.00) penalty. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
Chapter 8
ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
4-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a just, equitable and practicable method, cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy provided by the
building code, fire code or otherwise available at law, for requiring buildings, or structures that endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of
the general public to be repaired, vacated or demolished. (Ord. 2013-562, 9-3-2013)
4-8-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this code shall apply to all dangerous buildings, as herein defined, which are now in existence or which may hereafter become
dangerous. (Ord. 2013-562, 9-3-2013)
4-8-3: ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS AND REPAIRS:
All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under the provisions of this code shall be completed in compliance with this chapter and must
conform to the current city standards, current building codes as applicable and any other city ordinances. (Ord. 2013-562, 9-3-2013)
4-8-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this chapter or as specified in the
building code. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Words used in
the singular include the plural and the plural the singular.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE: The fire marshal, the building official and their designated representatives, or such other person as designated and
appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council.
BOARD OF APPEALS: The board of appeals shall consist of five (5) members composed of the following: certified building inspector; a general building
contractor; a city resident; one member of the city's planning and zoning commission and fire department official.
BUILDING CODE: The building code promulgated by the International Conference Of Building Officials, as adopted by the city or modified by ordinance.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The building official shall have certification to conduct either residential and/or commercial building inspections, or such person as
designated and appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council and having sufficient working knowledge and background relating to building
construction.
DANGEROUS BUILDING: Any building or structure which is structurally unsafe or lacks adequate egress, or which constitutes a fire hazard or is otherwise
dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitutes a hazard to public safety, health or welfare by reason of defective construction,
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment as provided in the building code or the fire code or
any other effective ordinance. The term has the same meaning as "unsafe building".
FIRE CODE: The fire code of the city as adopted and amended or modified by ordinance.
JURISDICTION: The city of Rigby, Jefferson County, Idaho.
LEGISLATIVE BODY: The mayor and city council.
OWNER OF RECORD: Any person, agent, firm, corporation or governmental agency shown to be the owner or owners of a structure in the real property,
assumed name, or the records of the secretary of state of Idaho. (Ord. 2013-562, 9-3-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 50/201
4-8-5: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Administration: The building official and/or fire marshal or their designated appointees are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Inspection: The city's compliance officer upon reviewing a possible infraction will issue a report to the building official. The fire marshal and/or the
building official or their designated representatives will make inspections based upon the complaint and take actions necessary to enforce the
provisions of this chapter or cause a dismissal of the complaint. All buildings or structures within the scope of this code and all construction or work for
which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by a certified building inspector.
C. Right Of Entry: Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this code, or whenever the building official, fire marshal or their
designated representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which
makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official, fire marshal or their designated representative may enter the
building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official or fire marshal by this code;
provided that if such building or premises are occupied, they shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises
are unoccupied, they shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and
request entry. If entry is refused, the building official, fire marshal or their designated representative may use any remedy provided by law to secure
entry.
D. Refusal To Permit Entry: When the building official, fire marshal or their designated representative has obtained a proper inspection warrant or other
remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail
or neglect, after proper request made as provided in this section, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official, fire marshal, or their
designated representative for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this code.
E. Abandoned Construction Site: Means a lot or group of lots, including subdivisions, building or buildings, or other development within the city, where the
responsible person has ceased work for any reason for a period of ninety (90) days. Circumstances indicating abandonment of a construction site
include, but are not limited to, failure to call for inspections, absence of workers, or removal of equipment and supplies. A valid building permit or other
permit or approval issued by the city does not alter the status of a construction site deemed abandoned. For the purposes of this chapter, construction
does not include temporary repairs, additions, remodels, or maintenance projects on existing single-family homes.
F. Vacant Residence Or Abandoned Construction Site Owner Obligations: Responsible person(s) shall maintain vacant residences and associated
premises and abandoned construction sites in a clean, safe and sanitary condition consistent with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable
provisions of this code. Responsible persons shall bear all costs associated with maintaining vacant residences and abandoned construction sites.
G. Minimum Maintenance Standards For Vacant Residences And Associated Premises:
1. Building Openings: All doors, windows, and other openings shall be weathertight and secured against entry by birds, vermin, and trespassers.
Missing or broken doors, windows, and other openings shall be covered by glass, plywood, or other weather resistant materials and tightly fitted and
secured to the opening.
2. Foundation Walls: Foundation walls shall be animal and vermin proof and be maintained in a structurally sound and sanitary condition so as not to
pose a threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
3. Exterior Walls: Exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials. Exposed metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be protected
from the elements and against decay or rust.
4. Exterior Features: All chimneys, decks, balconies, canopies, awnings, exhaust ducts, cornices, corbels, trim, wall facings, drains, gutters,
downspouts, and similar features shall be safely anchored. (Ord. 2013-562, 9-3-2013)
4-8-6: BOARD OF APPEALS:
A. General: In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretations of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals consisting of members who are qualified by experience and training
to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction and who are not employees of the city. The building official shall be an ex officio member and
shall act as secretary to said board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing
body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and
findings in writing to the appellant, with a duplicate copy to the building official. Appeals to the board shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions contained in this code. Copies of all rules or regulations adopted by the board shall be delivered to the city clerk, who shall make them freely
accessible to the public.
B. Limitations Of Authority: The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the
board be empowered to waive requirements of this code. (Ord. 2013-562, 9-3-2013)
4-8-7: GENERAL INFORMATION:
A. Notices Mailed: All notices required to be mailed under this chapter, shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested. When a notice is mailed
in accordance with this section and the United States postal service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed", the validity of the notice is not
affected, and the notice is considered delivered.
B. Notices Posted: All notices required to be posted shall be attached to the structure as close to the front door as practicable. If there is no front door,
notice shall be attached to the structure in a noticeable place in a weatherproof cover.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 51/201
C. Change Of Owner: If a building or structure has been designated as a dangerous building, it is the owner's responsibility to furnish a purchaser,
transferee, grantee, mortgagee or lessee a true and correct copy of the notice of dangerous building and to provide the building official written
notification of the intent to enter into such transaction, including the name and address of the purchaser, transferee, grantee, mortgagee or lessee. A
purchaser shall be bound by the notices and orders issued pursuant to this chapter. It is the purchaser's responsibility to provide a copy to the building
official of the document changing ownership which has been recorded in the official public records of Jefferson County, Idaho. (Ord. 2013-562, 9-3-
2013)
4-8-8: STANDARDS FOR VACATION, REPAIR, AND/OR DEMOLITION:
If the building official deems it necessary in the performance of his duties and responsibilities imposed herein, the building official may request an
inspection and report be made by any other city department or retain the services of an expert(s) whenever the building official deems such services are
necessary. The building official shall follow the following standards in ordering repair, vacation, or demolition of a dangerous building:
A. If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it no longer will exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered repaired.
B. If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety, and/or welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered vacated
and repaired.
C. In all cases where a dangerous building cannot be repaired so that it no longer will exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be demolished.
D. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of this chapter or any other city ordinance, or state or federal
statute, it shall be ordered repaired or demolished.
E. In all cases because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities, or otherwise, are unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to threaten the
health, safety, or welfare of those occupying (or who may occupy) such building or structure, it shall be ordered repaired or demolished.
All repairs that are deemed necessary to bring the dangerous building/structure into compliance with this chapter must conform to the building code as
adopted by the city and any other city ordinances. (Ord. 2013-562, 9-3-2013)
4-8-9: NOTICE OF REQUIRED ABATEMENT:
A. Notice: After a determination that a structure requires abatement, an initial notice shall be provided to the owner as defined under definitions, "owner of
record".
B. Contents: The initial notice shall contain the following:
1. The nature of the violation(s) of the minimum standards; and
2. That the structure is dangerous and that the owner must vacate and/or repair, remove, or demolish the structure for the good of the public health,
safety, and welfare.
C. Posting: The notice shall be posted on the dangerous building as follows:
THIS STRUCTURE IS A DANGEROUS BUILDING ACCORDING TO THE MINIMUM STANDARDS SET FORTH IN THE CITY OF RIGBY, IDAHO
CODE OF ORDINANCES, TITLE 4, CHAPTER 8 AND THE OWNER MUST REPAIR, REMOVE, OR DEMOLISH IT. CONTACT AT FOR FURTHER
INFORMATION. DATE . THIS NOTICE SHALL REMAIN ON THIS STRUCTURE UNTIL IT IS REPAIRED, REMOVED FROM THE CITY OF RIGBY,
IDAHO CITY LIMITS, OR DEMOLISHED.
D. Notification To Building Official: The owner or the owner's designated representative has thirty (30) days from the date of the notice to contact the
building official regarding their intent to repair, remove, or demolish the dangerous building. Notification to the building official must be in writing and
provide a date when repair, removal, or demolition will be completed. (Ord. 2013-562, 9-3-2013)
4-8-10: HEARINGS:
A public hearing shall be held so that the board may determine whether the structure complies with the minimum standards set forth in this chapter.
A. Notice Of Hearing:
1. The city clerk shall make a diligent effort to discover the identity and address of the owner(s) of record and any lienholders or mortgagees of the
structure and the underlying property.
2. The city clerk shall notify each owner, lienholder, or mortgagee by mail.
3. The city clerk shall notify any unknown interested parties by posting a copy of the notice on each structure.
4. The city clerk will notify all adjoining property owners within one hundred feet (100') that a public hearing is called on the underlying property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 52/201
5. The city clerk shall file a notice of hearing as prescribed by city code in the official newspaper of the city.
B. Contents Of Notice Of Hearing: The notice of hearing shall contain the following information:
1. The owner, lienholder, mortgagee or unknown interested parties have the burden of proof and will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the
scope of any work that may be required to make the structure comply with this chapter and the amount of time it will take to reasonably perform the
work.
2. The name and address of the owner of record.
3. A legal description of the property.
4. A general description of the structures not meeting the minimum standards.
5. A description of the proceeding.
C. Conduct Of Hearings: Section 604 - conduct of hearings (604.1 through 604.7.4) of the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings is
hereby adopted as the manner in which hearings shall be conducted.
D. Orders Of The Board:
1. The board may issue one of the following orders:
a. Order to secure or vacate the structure and relocate the occupants (if occupied).
b. Order to repair, remove or demolish.
c. Order to remove or demolish.
d. Order to release.
2. If the structure is occupied by owner's permission or consent and the board issues an order pursuant to subsection D1a of this section, the structure
shall be vacated and the occupants relocated at owner's expense. If the structure is occupied without owner's consent or without tenant's rights, such
tenants shall be evicted per Idaho Code.
3. Orders of the board issued pursuant to subsections D1b and D1c of this section shall allow sixty (60) days for the ordered action to be completed.
4. If a residential structure is removed or demolished pursuant to this chapter, all accessory structures located on the same property may be removed
or demolished, if deemed a dangerous structure.
5. The city clerk shall promptly mail a copy of any order issued pursuant to subsection D1 of this section, to the owner of record, any lienholder or
mortgagee along with a notice containing the following:
a. An identification of the structure and the property on which it is located;
b. A description of the violation(s) of the minimum standards;
c. A statement that the city will secure, vacate, repair, remove or demolish the structure if the ordered action is not taken within sixty (60) days.
6. Sixty (60) days after an order to repair, remove or demolish has been issued, the building official has the authority to request the utilities be
disconnected at the structure in order to prepare for demolition.
7. Within ten (10) days following the date that an order is issued, the building official shall:
a. File a copy of the order in the office of the city clerk; and
b. The city clerk shall publish in the official newspaper of the city a notice containing the following:
(1) The street address or legal description of the property;
(2) The date the hearing was held;
(3) A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
(4) Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. (Ord. 2013-562, 9-3-2013)
4-8-11: APPEALS:
Any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of record of property jointly or severally aggrieved by an order of the board of appeals under this chapter may file in
district court a verified petition setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition must be
filed by an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee within thirty (30) calendar days after the date a copy of the board's order is mailed to them in accordance with
this chapter. (Ord. 2013-562, 9-3-2013)
4-8-12: PROCEDURES AFTER APPEALS:
The city shall order by form of petition with a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain authority to complete the declaratory action contained in the order.
(Ord. 2013-562, 9-3-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 53/201
4-8-13: EXPENSE OF ABATEMENT:
A. Action Of City: If an owner or other interested party does not secure, vacate, repair, or demolish a structure within sixty (60) days, the building official
may take the ordered action at the city's expense.
B. Calculation Of Costs:
1. Costs: Costs include all expenses incurred as a result of the enforcement of the order.
2. Administrative Expenses: The general administrative expenses of inspecting structures, locating owners, conducting hearings, and issuing notices
and orders, together with all associated administrative functions, require a reasonable minimum charge of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
property. The city clerk shall maintain an accounting of all expenses incurred during this process. If the total is greater than five hundred dollars
($500.00) the cost shall be the greater amount.
3. Lien: Any expenses incurred by the city pursuant to subsection B1 of this section will be assessed against the property on which the structure stands
or stood. The city will have a privileged lien upon filing same in the official public records of Jefferson County, Idaho, subordinate only to tax liens
against the property unless it is a homestead as protected by Idaho statutes. The lien will be extinguished if the property owner or other interested
party reimburses the city for all expenses and penalties. (Ord. 2013-562, 9-3-2013)
Title 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
The head of the department shall be known as the chief of police and the number of additional members of the department, together with ranks and titles,
shall be determined by the council by resolution. (1999 Code)
5-1-2: COMPENSATION:
The compensation to be paid members of the police department shall be fixed by the council. (1999 Code)
5-1-3: CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Duties In General:
1. The chief of police shall be conservator of the peace, have supervision and control of the police department and its members, by and with the advice
and consent of the mayor and city council. It shall be his duty to see that all laws and ordinances that affect the city be enforced, kept and obeyed.
He shall recommend to the mayor and council the appointment of any additional police officers, whether permanent or casual, to ensure the proper
patrolling and preservation of the peace, and safeguard the lives and property of the inhabitants of the city. (1980 Code § 2.8.1; amd. 1999 Code)
2. The chief of police shall perform all other duties imposed by law, ordinance or resolution, or request of the mayor and city council. (1980 Code
§ 2.8.3)
B. Law Enforcement; Department Equipment: The chief of police shall be responsible to the council for law enforcement and for property of the city used
by the department.
C. Training And Discipline: The chief of police shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline of the members of the department.
D. Records; Reports: The chief of police shall be responsible for the keeping of adequate records and shall report to the council on the needs of the
department and its work. (1999 Code)
E. Assisting Fire Chief: The chief of police shall accompany the fire chief when so required during the inspection of public buildings or any other inspection
that is needed or considered necessary, wherein the health, safety, sanitation and fire hazard is under inspection or consideration. (1980 Code § 2.8.2)
5-1-4: DUTIES OF POLICE:
A. Obey Instructions: Every officer of the department subordinate to the chief shall obey the instructions of the chief and any superior officer.
B. Enforce Ordinances, Laws: Members of the police department shall enforce the ordinances and laws applicable to the city, bring violations before the
appropriate county court and make complaints for offenses coming to their knowledge.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 54/201
C. Service Of Process: Members of the police department shall serve process on behalf of the city and shall serve such notices as may be required by the
council or other authority. (1999 Code)
5-1-5: UNIFORM AND BADGE:
Each member of the department shall, while on duty, wear a suitable badge and uniform, except that the chief may authorize the performance of specific
duties while not in uniform. When a member terminates membership in the department, such member shall immediately deliver to the City his/her badge,
and all other property of the City in his/her possession. (1999 Code)
5-1-6: POLICE VEHICLES AT PERSONAL RESIDENCES:
Employees may take City owned vehicles home, only with prior approval from their Sergeant, and meet the following criteria: (Ord. 2015-583, 9-17-2015)
A. Off street parking shall be available at the employee's residence.
B. Vehicles shall be locked when not attended. (Ord. 2015-583, 9-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
5-1-7: POLICE TRAINING AND STANDARDS:
The Idaho Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST) Council mandates that all peace officers and detention officers designated to act as peace
officers employed within the State of Idaho shall receive certification by POST within the prescribed time periods specified1. (Ord. 2015-583, 9-17-2015)
5-1-8: NEGLECT OF DUTY:
Any police officer who shall be guilty of neglect of duty or refuse to perform any duty required of him in his official duties, or is found guilty of fraud,
extortion, oppression, favoritism or wrongdoing, upon conviction, shall be removed from office and be subject to any civil or criminal prosecution that the
case may warrant. (1980 Code § 2.9.2)
5-1-9: EXCESSIVE FORCE POLICY:
It is the policy of the City that excessive force by local law enforcement agencies shall not be used against individuals engaged in lawful and nonviolent
civil rights demonstrations within the City boundaries. (Res. 113, 3-2-2004)
Chapter 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
5-2-1: CRIMINAL AND MINOR CONSUMPTION STATUTES ADOPTED:
A. Criminal Offenses: Pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-901, the City hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the entirety of title 18 of the Idaho
Code including Idaho Code sections 18-100 through 18-2001, as such were existing on July 1, 1992, and as amended thereafter through action of the
State Legislature. Said sections represent the majority of criminal offenses for the State of Idaho.
B. Minor Consumption: Pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-901, the City hereby adopts and incorporates by reference Idaho Code sections 23-949, 23-
1023, 23-1024, 23-929 and 23-1334, as such were existing on July 1, 1992, and as amended thereafter through action of the State Legislature. (Ord.
425, 11-3-1992)
5-2-2: LIQUOR POSSESSION IN PARKS:
A. Definitions: The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes:
1. "Alcohol" meaning the product of distillation of any fermented liquor, rectified either once or more often, whatever may be the origin thereof, or
synthetic ethyl alcohol.
2. "Spirits" meaning any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation mixed with drinkable water and other substances in solution,
including among other things, brandy, rum, whiskey, and gin.
3. "Wine" meaning any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of natural sugar content of fruits (grapes, apples, etc.) or other agricultural
products containing sugar (honey, milk, etc.).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 55/201
4. Any liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, or wine and susceptible of being consumed by a human being, for beverage
purposes, and containing more than six percent (6%) of alcohol by weight.
BEER: Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, malt, and/or other ingredients in drinkable water
and which beverage contains not more than six percent (6%) of alcohol by weight. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
B. Exercise Of Police Power: This section shall be deemed as exercise of the police power of the City for the protection of the public health, safety and
morals of the citizens, and all its provisions shall be liberally construed for the attainment of that purpose. (1980 Code § 6.4.2)
C. Possession In Parks: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, or have in his or her possession, any alcoholic liquor or beer in any public park or
any outdoor public recreation area or in any public parking lot adjacent to such park or recreation area within the City, except in those areas and under
those circumstances hereinafter in this section set forth. (1980 Code § 6.4.3)
D. Exceptions: Any provision in this section to the contrary notwithstanding, beer may be possessed, and consumed, in any public park within the area for
which a local retailer's license for sale and disposition of beer has been duly issued by the City. The boundaries of such "licensed" areas shall be
clearly posted by the City, and any person possessing or carrying said beverage into any "nonlicensed" areas of a public park shall be in violation of the
provisions of this section. The retail licensee and his agents and suppliers shall be permitted to transport beer into the licensed area of the park for sale
and disposition. (1980 Code § 6.4.4)
5-2-3: FIREARMS:
A. Definitions:
FIREARM: Any weapon, device or instrument from which a shot, shell, pellet, BB, bullet or other projectile may be discharged by or through the force
of exploding gunpowder, combustion, gas and/or other explosive material.
WEAPON: 1. Any instrument used in the propulsion or discharge of any projectile capable of causing bodily injury by or through the release of a
pressurized gas, compressed air, expanding gas, accelerant, spring, or other force-producing means including, but not limited to, a blow gun, air rifle,
spring gun, wrist rocket, slingshot, BB gun, pellet gun, paintball gun, rocket having a propellant charge of more than four (4) ounces, bow, compound
bow, crossbow, recurve bow, and sling; or
2. Any instrument designed to or capable of inflicting death or serious bodily injury when discharged, propelled, or thrown, including, but not limited
to, a grenade, bomb, missile having an explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-fourth (1/4) ounce, spear, hatchet, ax, knife, sling,
throwing star, or sword.
3. Weapon shall not include a starter pistol or similar instrument designed and operated as a noisemaker if, upon firing, no projectile is propelled or
discharged; a toy such as a water gun, cap gun, squirt gun; or a toy that propels or discharges a projectile unlikely to cause bodily harm or
commonly used tools or equipment used in the construction trades.
B. Discharge Of Weapons Prohibited:
1. It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms or weapons within the City limits.
2. It shall also be unlawful to discharge any guns known as a BB or pellet gun, which guns propel a projectile by use of compressed air or carbon
dioxide. The discharge of any bow and arrow, other than a toy, is similarly unlawful.
C. Exceptions:
1. Permits: The Mayor and City Council may at any time, upon receipt of proper application, grant special permits to shooting galleries, gun clubs and
others for shooting in fixed localities and under specified rules. Such permits shall be in writing attested by the City Clerk conforming to such
requirements as the Mayor and City Council shall demand, and the permit thus issued shall be subject to revocation at any time by action of the
Mayor and City Council.
2. Limited Use Permit: A permit may be issued by the Chief of Police for the limited use of a spring or air powered BB or pellet gun, wrist rocket, or
slingshot as a means of pest control. The application for the permit will be available at the Police Department. The application shall include the
description of the weapon to be used, the days that the applicant plans to use the weapon, and a description of the situation that requires the use of
said weapon for pest control. The amount of days allowed for limited use shall not exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days, and no more than
nine (9) days total in a calendar year. BB and pellet guns shall not discharge a BB or pellet larger than .177 caliber. Wrist rockets and slingshots shall
not be used with projectiles exceeding .38 caliber.
3. Discharge By Certain Authorities: The discharge of a firearm or weapon by law enforcement officers, military personnel or militia in the discharge of
their duties or in the authorized performance of ceremonials.
4. Lawful Defense: Where a person exhibiting, drawing, pointing, directing, or discharging a firearm or weapon did so in the lawful defense of person,
persons, property, dwelling, or residence. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
5-2-4: SAND OR GRAVEL FALLING FROM TRUCK:
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person who is the owner, driver, or otherwise, to drive on or along or across any street, alley, or sidewalk within the
corporate limits of the City, any vehicle loaded with sand, gravel, ashes, cinders, mortar or other kindred substances, and allow same to be shaken, littered
or scattered on said street, alley or sidewalk because of a defective box or contrivance in which said substances are being hauled, or for any other reason.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 56/201
Any person found in violation of this section shall be guilty of an infraction with a twenty five dollar ($25.00) penalty for the first violation, a one hundred
dollar ($100.00) penalty for the second violation, a two hundred dollar ($200.00) penalty for the third violation and a three hundred dollar ($300.00) penalty
for the fourth and each subsequent violation within three (3) consecutive calendar years. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
5-2-5: SHOVELING SNOW OFF SIDEWALKS:
A. Removal Of Snow And Ice Required; Time Limit: Every person who may own, lease, or occupy any building within the corporate limits of the City, which
abuts on the main street of the City, or any adjacent streets, and has a good and substantial cement sidewalk in front of said building, shall clean the
same of any snow, slush, ice or other refuse within ten (10) hours after the close of any windstorm or other storm that may take place.
B. Failure To Remove Snow Or Ice; Penalty: Any person who neglects to comply with the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction, shall be subject to an infraction with a fifty dollar ($50.00) penalty for the first and second violations and a one hundred dollar
($100.00) penalty for the third and subsequent violations within a calendar year. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
5-2-6: CURB SERVICE FOOD OR BEVERAGE SALES:
It shall be an infraction with a one hundred dollar ($100.00) penalty for the first violation for any person to operate in front of his place of business what is
commonly called a curb service, or for any person operating a motor vehicle to pull up, stop or solicit any so called curb service in food or drink, in front of
any business establishment, or place where food and drink are served, and in any manner interfere with the free passage of other vehicles or pedestrians
upon the streets or sidewalks, as the case may be, in any of the business districts within the City. A second violation within three (3) years will be treated
as a misdemeanor as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
5-2-7: INTERFERENCE WITH IRRIGATION:
For the purpose of properly complying with Idaho Code title 42, chapter 12, in the proper exercise of the duties connected with the distribution of water for
irrigation purposes, it is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor for any person not authorized by the City to meddle, dam, turn, or interfere in any manner
with such water for irrigation, and rearrange the schedule of the City, and thereby deprive any user or landowner from the uninterrupted use of the same,
as set forth by the water master or other person in charge1. (1980 Code § 6.1.6; amd. 1999 Code)
5-2-8: PENALTY:
Any person who commits any misdemeanor as listed in this chapter, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code §§ 6.1.7, 6.2.3, 6.4.5; amd. 1999 Code)
5-2-9: PARK HOURS RESTRICTED:
The Rigby City parks, that is all City public lands, including, but not limited to, the north and south parks, excluding the fairgrounds, shall close at eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. until sunrise. The Chief of Police may authorize, in writing, an exception to the above restriction.
Anyone who remains or enters upon the property after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and prior to sunrise shall be guilty of an infraction for the first violation
with a twenty five dollar ($25.00) penalty, an infraction for the second violation with a fifty dollar ($50.00) penalty, and misdemeanor for the third and
subsequent violations within a calendar year, and punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
5-2-10: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
A. 1. It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of alcohol, drugs or any other intoxicating substances, or who has an alcohol concentration of
0.08, as defined in subsection hereafter, or more, as shown by analysis of his blood, urine, breath, or other bodily substance, to be a pedestrian who is
under the influence of alcohol or drugs to a degree which renders them a hazard and who walk or are otherwise upon a highway except on a sidewalk,
or regarding persons who are using or are under the influence of controlled substances or narcotic drugs and who are on public property, roadways or
conveyances or on private property open to the public and such person is guilty of a misdemeanor.
2. For purposes of this section, an evidentiary test for alcohol concentration is a determination of the percent by weight of alcohol in blood and shall be
based upon a formula of grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood, per two hundred ten liters (210 L) of breath or sixty
seven milliliters (67 mL) of urine. Analysis of blood, urine or breath for the purpose of determining the blood alcohol concentration shall be performed
by a laboratory operated by the Idaho State Police or by a laboratory approved by the Idaho State Police under the provisions of approval and
certification standards to be set by that department, or by any other method approved by the Idaho State Police. Notwithstanding any other provision
of law or rule of court, the results of any test for alcohol concentration and records relating to calibration, approval, certification or quality control
performed by a laboratory operated or approved by the Idaho State Police or by any other method approved by the Idaho State Police shall be
admissible in any proceeding in this State without the necessity of producing a witness to establish the reliability of the testing procedure for
examination.
3. Any person found in violation of this section and found guilty thereof, may be subjected to the penalties for a misdemeanor as amended or modified
in Idaho Code section 18-113. (Ord. 07-532, 1-15-2008)
5-2-11: VAGRANCY:
Persons within the limits of the City of Rigby, Idaho who are lodging upon the premises of others or upon City property and not giving a satisfactory
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 57/201
account of themselves shall be deemed vagrants, and on conviction shall be liable for each offense as a general misdemeanor as defined in this Code, as
amended. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
Chapter 3
CURFEW
5-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this Chapter are:
A. To regulate and prohibit minors from remaining in public places during certain hours of the day;
B. To protect minors from each other and from other adult perpetrators of crime;
C. To reduce nocturnal juvenile crime and juvenile delinquency;
D. To promote family responsibility and parental control over their children; and
E. To protect and promote the peace, health, safety, welfare and tranquility of the inhabitants of the City. (Ord. 464, 3-4-1997, eff. midnight 4-1-1997)
5-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are defined as follows:
CURFEW HOURS: The hours between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. the next day, beginning on Sundays and running through
Thursdays of each week; and, from twelve thirty o'clock (12:30) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) A.M. the next day on Saturday and Sunday mornings (commonly
known as Friday and Saturday nights from 12:30 A.M. to 5:00 A.M.)
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state, that calls for immediate action to prevent, control or minimize serious
bodily injury, death or significant loss of property.
EMPLOYMENT ACTIVITY: The performance of any responsibilities or duties expressly or impliedly required as a condition of employment of a minor.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN: A guardian is: a) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; b) a public or private agency with whom a minor
has been placed by order of a court; or c) a person to whom a parent or guardian has delegated any of his or her powers with respect to a minor pursuant
to Idaho Code section 15-5-104.
MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation which owns or operates an establishment.
PARENT: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the general public has access including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks and the common
areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities, shopping malls, public parking lots and commercial businesses.
REMAIN: To linger or stay or to fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of an
establishment. (Ord. 464, 3-4-1997, eff. midnight 4-1-1997)
5-3-3: JUVENILE CURFEW:
Any minor who remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours is guilty of an infraction for the first
violation with a one hundred dollar ($100.00) penalty, an infraction for the second violation with a two hundred dollar ($200.00) penalty, an infraction for the
third violation with a three hundred dollar ($300.00) penalty and a misdemeanor for the fourth and subsequent violations within a calendar year pursuant to
section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
5-3-4: PARENTAL VIOLATION OF CURFEW HOURS:
Any parent or guardian of a minor is guilty of a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly permits, or by culpable indifference allows, such minor to remain in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours. (Ord. 464, 3-4-1997, eff. midnight 4-1-1997)
5-3-5: VIOLATION OF CURFEW HOURS BY BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 58/201
Any owner, operator or any employee or other person in control of an establishment is guilty of a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly or willingly allows
such minor to be upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. (Ord. 464, 3-4-1997, eff. midnight 4-1-1997)
5-3-6: DEFENSES:
A. Defense For Minor: It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter if the offending minor was:
1. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
2. On an errand at the express direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
3. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
4. Engaged in employment activity or going to an employment activity or returning to the minor's place of residence, without any detour or stop;
5. Involved in an emergency;
6. Within the yard or upon the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of another adult with whom the parent or guardian of
such minor has expressly placed temporary custody of the minor;
7. Attending an officially-sponsored school, religious or other recreational, cultural or educational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a
public entity or a religious, charitable, fraternal, civil or other similar organization organized by adults, or going to or returning home from such
activities, without any detour or stop;
8. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution or rights protected by article I, section 9 of the Constitution of the
State of Idaho;
9. Is married or has had the disabilities of minor removed in the manner provided by law.
B. Defense For Business Establishment: It is a defense to prosecution under section 5-3-5 of this chapter that the owner, operator or employee of an
establishment asked the minor to leave the premises and promptly notified the law enforcement that a minor is present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refuses to leave. (Ord. 464, 3-4-1997, eff. midnight 4-1-1997)
5-3-7: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Police Authority: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a peace officer shall ask the apparent offending minor's age and reason for
being in the public place or establishment. The peace officer shall not request a juvenile petition or make an arrest under this chapter unless the officer
reasonably believes that a violation of this chapter has occurred and that, based an any response and all other circumstances, no defense is present.
Additionally, the juvenile shall be presented a written warning should this be the initial violation of this chapter and he returns to his residence.
B. Procedure Upon Arrest Of Minor: Any peace officer who arrests a minor under this chapter shall immediately take the minor to the Jefferson County
Sheriff's Department and summon his or her parent or guardian. If the minor's parent or guardian arrives within a reasonable period of time, the minor
shall be remanded to the custody of the parent or guardian and shall be released upon the recognizance of his or her parent or guardian. Should the
parent or guardian not be available or refuse to take responsibility for the child, the Department of Health and Welfare shall be notified. The department
may make reasonable accommodations to maintain detention as such is provided by law or court decision. (Ord. 464, 3-4-1997, eff. midnight 4-1-1997)
5-3-8: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall, upon his or her first conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00).
B. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter within three (3) years after another conviction for any other violation under this chapter shall be
punished, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 464, 3-4-1997, eff. midnight 4-1-1997)
Chapter 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
5-4-1: DOG OWNER DEFINED:
The term "owner", as used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean and include any person, association, or corporation owning, harboring or keeping a
dog or dogs within the corporate limits of the city. (1980 Code § 6.9.2)
5-4-2: DOG LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES:
A. Annual License Required: It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, harbor or possess a dog within the city unless the owner or person in charge of said
dog shall have obtained an annual dog license from the city. (1980 Code § 6.9.2; amd. 1999 Code)
B. License Fees: The fee for said annual dog license shall be as set by city resolution. (Ord. 2015-583, 9-17-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 59/201
5-4-3: ISSUANCE OF TAG; FEE FOR DUPLICATE TAG:
A. Issuance Of Tags And Receipt: The license fee shall be paid to the city clerk, who shall thereupon give to the person paying for such license a receipt
reciting the owner's name, the number of the license; and also a metal tag or disc bearing the year of issuance and a license number corresponding
with that mentioned in the receipt.
B. Lost Tag; Fee For Duplicate: In the event of loss of the license tag, a duplicate shall be provided the owner by the city clerk at the expense of fifty cents
($0.50) for each tag.
C. Affixing Tag To Collar: Said license tag or disc shall be affixed to a collar worn by the dog to be licensed under the provisions of this chapter. (1980
Code § 6.9.2)
5-4-4: NONCOMMERCIAL KENNEL LICENSE:
A. License Required; Application; Consent; Fee:
1. License Required: It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, harbor or possess upon the premises of any one household more than two (2) dogs unless
the owner or person in charge thereof shall have obtained a noncommercial kennel license. (1980 Code § 6.9.2)
2. Application; Consent Of Neighboring Property Owners: Application for a noncommercial kennel license shall be made to the city clerk and must be
accompanied by the written consent to such noncommercial kennel by at least seventy five percent (75%) of all the persons in possession of
premises within one hundred foot (100') radius, measured from the outside property boundary of the premises upon which said noncommercial
kennel is to be maintained. Application shall contain a map showing applicant home and adjacent residence within the one hundred foot (100')
radius.
3. Application Fee: Said application fee shall be set by city resolution. (Ord. 2015-583, 9-17-2015)
B. Contents Of Application; Conditions For Approval:
1. Contents Of Application: The application shall state the name and address of the owner, where the noncommercial kennel is to be kept and the
number of dogs. (1980 Code § 6.9.2)
2. Compliance With Health Regulations: The application shall be submitted to the mayor and city council, and the council shall determine whether or
not the location and operation of said kennel complies with the health ordinances in the city. If such determination is unfavorable, no license shall be
issued. (1980 Code § 6.9.2; amd. 1999 Code)
C. License Nontransferable; Term; Report Changes:
1. Nontransferable; Term: Noncommercial kennel licenses shall not be transferable, and shall expire on December 31 of the year in which issued.
(1980 Code § 6.9.2)
2. Report Changes; New Applications Pay Additional Fee: Whenever additions are made to the number of dogs for which a kennel license has been
issued, the licensee shall, within three (3) days, report to the city clerk, begin a new application, and pay the required license fee; provided, however,
that whenever puppies are born to a dog theretofore counted in computing the license fee, such puppies shall not be counted as additions until three
(3) months old. (Ord. 2015-583, 9-17-2015)
D. Issuance Of License; Additional Requirements: The issuance of a noncommercial kennel license shall not obviate the necessity of obtaining an
individual dog license nor shall any of the provisions hereof be deemed to vary or alter any of the zoning ordinances of the city. (1980 Code § 6.9.2)
E. Revocation:
1. The mayor, or police chief, in an emergency, may revoke a noncommercial kennel license if the kennel owner or person in charge fails to comply
with the health ordinances of the city.
2. The noncommercial kennel license may, upon good cause, be revoked if sufficient neighbors withdraw their consent through written notification to
the city clerk that the application no longer has the requisite seventy five percent (75%) consent.
3. Failure to pay the annual fee for each dog within thirty (30) days of notification of expiration shall result in a revocation of a noncommercial kennel
license.
F. Application Form:
CITY OF RIGBY
NONCOMMERCIAL KENNEL LICENSE APPLICATION
Applicant:
Premises for which license is requested
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 60/201
Number of Dogs:
Application Fee: As set by city resolution.
DECISION
Based upon the report of the Health and Sanitation Committee and consideration of 75 percent of the residents who live within 100 feet of the
applicant's residence, the Application for Noncommercial Kennel License is hereby approved. This license is good until December 31, and is in effect to
allow dogs.
Dated this day of , 20 .
CITY OF RIGBY
By:
DECISION
Based upon the:
report of the Health and Sanitation committee; and/or
failure to have the consent of the 75 percent of the neighbor who live within 100 feet of the premises;
Your Application for Noncommercial Kennel License, has been denied.
Dated this day of , 20 .
CITY OF RIGBY
By:
(Ord. 2015-583, 9-17-2015)
5-4-5: LIVESTOCK AND FOWL PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Prohibition; Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs And Domestic Hen Chickens Excepted: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the
corporate limits of the City, either on his premises or on the premises of another, any cows, horses, mules, sheep, goats, hogs, or other domestic
animals or fowl, other than cats, dogs, and that particular species of swine commonly known as a Vietnamese potbellied pig and domestic hen
chickens as hereinafter described.
B. Vietnamese Potbellied Pig: The Vietnamese potbellied pig shall be allowed into the City upon the following additional conditions:
1. The animal, prior to entering into the City, has been tested for pseudo rabies and brucellosis and been found clean of such diseases;
2. The animal is subject to licensing, kenneling, and other requirements of this chapter pertaining to dogs;
3. That such animal is treated as a domestic animal in a similar manner as dogs and cats.
C. Domestic Hen Chickens: Notwithstanding the foregoing, the keeping of not more than eight (8) domestic hen chickens is permitted in the rear yard of
any single-family dwelling or duplex located in a residential zone, provided the following requirements are observed:
1. Eggs provided by such hens will not be sold for pecuniary gain or profit.
2. For the purposes for this subsection, the term "rear yard" means a residential yard lying between the rear lot line and the nearest foundation line of
the main building and extending across the full width of the lot. In the case of a corner lot, where the building fronts on a side street, the rear yard
may be established from the rear of the house to the side of the property line.
D. Conventional Swine And Fowl Banned: Conventional swine, hogs, and pigs, other than the Vietnamese potbellied pig, and fowl other than domestic hen
chickens shall remain banned from the City. (Ord. 2014-569, 5-14-2014)
E. Penalty: Any person keeping or harboring any cows, horses, mules, sheep, goats, hogs, chickens (other than domestic hen chickens), or other
domestic animals or fowl, other than cats, dogs, and potbellied pigs, and domestic hen chickens within the City limits, shall be guilty of maintaining a
public nuisance and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty for an infraction on the first violation with a one hundred dollar ($100.00)
penalty, an infraction on the second violation with a two hundred dollar ($200.00) penalty, and an infraction on the third and subsequent violations with
a three hundred dollar ($300.00) penalty. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
5-4-6: CONTROL OR CONFINEMENT REQUIRED:
A. Control Or Confinement Required: Except as provided by section 5-4-7 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any owner to allow or permit any dog,
whether licensed or not, to be or remain upon the streets or alleys of the City, or in any public place in the City, or upon any other premises without the
consent of the person in possession of such premises, unless:
1. Such dog shall be in the charge of a person and controlled by a leash; or unless
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 61/201
2. Such dog shall be confined in a motor vehicle.
B. Penalty: Upon a first violation the matter will be considered an infraction with a one hundred dollar ($100.00) penalty, an infraction for the second
violation with a two hundred dollar ($200.00) penalty and an infraction for the third and subsequent violations with a three hundred dollar ($300.00)
penalty if occurring within a three (3) year period. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
5-4-7: PUBLIC AREAS DESIGNATED FOR TRAINING AND EXERCISE:
The City Council may designate such areas of the public park or other public grounds of the City which may be used, subject to such rules and regulations
as may be prescribed, for the training or exercise of dogs. Dogs within such areas so designated need not be controlled by leash but shall be under the
control of a responsible person and controlled by a whistle, voice or other effective command. (1980 Code § 6.9.2)
5-4-8: RABIES; PROCEDURE UPON DETECTION:
A. Disposal Of Afflicted Dog: Any dog afflicted with rabies shall be disposed of immediately either by the owner or by the Chief of Police.
B. Quarantine Or Impoundment Authorized:
1. The Chief of Police, his assistants, or any person designated by the Chief of Police shall have authority to order the owner of any dog showing
symptoms of rabies, or of any dog which has bitten any person so as to cause any abrasion of the skin, to subject such dog to the City pound for
quarantine for a period of not to exceed fifteen (15) days, and if such owner shall pay one-half (1/2) of the regular fee for keeping dogs impounded,
no other fee shall be charged. If such fee is not paid, the dog shall be subject to disposal as provided in section 5-4-10 of this chapter.
2. Provided, however, that in lieu of submitting such dog to the City pound, the owner may, at his expense, admit such a dog to a veterinarian for
examination. (1980 Code § 6.9.2)
5-4-9: NOISY OR VICIOUS DOGS:
It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, harbor or possess a howling, barking, noisy or vicious dog. Any such dog shall be considered as a public nuisance
and may be abated as such with a general misdemeanor as the potential penalty as described in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
5-4-10: SEIZURE OF STRAY DOGS; NOTIFY OWNER; FEES:
A. Police Duties: It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, his assistants, or any other person designated by the Chief of Police, to seize and maintain the
dog at such facility as designated by the City of Rigby; and, if unclaimed, to kill and properly bury in some suitable place within the County any and all
dogs, whenever and wherever found, whether on public or private property within the City without a collar with such license tag or marking collars with
such license tag or disk, whenever and wherever found, whether on public or private property, on which the owner has failed to renew the annual
license; provided, that when a dog wearing a collar with a license attached has been taken up, the Chief of Police shall notify the owner, if known, who
may thereupon recover possession of the dog upon payment of the license fee, fine and cost.
B. Fees: Costs shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for pick up fee and seventeen dollars fifty cents ($17.50) a day for impound fee, as well as any required
vaccination or other fees deemed necessary by the veterinarian. The impounded dog's owner may contest the fee if deemed to be extraordinary.
C. Penalties: Penalties for this title shall be set by a schedule, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council of the City of Rigby, Idaho, unless stated
otherwise herein. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
5-4-11: VIOLATION; FINES:
Any person violating the provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on the first offense shall be punishable by a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). A second offense shall be punishable by a fine not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A third or subsequent offense shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or five (5) days in jail. For purposes of this section, all violations within three (3) years of the
last offense shall be considered. (Ord. 393, 6-19-1984)
Title 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
IDAHO VEHICLE LAWS
6-1-1: STATE VEHICLE LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 62/201
A. Intent: It is hereby declared to be the intent of the City Council to aid and assist by whatever means possible, for the utmost consistency in traffic
regulation among and between agencies of Idaho having such jurisdiction. Toward that end, adoption of the Idaho Motor Vehicle Laws by the cities of
Idaho is a necessary means of assuring maximum uniformity within the State. (1980 Code § 10.1.1)
B. Adoption Of Statute: There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the use of all streets and public thoroughfares of
the City, that certain code, identified as the latest edition of the Idaho Motor Vehicle Laws, more particularly Idaho Code title 49, published by the Idaho
Department of Transportation, and as the same may hereafter be revised by the Idaho Legislature, or amended by the City Council, and the same is
hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the City as fully as though set forth at length herein. (1980 Code § 10.1.2; amd. 1999 Code)
C. Copies On File: One copy of the Idaho Motor Vehicle Laws, together with any revisions or amendments, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be kept on
file in the Clerk's office for use and examination of and by the public. (1980 Code § 10.1.3; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 2
TRAFFIC CITATIONS; PENALTY
6-2-1: FORMS AND RECORDS OF CITATIONS AND ARRESTS:
A. Citations In Book Form: The City Clerk shall provide books to include traffic citation forms for notifying alleged violators to appear and answer to
charges of violating traffic laws in the Magistrate Court. Said books shall include serially numbered sets of citations in quadruplicate in the forms
prescribed and approved by the Mayor.
B. Responsibility Of Police Chief: The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the issuance of such books to individual members of the Police Department.
The Chief of Police shall require a written receipt for every book so issued and shall maintain a record of every such book and each set of citations
contained therein. (1980 Code § 10.22.1; amd. 1999 Code)
6-2-2: ISSUANCE OF CITATION BY POLICE OFFICER:
Except when authorized or directed to immediately take a person before a magistrate for the violation of any traffic law, a police officer who halts a person
for such violation, other than for the purpose of giving him a warning notice and does not take such person into custody under arrest, shall take the name,
address and operator's license number of said person, the registered number of the motor vehicle involved and such other pertinent information as may be
necessary, and shall issue to him in writing on a form provided by the City Clerk, a traffic citation containing a notice to answer to the charge against him in
the Magistrate Court at a time at least five (5) days after such alleged violation to be specified in said citation. The officer, upon receiving the written
promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified in the citation, shall release such person from custody. (1980 Code § 10.22.2; amd. 1999 Code)
6-2-3: CITATIONS MAINTENANCE; ALTERATION:
A. Disposition Of Quadruple Copies Of Citation: Every police officer, upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged violator of a traffic ordinance of the City,
shall also provide one copy for the court, one for the officer and one for the records.
B. Return Citations To Police Chief: The Chief of Police shall require the return to him of each traffic citation and all copies thereof, except that copy
required to be retained in the book as provided herein, which has been spoiled or upon which an entry has been made and has not been issued to an
alleged violator.
C. Maintain Record Of Disposition Of Charge: The Chief of Police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained in connection with every traffic citation
issued by a member of the Police Department a record of the disposition of the charge by the Magistrate Court.
D. Misconduct To Alter Or Deface Citation: It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for any member of the Police Department or other officer or public
employee to dispose of, alter, or deface a traffic citation or any copy thereof, or the record of the issuance or disposition of any traffic citation,
complaint, or warrant in a manner other than as required. (1980 Code § 10.22.3; amd. 1999 Code)
6-2-4: AUDIT OF REPORTS AND RECORDS:
Every record of traffic citations, complaint thereon, and warrants issued therefor required in this Chapter shall be audited at least quarterly by the City
Clerk who shall submit a report of such audit together with a summary thereof to the Mayor. Such reports shall be public records. (1980 Code § 10.22.5)
6-2-5: CITATION DEEMED LAWFUL COMPLAINT:
In the event the form of citation provided therein includes information and is sworn to as required under the general laws in respect to a complaint charging
commission of the offense alleged in said citation to have been committed, then such citation when filed with a court having jurisdiction shall be deemed to
be a lawful complaint for the purpose of prosecution under this Chapter. (1980 Code § 10.22.6)
6-2-6: CITATION ON ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 63/201
Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by any traffic ordinance of the City, the
officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number, and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and
shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle, a traffic citation on a form provided by the City Clerk, for the driver to answer to the charge against him within five
(5) days during the hours at a place specified in the citation. (1980 Code § 10.22.8)
6-2-7: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH CITATION ATTACHED TO VEHICLE:
If a violator does not appear in response to a traffic citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five (5) days, the City Clerk shall send the
owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that, in the event such letter is
disregarded for a period of five (5) days, a warrant of arrest may be issued. (1980 Code § 10.22.9; amd. 1999 Code)
6-2-8: PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING:
A. In any prosecution charging a violation of any ordinance of the City governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such ordinance, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time
of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facia presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle
was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred.
B. The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure as prescribed herein has been followed. (1980 Code § 10.22.10)
6-2-9: PENALTY FOR CITATION CONVICTION:
Any person convicted of a citation of any section of this Chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1980 Code
§ 10.22.13; amd. 1999 Code)
6-2-10: GENERAL PENALTY FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS:
If no separate penalty is otherwise given in this Title, all violations of this Title shall be punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1-4-1 of this
Code. (1980 Code § 10.25; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 3
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Definitions listed in Idaho Code title 49, chapters 6, 7 and 8, as amended from time to time, are hereby specifically adopted, in addition to the following
defined words and terms:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE OR OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY: An automobile or personal property which remains upon the street or other public
property for a period of time longer than forty eight (48) hours, the owner of which cannot be located or the owner refuses to remove the same.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles as are designated
by the director of the Idaho department of transportation or the chief of police.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a public thoroughfare when, within one hundred fifty feet (150'), there are buildings in use
for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks and/or office buildings.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle designed, maintained and/or used primarily for the transportation of property.
CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight.
PARKING METER OR METER: A mechanical device which is so adjusted as to show the length of time parking upon the streets of the city of Rigby.
PARKING METER SPACE: Any space within a parking meter zone, adjacent to a parking meter and which is duly designated for the parking of a single
vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street and adjacent to or adjoining the parking meter.
PARKING METER ZONE: Any and all zones, areas or streets established or designated as those areas, zones or parts of streets within or upon which the
parking of vehicles shall be controlled, regulated, and inspected with the aid of timing devices and meters herein referred to as parking meters or meters.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE: A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during loading or unloading of passengers.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a public thoroughfare not comprising a business district when the property on such
thoroughfare for a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings.
STOLEN MOTOR VEHICLE OR OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY: That property which the Police Department has reasonable grounds to believe to be
stolen.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 64/201
TRAFFIC DIVISION: The Traffic Division of the Police Department or in the event a Traffic Division is not established, then said term whenever used
herein shall be deemed to refer to the Police Department.
UNIDENTIFIED MOTOR VEHICLE OR OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY: Such motor vehicles or other personal property where ownership thereof cannot
be ascertained. (1980 Code §§ 10.2.1, 10.2.2; amd. 1999 Code)
6-3-2: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
A. Enforce State And City Laws: It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police to
enforce all street traffic laws of the State and the City.
B. Officers To Direct Traffic: Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand or signal; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the
Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require.
C. Fire Department Authority At Scene Of Fire: Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing
traffic thereat, or in the immediate vicinity. (1980 Code § 10.3.1)
6-3-3: OBEDIENCE TO REGULATIONS AND OFFICIALS:
A. Traffic Regulations: It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required herein. (1980 Code § 10.3.2)
B. Police And Fire Department Officials: It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police
officer or Fire Department official. (1980 Code § 10.3.3)
C. Persons Propelling Push Carts: Every person propelling any push cart upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this Title applicable to the
driver of any vehicle, except those provisions which by their very own nature can have no application. (1980 Code § 10.3.4)
6-3-4: APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Upon the immediate approach of an emergency, the driver of every vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to,
and as close as possible, to the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. (1980 Code § 10.3.6)
6-3-5: PEDESTRIANS:
A. Crossing At Right Angles: It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by
the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a crosswalk. (1980 Code § 10.10.1)
B. Yield Right Of Way By Pedestrian:
1. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall
yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
2. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield upon the
roadway.
3. The foregoing rules have no application under the conditions stated herein when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain designated
places. (1980 Code § 10.10.2)
6-3-6: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
A. Authority To Recommend: The Chief of Police shall have authority to recommend placement of traffic-control signs, signals and devices. (1999 Code)
B. Specifications: All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the approved specifications. All signs and signals required hereunder for a
particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the City. All traffic-control devices so erected and not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Section shall be official traffic-control devices. (1980 Code § 10.4.2)
C. Play Streets:
1. Authority To Establish: The Chief of Police shall have the authority to declare any street, or part thereof, a play street, and to place appropriate signs
or devices in the roadway indicating the same. (1980 Code § 10.4.3)
2. Vehicles Restricted: Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street, or part thereof, as a play street, it shall be unlawful for any person
to drive a vehicle upon any such street, or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed
area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. (1980 Code § 10.4.4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 65/201
D. Crosswalks And Safety Zones Designated: The Chief of Police is hereby authorized:
1. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks, or at intersections where, in his
opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary.
2. To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of the pedestrians. (1980
Code § 10.4.5)
E. Marking Traffic Lanes:
1. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where regular alignment of traffic is
necessary.
2. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. (1980 Code § 10.4.6)
6-3-7: FUNERALS AND OTHER PROCESSIONS:
A. Driving Through Funeral Or Other Procession: It shall be unlawful for a driver of a vehicle to drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other
authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated. (1980 Code § 10.8.1)
B. Drivers In A Procession: Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical, and shall
follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. (1980 Code § 10.8.2)
6-3-8: RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES:
A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon a permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person
nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person. (1980 Code § 10.8.3)
6-3-9: BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS:
A. Prohibited In Business District: It shall be unlawful for any person whatsoever to park, ride, or propel any bicycle upon the sidewalks of the City in the
business district, or any other congested district of the City, that may be so designated by proclamation of the Mayor of the City. (1980 Code § 10.8.4)
B. Penalty: Violators of this Section shall be punished by fine not exceeding the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each and every offense. (1980 Code
§ 10.8.4; amd. 1999 Code)
6-3-10: COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates, rollerblades, in-line skates, or riding any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device to go upon any
roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk; and when crossing, such person shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to pedestrians. This Section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street. (1980 Code § 10.3.5; amd. 1999 Code)
6-3-11: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person riding upon a bicycle, coaster, roller skates, rollerblades, in-line skates, sled, or toy vehicle to attach the same or himself
to any vehicle upon a roadway. (1980 Code § 10.8.5; amd. 1999 Code)
6-3-12: BACKING OUT OF DRIVEWAY:
It shall be unlawful for any driver of any vehicle to back such vehicle out of any alley, public garage, or on any street, or across any sidewalk or street
intersection without first sounding the horn or other device to give warning to others of his intent in coming onto the public street. (1980 Code § 10.8.6)
6-3-13: AUTO EXHAUST AND NOISE:
Every driver or operator of any motor-propelled vehicle upon the streets of the City shall not permit the motor to emit any undue amount of smoke, or
product of combustion from the exhaust pipe, or make any undue noise by operating the horn or sound contrivance attached to said vehicle. (1980 Code
§ 10.8.7)
6-3-14: VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTION:
When signs are erected by authority of the City Council giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle with a gross weight
in excess of the amounts specified. (1980 Code § 10.15.1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 66/201
6-3-15: CERTAIN VEHICLES RESTRICTED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
A. Designation By Police Chief: The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to determine and designate those heavily traveled streets upon which shall be
prohibited the use of the roadway by motor-driven cycles, bicycles, horse-drawn vehicles or other nonmotorized traffic, and shall erect appropriate
signs giving notice thereof.
B. Obey Signs: When signs are so erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the restrictions stated on such signs. (1980
Code § 10.15.2)
6-3-16: SCHOOL BUSES, PASSING:
A. Duty To Stop: The driver of any vehicle upon a street or highway within the City, upon meeting or overtaking, from either direction, any school bus which
has stopped on a public street or road of the City, or adjacent to a public street or road of the City, for the purpose of receiving or discharging school
children, shall stop the vehicle immediately before passing the school bus, and shall remain stopped when the stop signal arm is extended or yellow
warning lights are flashing. When the stop arm is not extended or yellow lights are not flashing, the motorist may, after first stopping, proceed at a
speed not exceeding ten (10) miles per hour, and with due caution for the safety of such children. (1980 Code § 10.21.1)
B. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1
of this Code. (1980 Code § 10.21.2; amd. 1999 Code)
6-3-17: PUBLIC CONVEYANCES:
A. Boarding Or Alighting From Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. (1980 Code
§ 10.9.1)
B. Unlawful Riding: It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of passengers.
This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended
for merchandise. (1980 Code § 10.9.2)
C. Railroad Train Blocking Street1: It shall be unlawful for the direction officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the
same in such manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes; except, that this
provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching.
D. Vehicle Blocking Intersection Or Crosswalk: It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to stop within an intersection of a crosswalk for the purpose of receiving
or discharging passengers. (1980 Code § 10.9.3)
6-3-18: ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKES:
A. Engine Compression Brakes Prohibited: No person shall, while operating a motor vehicle within the city, apply or otherwise use "jake brakes", engine
compression brakes, or any similar braking system which emits a clearly audible noise when measured at a distance of fifty feet (50') directly from the
source. "Engine compression brakes" are defined as a braking system which uses compressed air from a motor vehicle's engine to slow the vehicle.
B. Penalty: Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as defined in Idaho Code section 18-113, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 534, 8-19-2008)
Chapter 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
6-4-1: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on
official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or official
traffic-control device. (1980 Code § 10.14.1)
6-4-2: PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED:
Whenever any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to erect appropriate
signs giving notice thereof and such regulations shall not be effective unless said signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. (1980
Code § 10.14.3)
6-4-3: PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 67/201
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of the curb or edge of the roadway, except where parking is
permitted at an angle of forty five degrees (45°) to the curb as designated by painting markers upon spaces reserved for such parking. (1980 Code
§ 10.11.1)
6-4-4: LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES:
A. Within Business Or Residence Districts: Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street within a business or residence district, no
lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle.
B. Headlights To Be Dimmed: Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. (1980 Code § 10.11.3; amd. 1999 Code)
6-4-5: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet (10') of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. (1980 Code § 10.12.1)
6-4-6: ALL-NIGHT PARKING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within the business district for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of any day, except physicians on emergency calls, where signs are properly posted prohibiting all-night
parking. (1980 Code § 10.12.3)
6-4-7: PERMIT FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING AT ANGLE TO CURB:
A. Issuance Of Special Permit For Backing To Curb: The Chief of Police is authorized to issue special permits for the backing of a vehicle to the curb for
the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to
the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle.
B. Compliance With Terms Of Permit: It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such
permit. (1980 Code § 10.11.2)
6-4-8: TRUCK PARKING RESTRICTED:
Parking of trucks upon public streets within the City is prohibited.
A. Truck Defined: For the purposes of this Section, a "truck" is defined as a tractor-truck and/or trailer designed for ten (10) or more wheels, regardless of
the number of wheels installed and shall include trailers regardless of whether attached or detached from the tractor-truck and/or trailer.
B. Streets Excepted From Prohibition: Unless otherwise posted, and unless loading or unloading, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a truck and/or
truck trailer upon any street within the City except on Farnsworth Way and South State Street from Short Street to the south City limits.
C. Transporting Flammable Or Toxic Materials: All vehicles transporting or capable of transporting flammable or toxic materials shall not be parked within
the City unless unloading or loading said material.
D. Street Construction; Parking Permit Issuance: Permits may be issued by the Chief of Police for the parking of trucks or truck trailers that are involved
with construction upon City streets or adjacent property for a limited time. (1980 Code § 10.12.4)
E. Buses, School Buses, Other Transportation Vehicles: Buses are prohibited from parking on City streets unless loading or unloading passengers. The
term buses includes school buses and other commercial transportation of passengers. (1999 Code)
F. Notice Of Violation: It shall be the duty of each police officer observing the violation of this Section to leave at or upon any truck or truck trailer parked in
violation of the provisions hereof a notice that the vehicle has been parked in violation of the provisions of this Section. The notice shall bear the date
and the hour of leaving the same at or upon said vehicle, and the notice shall instruct the owner and/or operator of such vehicle to report to the Police
Department in regard to such violation. (1980 Code § 10.12.4)
G. Penalty: Any person who shall violate any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a criminal offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1980 Code § 10.12.4; amd. 1999 Code)
6-4-9: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purposes of:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 68/201
A. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
B. Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (1980 Code § 10.12.5)
6-4-10: ILLEGAL PARKING OR DRIVING ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY:
A. Vehicle Defined: A "motor vehicle" shall be defined as every vehicle by which any person or property may be transported which is self-propelled
whether functioning or not and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power, except vehicles moved solely by human power and motorized
wheelchairs.
B. Vehicles And Animals Prohibited; Exception:
1. It shall be a violation of this Section for any person to park or drive a vehicle upon or over any City property not expressly marked as allowing parking
or driving of motor vehicles. All streets, alleys, or roads are excepted from this Section. This includes, but is not limited to, the driving or parking of
motor vehicles or riding of hoofed animals, or staking thereof, upon grass or graveled areas owned by the City.
2. Maintenance vehicles, vehicles owned by the City, and emergency vehicles shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section.
C. Designation Of Parking Areas:
1. Placement Of Signs: Parking areas may be indicated by the placement of signs indicating parking areas, or by markings placed upon the ground. It
shall not be necessary that the signing comply with all rules and regulations set forth by the Idaho Transportation Department.
2. Handicapped Parking: By this Section, the City is hereby empowered by resolution to designate upon City property areas allowing handicapped
parking only. It shall be a violation of this Section to park in a handicapped zone a vehicle not bearing the handicapped license plates or tags issued
by the Idaho Transportation Department as prescribed by Idaho Code section 49-410. However, said handicapped parking zone shall comply with
the signing requirement of Idaho Code section 49-213. (Ord. 419, 2-4-1992)
D. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall, for each such offense, be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this
Code. (Ord. 419, 2-4-1992; amd. 1999 Code)
E. Vehicle Impoundment: The Police Department is hereby empowered to impound all vehicles found illegally parked upon City property, and shall be
towed and impounded at the owner's expense. (Ord. 419, 2-4-1992)
6-4-11: PLACES WHERE STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED:
A. Alleys: It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten
feet (10') of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and it shall be unlawful for a person to stop, stand or park a vehicle
within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. (1980 Code § 10.12.2)
B. Adjacent To Schools:
1. The Chief Of Police is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property
when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
2. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, it shall be
unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any such designated place. (1980 Code § 10.12.6)
C. Narrow Streets:
1. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty
feet (20') or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet (30').
2. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle
upon any such street in violation of any such signs. (1980 Code § 10.12.7)
D. One-Way Streets:
1. The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles and when
such signs are in place, it shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side of the street. (1980 Code § 10.12.8)
2. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, it shall be
unlawful for any person to stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing
or parking. The Chief of Police is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way
roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. (1980 Code § 10.12.9)
E. Hazardous Or Congested Places:
1. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs, places not exceeding one hundred feet (100') in length in
which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay in traffic.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 69/201
2. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a
vehicle in any such designated place. (1980 Code § 10.12.10)
6-4-12: CURB LOADING ZONES:
A. Designation: The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and
maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this Section are applicable. (1980 Code § 10.13.1)
B. Special Request; Permit: The Chief of Police shall not hereafter designate or sign any curb loading zone upon special request for any person unless
such person makes application for a permit for such zone and for two (2) signs to indicate the ends of each such zone. Said permit fee shall be as set
and designated by the City Council. (1980 Code § 10.13.2)
C. Standing In Loading Zones:
1. Passengers: It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during the hours when the regulations applicable to such
curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes. (1980 Code § 10.13.3)
2. Freight: It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading
and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to
such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. (1980 Code § 10.13.4)
6-4-13: PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS:
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier
motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such manner as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public
and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab or other stands shall be designated by appropriate signs. (1980 Code § 10.13.5)
6-4-14: BUSES AND BUS STANDS:
A. Stopping, Standing And Parking Restrictions:
1. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than at a bus stand so designated.
2. The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage
other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated except in case of an emergency.
3. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to
load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not farther than eighteen inches (18") from the
curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to impede unduly the movement of other vehicular traffic. (1980 Code § 10.13.6)
B. Restricted Use Of Bus Stands: It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a temporary stop therein for the purpose
of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus. (1980 Code § 10.13.7)
6-4-15: SNOW REMOVAL; PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this Section is as follows:
1. To render the removal of snow and ice from the public streets safe, more economical and less time consuming;
2. Avoid collisions of snow removal equipment with motor vehicles and reduce the possibility of accidents involving pedestrians;
3. Provide for more efficient and economical utilization of snow removal equipment. (1980 Code § 10.23.1)
B. Definitions: The following terms shall have the meanings specified:
DOWNTOWN AREA: The area within the City of Rigby, Idaho described as follows:
Clark, between Main and Fremont.
Fremont, between Farnsworth Way and State Street.
Main Street, between Farnsworth Way and 2nd West.
State, between 2nd South and Fremont.
1st North, between 1st West and 2nd West.
1st West, between Main Street and 2nd North.
2nd West, between Main and 1st North.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 70/201
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every self-propelled vehicle in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street or
highway, excepting vehicles or devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
MOTORCYCLE: A motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact
with the ground.
RESIDENTIAL STREET: Any street within the City of Rigby not included in the "downtown area" defined in this subsection.
TRAILER: Every vehicle with or without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (1980 Code § 10.23.2)
C. Parking Restricted During Certain Times: No person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle, motorcycle or trailer on the streets of the City during the
following times:
1. Downtown Area: During the period commencing November 15 to and including March 15 of the next succeeding year on any street within the
downtown area during the hours between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
2. Residential Streets: During the period commencing November 15 to and including March 15 of the next succeeding year on any street within the
residential area during the hours between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. (1980 Code § 10.23.3; amd. 1999 Code)
D. More Restrictive Provisions Apply: In the event any other ordinance, statute or law provides for parking restrictions which are more restrictive than those
set forth herein, then such other parking restrictions shall be controlling and may be enforced in accordance with the terms hereof or in accordance with
the terms of such other ordinance, statute or regulation. (1980 Code § 10.23.4)
E. Removal Of Vehicles:
1. Towing Away Without Notice To Owner: Any motor vehicle, motorcycle or trailer found parked upon any public street at any time or place contrary to
the terms of this Section may be removed at any time at the direction of a duly authorized police officer of the City, and may be towed to any public or
private impound lot, without notice to the owner or the public lot operator thereof. (1980 Code § 10.23.5)
2. Owner Responsible For Towing And Impound Costs: The owner or operator of such towed vehicle shall be responsible for all impound and towing
charges of the private towing company. In the event the vehicle is towed at city expense, the owner or operator thereof shall pay all towing expense
paid or incurred by the city. (1980 Code § 10.23.5; amd. 1999 Code)
F. Private Snow Removal: It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, or cause to be removed, snow from private property onto public streets, in such a
manner as to cause any obstruction or hazard, or to cause the city to remove the snow from the public street. (1980 Code § 10.23.6)
G. Penalty: Any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code. (1980 Code § 10.23.7; amd. 1999 Code)
6-4-16: REMOVAL OF IMPROPERLY PARKED VEHICLES:
A. Removal By Police; Owner Responsible For Costs: Any vehicle parked in violation of traffic regulations or any vehicle parked so as to obstruct the free
movement of traffic or causing a traffic hazard may be removed upon order of the police department. Any such vehicle removed by the police
department shall be kept under the control of the police department until the owner or authorized agent pays a reasonable cost for removal and
storage, in addition to the penalty provided for such improper parking.
B. Time Limit; Improperly Parked Vehicle: Any such vehicle shall be deemed to be improperly parked after a period of ten (10) minutes unless said vehicle
is parked in a regular marked parking meter area and in violation of traffic regulations, when it shall be deemed to be improperly parked after a period
of one hour. (1980 Code § 10.16)
C. Redemption Of Vehicle; Payment Of Costs: When said vehicle is redeemed, the owner or authorized agent shall pay the actual costs of the removal of
said vehicle, together with a storage charge. (1980 Code § 10.16; amd. 1999 Code)
6-4-17: REGULATIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (1980 Code § 10.14.2)
6-4-18: PARKING VIOLATION FEES:
The fees for parking violations shall be set by city resolution. (Ord. 2015-583, 9-17-2015)
6-4-19: OVERSIZED VEHICLES; PARKING RESTRICTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 71/201
Vehicles in excess of six feet (6') in width, such as buses, tractors, trailers, trucks, camp trailers and motor homes shall be allowed to park on city streets
having a width of less than thirty five feet (35') as measured from curb to curb, for a period of time not to exceed one hour for loading or unloading
purposes. Those requesting extended time may make application to the chief of police. The following streets are subject to the above restriction:
Annis Highway
Bennett Street
Bonham
Claremore
Tall
All violations of this section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor by a fine set by city resolution, or may be towed at police officer discretion. Additional
streets may be subject to this provision of this section by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2015-583, 9-17-2015)
Chapter 5
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS; STOP STREETS
6-5-1: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
A. Authority To Erect Signs: Whenever any regulations of the City designate any one-way street or alley, the Chief of Police shall place and maintain signs
giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement
shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (1980 Code § 10.6.1)
B. Restrict Direction Of Movement During Certain Periods:
1. Authority Of Police Chief: The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon
which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period in the day and shall place
and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof.
2. Temporary One-Way Designations: The Chief of Police may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular
direction, regardless of the center line of the roadway.
3. Violation Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle violating such markers, signs, barriers, or other devices so placed.
(1980 Code § 10.6.2)
6-5-2: SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED:
A. Authority To Erect Stop Signs: Whenever any of the laws of the City designate and describe a through street, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to
place and maintain a stop sign on each and every street intersecting such through street or intersecting that portion thereof described and designated
as such, unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals; provided however, that at the intersection of two (2)
through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of
either of said streets as may be determined by the Chief of Police upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. (1980 Code § 10.7.1)
B. Intersections Where Stop Required: The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazards exist
upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at every such place where a stop is required; provided, that said Chief of
Police may, at his discretion, establish "yield right-of-way" signs at such intersections as it is deemed advisable. Such signs shall indicate that an
intersection may be entered without stopping if no vehicles are approaching along the street whereon the yield right-of-way signs control entering
traffic. (1980 Code § 10.7.2)
C. Emerging From Alley, Driveway Or Building: The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, yielding the
right of way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right of way to all vehicles
approaching on said roadway. (1980 Code § 10.7.3)
D. Stop When Traffic Obstructed: It shall be unlawful for any driver to enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the
other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians,
notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (1980 Code § 10.7.4)
Chapter 6
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
6-6-1: REMOVAL FROM HIGHWAY OR PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A. Police Department Authority To Remove: The Police Department is hereby authorized, in addition to any penalty that may be provided therefor, to
remove an unidentified, stolen, wrecked, or abandoned motor vehicle, or other personal property as herein defined, found upon any public thoroughfare
or other property of the City and shall keep the same in the Police Department until redeemed by the owner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 72/201
B. Towing And Storage Charges: All such unidentified, stolen, wrecked or abandoned motor vehicles or other personal property which now is in the
possession of the Police Department shall be subject to the actual cost of removal or tow-in from the public place and a storage charge of two dollars
($2.00) per day as long as the same is in possession or custody.
C. Unlawful To Abandon: It shall be unlawful for any owner or any person in charge of a motor vehicle or other personal property to leave or abandon the
same upon the streets or public places. (1980 Code § 10.17)
6-6-2: REMOVAL FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. Posted Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended, any motor vehicle upon any private lot or parcel of land within the City
without the consent of the owner or the person in charge thereof, when such lot or parcel of land is posted. For the purposes of this Chapter, a lot or
parcel of land shall be "posted" when one or more signs legibly printed in the English language are placed thereon giving notice that the premises are
for private use only; provided however, no lot or parcel of land shall be deemed "posted" unless the wording of one or more such signs is plainly visible
from each entrance to the premises. (1980 Code § 10.18.1)
B. Blocking Entrances Or Exits: It shall also be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended a motor vehicle in such position as to block any
entrance or exit from any private lot or parcel of land so posted in the City. (1980 Code § 10.18.2)
C. Notice Of Violation: It shall be the duty of each police officer observing the violation of this Section, when requested to do so by the owner or person in
charge of such lot or parcel of land, to leave at or upon any motor vehicle parked in violation of the provisions hereof a notice that the vehicle had been
parked in violation of the provisions of this Section. The notice shall bear the date and the hour of leaving of the same at or upon such vehicle, and the
notice shall instruct the owner or operator of such vehicle to report to the Police Department in regard to such violation. (1980 Code § 10.18.3)
D. Penalty: Any person who shall violate any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a criminal offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1980 Code § 10.18.4; amd. 1999 Code)
E. Removal Of Vehicle; Lien:
1. Signed Complaint Required: If, at any time, a vehicle is parked upon private property without the consent of the owner of such property, the Police
Department is hereby authorized to remove said vehicle therefrom and to cause the same to be stored, provided the owner of such private property
has first signed a complaint against the owner or operator of said vehicle.
2. Lien For Costs: The City shall have a lien for all necessary costs of removing and storing such vehicle and said vehicle may be held by the City until
such lien is paid. (1980 Code § 10.18.5)
6-6-3: IMPOUNDED PROPERTIES; SALE:
All motor vehicles and other personal property impounded or heretofore impounded by the Police Department and unredeemed by the owner thereof for a
period of sixty (60) days shall thereafter be subject to sale by the Chief of Police to the highest bidder for cash as hereinafter provided, and the proceeds of
said sale shall be applied to the removal and storage charges accumulated against each article, which shall be deposited with the City Treasurer and
credited with him and shall be kept in a separate fund for a period of one year from the date of receipt, and if at the end of said year the former owner of
said property has not made satisfactory proof of claim, then the balance of said proceeds of sale shall be credited to the General Fund of the City. (1980
Code § 10.19)
6-6-4: PROOF OF OWNERSHIP; APPEAL; REDEMPTION AFTER SALE:
Any person claiming to be the owner of any impounded property shall make written application therefor to the Police Department and shall furnish such
additional proof as may be required to establish said ownership. If he shall present to said Department the proof of his ownership of said impounded
property prior to the date of actual sale thereof, then the property itself shall be delivered to said owner under these conditions; but if said property has
been sold, then said Department shall endorse its findings of ownership with a copy of the written application, which application and findings shall be
addressed to the City Clerk; and if presented within one year after said sale, then such balance of the proceeds of the sale, after deductions, shall be paid
to the said owner. (1980 Code § 10.20)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREET IMPROVEMENTS
7-1-1: SUPERVISION OVER IMPROVEMENTS:
In all cases where the City shall contract for the installation, construction or laying of any cement, concrete or pavement, or any improvements to the
streets, alleys, and sidewalks or curbs within the corporate limits of the City, or any improvements wherein solids are necessary for endurance, shall be
under the immediate supervision of the City Public Works Director, who shall receive his instructions from the Mayor and City Council. It shall further be a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 73/201
part of this Chapter that in all improvements, works, and buildings, as aforesaid, only standard material and approved methods shall be used in their
construction, and none other may be used or allowed. (1980 Code § 9.1.1; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 2
SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION
7-2-1: COUNCIL AUTHORITY TO ORDER CONSTRUCTION:
The City Council may, whenever it is deemed necessary or convenient by an order duly made and entered in its minutes, order the construction of
sidewalks, curbs, gutters and/or curbs and the parking on any streets of the City, and it may in like manner order the alteration or repair of such. (1980
Code § 9.3.2)
7-2-2: DUTY OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
All sidewalks, curbs, gutters and/or curbs and parking constructed within the corporate limits of the City shall be constructed under the supervision of and
subject to the inspection of the Public Works Director and in conformity with the lines and grades laid out on the ground by said Director. Stakes set by
said Director shall be preserved by the owner and the contractor doing the work. (1980 Code § 9.3.9; amd. 1999 Code)
7-2-3: RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS:
A. Responsibility For Construction And Repair: Property owners within the City shall be responsible for the construction and repair of all sidewalks, curbs,
gutters, driveway approaches and/or curbs and the parking between curbs abutting upon their respective properties; and on corner lots such
responsibility shall include the sidewalks, curbs, gutters, driveway approaches and/or curbs and the parking to the intersection of the curb lines
extended.
B. Assistance Programs: Notwithstanding the above, the City has authorized implementation of various assistance programs for the benefit of the property
owner. The breadth, percentage, items, period of time, and any and all other facets of such program shall be in the sole discretion of the City Council,
as set forth by resolution. The above program shall not impact local improvement districts (LIDs) in any way, as such are established pursuant to Idaho
Code. (Ord. 463, 2-18-1997)
7-2-4: CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Whenever the construction or repair of sidewalks, curbs, gutters and/or curbs and the parking is ordered, the order therefor shall state the material of
which the same shall be completed, and in case of new sidewalks, curbs, gutters and/or curbs and the parking, to be constructed, the order shall contain
complete specifications thereof. (1980 Code § 9.3.3)
7-2-5: NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNER:
A. Notice To Construct Or Repair; Time Limit: Whenever sidewalks, curbs, gutters and/or curbs and the parking are ordered constructed or repaired, the
City Clerk shall prepare a notice to be served upon the owner of the property abutting upon the sidewalk to be constructed or repaired, directing such
owner to construct or repair such sidewalk within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice and report the completion to the Public Works Director.
B. Service Or Publication Of Notice:
1. Such notice shall be served by the Chief of Police or any other police officer of the City by delivering a written copy thereof to the owner of the
abutting property or his agent if such owner or agent can be found within the City; but if not found within the City, then if his place of residence be
known, by mailing a copy of the notice to such owner at his place of residence.
2. If such owner or agent cannot be found within the City and his place of residence is not known, such notice shall be served by the publication of a
copy thereof for two (2) successive weeks in the Jefferson Star, the official newspaper of the City, the last publication of which must be at least
twenty (20) days before the expiration of the time mentioned in the notice for the completion of said work. (1980 Code § 9.3.4; amd. 1999 Code)
7-2-6: FAILURE TO REPAIR OR CONSTRUCT; BIDDING PROCEDURE:
A. Failure To Act; Advertise For Sealed Bids: If, after the expiration of sidewalks, curbs, gutters and/or curbs and parking ordered to be constructed or
repaired are not completed according to the order therefor, the City Council shall proceed to advertise for sealed bids for the construction or repair
thereof by publication in one issue of the Jefferson Star, the official newspaper of the City.
B. Contents Of Notice: It shall be stated in such notice the particular piece or pieces of sidewalks, curbs, gutters and/or curbs and the parking to be
constructed or repaired, and shall refer to the original order for such construction or repair and the specifications thereof.
C. Letting To Lowest Bidder: The City Council shall proceed to let the contract for such construction or repair to the lowest bidder unless, in the judgment
of the City Council, such bids are too high; provided, however, that if in the judgment of the City Council all bids received are unsatisfactory, the City
Council may proceed with such construction or repair under the direction of the Public Works Director. (1980 Code § 9.3.5; amd. 1999 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 74/201
7-2-7: DELINQUENCY OF PROPERTY OWNER:
A. Delinquency Notice; Penalty: After any sidewalk or portion thereof or curbs, gutters and/or curbs and parking has been constructed or repaired, as
provided herein, the City Council shall declare the owner of the abutting property delinquent and the City Clerk shall at once give such delinquent
owner notice in the manner provided for the service of notice for construction or repair, that he is delinquent, stating the amounts, and that unless the
same is paid, together with the cost of service, if served by publication, within thirty (30) days from the date of the service, that twenty five percent
(25%) will be added to the amount of delinquency as a penalty.
B. Assessment On Tax Roll:
1. Determination Of Total Charges: At the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of the notice served, provided the same has been served, mailed
or published at least twenty (20) days previously, the City Council shall proceed to add twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of such delinquency
as a penalty, and assess the actual cost of sidewalk, curb, gutter and/or curb and the parking constructed or repaired, together with the charges for
publication against the property abutting thereon.
2. Placement On Tax Roll: The City Clerk shall forthwith certify the action of the City Council, together with a description of the property with the
assessment and the amount thereof, to the County Auditor, who shall place the amount of such delinquency, together with the penalty and costs of
publication on the current tax roll.
3. Individual Item On Tax Roll: If such property is not liable for other taxes on such roll, he shall enter the name of the delinquent owner for the amount
of such delinquent sidewalk tax, together with the penalty and costs of publication on the tax roll as an individual item.
4. Collection: The same shall be collected at the time and in the manner provided by law for the collection of other real estate taxes and the amount so
collected turned over to the City Treasurer the same as other Municipal taxes. (1980 Code § 9.3.6)
7-2-8: EXTENSION OF TIME FOR CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR:
The City Council may, for good cause shown, extend the time within which any sidewalk, curb, gutter and/or curb and parking may be constructed or
repaired, but no such extension of time shall exceed thirty (30) days. (1980 Code § 9.3.7)
7-2-9: APPLICATION FOR CONSTRUCTION:
A. Application Required: Persons desiring to construct sidewalks, curbs, gutters and/or curbs and parking shall make written application to the City Clerk,
upon blanks supplied by the City for the establishment of line and grade.
B. Contents Of Application: This application shall state the exact location of the proposed construction, the name of the person applying, the name of the
firm or individual doing the work and the date on which it is desired to start construction.
C. Line And Grade Established By Director: The City Clerk shall deliver the application to the Public Works Director without delay. The Public Works
Director shall establish the desired line and grade at the earliest possible date and shall notify the applicant when said work will be completed. (1980
Code § 9.3.8; amd. 1999 Code)
7-2-10: CONFORMITY OF ESTABLISHED LINES AND GRADES:
Where such work has been constructed or repaired without first having obtained a grade and line therefor from the Public Works Director or where the
same have not been constructed in conformity with the established grade and line, said work shall be rebuilt or repaired at the owner's expense to so
conform as provided herein. (1980 Code § 9.3.10; amd. 1999 Code)
7-2-11: DEMOLITION PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, or in any way demolish any sidewalk, curb, gutter and/or curb and parking for any purpose
whatsoever without first securing a permit from the Public Works Director so to do.
B. Application For Permit: Said person shall make application to the Public Works Director by giving the location of the proposed work to be done and the
purpose for which the same is to be used.
C. Permit Issuance; Conditions: If the Public Works Director grants such request, he may issue a permit for the work to be done, but such cutting or
demolition shall not cover over fifty percent (50%) of the property frontage of the applicant; provided however, that if more than fifty percent (50%) of
the property frontage is to be cut, the said application shall be submitted to the City Council for its approval. (1980 Code § 9.3.11; amd. 1999 Code)
7-2-12: OPEN STAIRWAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain upon any street, alley, or public place any open stairway, areaway, or cellar way within the limits
of the sidewalk space or other public place within the confines of the City without first obtaining the express permission of the City Council. (1980 Code
§ 9.3.12)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 75/201
7-2-13: EXCAVATIONS UNDER SIDEWALKS:
A. Permission Required: It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, or operate any trap door, opening, grating, or other opening except upon permission
granted by the City Council.
B. Restriction For Operating Trap Doors: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate any opening into or beneath the sidewalk space covered
by trap doors or folding doors, or to fail or neglect to keep the same securely closed while said doors are not in use, or to properly and securely guard
the openings against accident when said doors are in use. (1980 Code § 9.3.13)
C. Specification For Underground Excavating:
1. Waterproof Retaining Walls: All such areas or excavations under sidewalks shall have waterproof retaining walls of concrete not less than nine
inches (9") in thickness and not more than twelve feet (12') in length without sufficient lateral support, and the sidewalks in such places shall be so
constructed as to safely support a live load of not less than two hundred (200) pounds per square foot of surface or area of sidewalk. (1980 Code
§ 9.3.13; amd. 1999 Code)
2. Compliance Required: Subsurface excavating adjacent to any building for the purpose of lighting or ventilating cellars or basements or for storage
under any sidewalk, together with the sidewalk doors, coal holes, coverings, sidewalk lights and construction of similar nature are forbidden unless
the requirements of this Section are complied with. (1980 Code § 9.3.13)
7-2-14: PREVENT ENTRANCE OF FLOODWATER:
All openings for elevators, chutes, coal holes, lights or ventilation or for any other purpose shall be constructed and installed in such manner as to prevent
the entrance of floodwater from the street or sidewalk. (1980 Code § 9.3.14)
7-2-15: SIDEWALK DOORS AND COVERINGS; CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
All sidewalk doors, coal holes and coverings, frames for sidewalk lights and supports for same, and all construction of similar nature shall be made of steel
or cast iron and placed flush with the sidewalk surface; and shall have corrugated surface or other approved finish that will form a grip for the feet of
pedestrians. All such openings and coverings shall be so constructed as to safely support a load of not less than two hundred (200) pounds per square
foot. (1980 Code § 9.3.15)
7-2-16: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this
Code. (1980 Code § 9.3.16; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 3
EXCAVATIONS
7-3-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
A. It is the intent of this Chapter to protect underground facilities located underneath property owned or under the control of the City from damages caused
by haphazard excavation.
B. It is further the intent to provide notice to the City of any substantive excavation within the City limits. (Ord. 433, 5-19-1994)
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
BUSINESS DAY: Any day other than Saturday, Sunday, or legal, local, State or Federal holiday.
EMERGENCY: Any condition constituting a clear and present danger to life or property, or a customer service outage.
EXCAVATION: Any operation in which earth, rock, or other material in the ground is moved or otherwise displaced by any means including, but not limited
to, explosives.
EXCAVATOR: Any person who engages directly in excavation.
ONE-NUMBER LOCATOR SERVICE: A service through which a person can notify owners of underground facilities and request field-marking of their
underground facilities.
UNDERGROUND FACILITY: Any item buried or placed below ground for use in connection with the storage or conveyance of water, unless being
delivered primarily for irrigation, sewage, electronic, telephonic or telegraphic communications, cable television, electric energy, petroleum products, gas,
gaseous vapors, hazardous liquids, or other substances and including, but not limited to, pipes, sewers, conduits, cables, valves, lines, wires, manholes,
attachments, and those parts of poles or anchors below ground.
UNDERGROUND FACILITY OWNER: Any person who owns or operates an underground facility. (Ord. 433, 5-19-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 76/201
7-3-3: PERMIT COMPLIANCE; NOTICE OF EXCAVATION:
A. Excavator Requirements: Before commencing excavation, the excavator shall:
1. Comply with other applicable laws or permit requirements of any public agency issuing permits;
2. Provide notice of the scheduled commencement of excavation to the City through a one-number locator service. The notice shall be communicated
to the City not less than two (2) business days nor more than ten (10) business days before the scheduled date for commencement of excavation,
unless otherwise agreed by the parties.
3. Receive a permit from the City for excavation of any property owned by the City or upon which the City has a right of way or easement, regardless of
whether an underground facility exists underneath the property, unless under the provision of section 7-3-6 of this chapter, as set forth below.
B. Emergency Excavations: Emergency excavations are exempt from the time requirements for notification provided in this section.
C. Unidentified Underground Facilities; Notice To City: If the excavator, while performing the excavation, discovers underground facilities (whether active or
abandoned) which are not identified, the excavator shall cease excavating in the vicinity of the facility and immediately notify the City. (Ord. 433, 5-19-
1994)
7-3-4: DAMAGE TO UNDERGROUND FACILITIES:
A. Notify City And Safety Agencies Of Damage: An excavator who, in the course of excavation, contacts or damages an underground facility shall notify
the City owning or operating such facility and the one-number locator service. If the damage causes an emergency condition, the excavator causing the
damage shall also alert the appropriate local public safety agencies and take all appropriate steps to ensure the public safety. No damaged
underground facility may be buried until it is repaired or relocated.
B. Provisions For Repair; Cost: The City shall arrange for repairs or relocation as soon as is practical or may permit the excavator to do necessary repairs
or relocation at a mutually acceptable price. (Ord. 433, 5-19-1994)
7-3-5: PERMIT ISSUANCE; DUTIES OF CITY1:
A. Permit Issuance; Notice To Excavator: The City will issue permits authorizing excavation operations and shall notify persons seeking such permits of the
existence of this chapter and the one-call locator service telephone number.
B. Permit Invalid Without Notice: A permit shall not be valid for excavation until or unless the notice provisions of this section have been complied with and
documentation provided, as approved by the City. (Ord. 433, 5-19-1994)
7-3-6: EXCAVATIONS EXEMPT FROM NOTICE REQUIREMENT:
Unless facts exist which would reasonably cause an excavator to believe that an underground facility exists within the depth of the intended excavation,
the following excavations shall not require notice of the excavation pursuant to Idaho Code section 55-2203(1)(b):
A. An excavation of less than fifteen inches (15") in vertical depth outside the boundaries of an underground facility easement of public record on private
property and if the excavation is being performed by the person or an employee of the person who owns or occupies the property on which the
excavation is being performed.
B. The tilling of soil to a depth of less than fifteen inches (15") for agricultural practices, unless such excavation is on public property.
C. Excavation of less than fifteen inches (15") upon public property or roads, alleys, rights-of-way, and parks owned or upon which the City has an
easement.
D. The extraction of minerals within recorded mining claims or excavation within material sites legally located and of record, unless such excavation occurs
within the boundaries of an underground facility easement. (Ord. 433, 5-19-1994)
7-3-7: VIOLATION; CIVIL PENALTY; ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
A. Civil Penalty Imposed: Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, and which violation results in damage to underground facilities, is subject
to a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. All penalties recovered in such actions shall be deposited in the
State general account.
B. Liable For Treble Costs: Any excavator who wilfully or maliciously damages a field-marked underground facility owned by the City shall be liable for
treble the costs incurred in repairing or relocating the facility.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 77/201
C. Additional Remedies: Unless expressly provided herein, nothing in this chapter eliminates, alters or otherwise impairs common law, statutory or other
preexisting rights and duties of persons affected by the provisions of this chapter; nor does anything in this chapter, unless expressly so provided,
eliminate, alter or otherwise impair other remedies, State or Federal, including those at common law, or an underground facility owner whose facility is
damaged; nor do the provisions of this Chapter affect any civil remedies for personal injury or property damage except as expressly provided for
herein. (Ord. 433, 5-19-1994)
7-3-8: WAIVER PERMITTED:
The notification and marking provisions of this Chapter may be waived for one or more designated persons. (Ord. 433, 5-19-1994)
7-3-9: PENALTY:
Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 433, 5-19-1994)
Chapter 4
RAILROADS
7-4-1: SPEED LIMIT FOR TRAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person running or operating any locomotive train of cars to operate the same at a greater speed than twenty (20) miles per hour
within the corporate limits of the City. (1980 Code § 9.2.1)
7-4-2: OBSTRUCTING STREET CROSSINGS1:
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any railroad train or railroad cars to stand or be permitted to stand upon any of the public crossings in the
corporate limits of the City for a greater period of time than ten (10) minutes. (1980 Code § 9.2.2; amd. 1999 Code)
7-4-3: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this
Code. (1980 Code § 9.2.3; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 5
CITY SHELTERS AND MEETING ROOMS
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
ENTITY: Includes persons, sole proprietorship, associations, LLC, PLLC, corporations, and any other legally recognized business form.
FOR PROFIT: Includes all entities who charge a fee for entry into the space. It also specifically includes organizations which attempt to sell or do sell any
item whether tangible or intangible.
NONPROFIT: Includes all agencies or organizations deemed charitable organizations for charitable deductions under internal revenue service regulations.
It also includes all private individuals who are renting the space for such things as family reunions and where no money is required for entry or where no
items or intangibles are sold. The use by a charitable organization or a for profit entity as a fundraiser will not require the higher fee.
ROOM: Meeting rooms designated as such by the city council. It currently includes two (2) rooms in the community center, one upstairs and one
downstairs. It also includes two (2) rooms at the recreation center. It also includes any such future areas designated by the city as "meeting rooms".
SHELTER: Those enclosed or partly enclosed areas located at the: north and south parks denominated as "City park" (north park), and "Scotty's park"
(south park). Currently, there are two (2) shelters at City park and one shelter at Scotty's park. It specifically excludes the shelter at the "Veteran's park"
and specifically includes any and all future shelters. (Res. 102, 5-6-2003)
7-5-2: FEE SCHEDULE:
The fee schedule for nonprofit entities shall be as follows:
Rooms
Community center $15.00/12 hour period
Recreation center 15.00/12 hour period
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 78/201
Shelters
North park 25.00/12 hour period
South park 25.00/12 hour period
The fee schedule for profit entities shall be as follows:
Rooms
Community center $30.00/12 hour period
Recreation center 30.00/12 hour period
Shelters
North park 25.00/12 hour period
South park 25.00/12 hour period
(Res. 102, 5-6-2003)
7-5-3: SIZE AND PRORATION:
The city recognizes that currently the rooms and shelters available vary in size. In order to simplify the fee schedule, the city chose not to account for these
differences. However, it is anticipated that the west portion of the recreation center may become available. When and if that occurs, this room will be billed
out differently as it is substantially larger than those spaces currently available.
The city has elected to treat the time periods as specific increments. Should an entity spend less than twelve (12) hours at the space, the fee shall not be
reduced. Similarly, if the entity exceeds the twelve (12) hour time period, it shall be charged for a full twelve (12) hour period. (Res. 102, 5-6-2003)
7-5-4: CURFEW1:
Any entity shall vacate the space on or before eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. the day it has rented the space. (Res. 102, 5-6-2003)
7-5-5: ALLOCATION OF SPACE:
Space shall be rented on a first come first served basis. The reservation shall be made at least twenty four (24) hours in advance to the city clerk and
payment shall be due at that time. (Res. 102, 5-6-2003)
7-5-6: REFUNDS:
While the city shall endeavor to keep the spaces clean and habitable, there is no guarantee of such. It is the city's responsibility to place signage indicating
who has reserved the space. It is encouraged to reserve meeting rooms and city shelters in advance. Reservations are on a first come first served basis.
Only paid reservations are guaranteed. Refunds will be given if the cancellation is made fourteen (14) days prior to the date reserved. No refunds will be
made for reservations made within fourteen (14) days of the event. (Ord. 2013-565, 8-20-2013)
7-5-7: DISPUTES:
The entity shall initially try to settle all disputes with a representative of the city clerk's office. If a resolution shall not be reached, the entity shall file a
written request within ten (10) days to the city council to review the matter. Such hearing shall be conducted at the next regularly scheduled city council
meeting. (Res. 102, 5-6-2003)
7-5-8: DISCRIMINATION:
The city shall not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, gender, age or any other classification. However, the city may refuse to rent in the case where
there is a reasonable risk of violence, damage, criminal activity or if there are any outstanding city fees. (Res. 102, 5-6-2003)
7-5-9: INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT:
The city strives to make sure that the spaces are safe. However, the city may elect to have each entity enter into an indemnification agreement as a
condition of providing the space. (Res. 102, 5-6-2003)
7-5-10: LITIGATION:
In the event of litigation, this rental shall be resolved by the laws of the state of Idaho and the renter shall be informed of such. (Res. 102, 5-6-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 79/201
Chapter 6
PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION
7-6-1: STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION ADOPTED:
The current edition of the Idaho standards for public works construction as promulgated by the Idaho standards for public works construction executive
committee is adopted and incorporated herein by reference as an ordinance of the city of Rigby in its current form and as it may hereafter be amended
from time to time as though set forth fully herein. Future editions of these standards may be adopted as the same are published from time to time by the
committee, by resolution of the mayor and city council and such resolution shall identify with particularity the edition being adopted. Unless specifically
stated to the contrary, such resolution shall have the effect of adopting that future edition as the edition then in force. One copy of the current edition of the
standards shall be maintained on file at the city clerk's office for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 535, 8-19-2008)
Chapter 7
AIRPORT
7-7-1: TITLE:
A. This chapter shall be known as the CITY OF RIGBY AIRPORT ORDINANCE.
B. This chapter is based upon rules and regulations promulgated and effective by the Federal Aviation Administration title 14 CFR FAR (part 77) and the
State of Idaho Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics. Idaho Code 21 aeronautics chapter 5.
C. The overall property of the City of Rigby Airport lies within Jefferson County and as such is subject to the County's land use zoning, which as of January
1, 2016 is zoned Commercial Two (C-2). (Ord. 2017-590, 4-6-2017)
7-7-2: PURPOSE:
A. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by Idaho Code1. It is hereby stated that certain constructions or structures may constitute
hazards to aerial operation and navigation, and such hazards may endanger the lives and/or property of users of the City of Rigby Airport. Additionally,
if the construction or structure in effect reduces the size of the area available for taking off, maneuvering, and landing of aircraft, the construction and/or
structure destroys or impairs the utility of Federal airspace, the airport and the public investment therein.
B. It is further found that certain activities and uses of land in the immediate vicinity of the airport are not compatible with normal airport operations, and
may, if not regulated, also endanger the lives of the participants, adversely affect their health, or otherwise limit the accomplishment of normal activities.
Accordingly, it is declared:
1. That the creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public nuisance and injury to the region served by the City of Rigby Airport;
2. That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety, and general welfare that the creation or establishment hazards to the airport be
prevented;
3. That the prevention of these hazards should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police powers without
compensation;
4. That appropriate notice be given to property owners, buyers, or sellers within a reasonable operating radius of the airport, informing them that the
airport exists. That airport operations may occur at all hours of the day or night throughout the calendar year, and person(s) within that operating
radius should not expect relief from reasonable airport operation. The City of Rigby Airport Board subscribes to the following: "Fair Disclosure
Statement" the statement means a notification to prospective buyers of property near or adjacent to the airport that they may be exposed to
potentially impactive levels of aircraft overflights. These statements in no way abrogate an individual's right to take later action against the airport, but
rather give the buyer a fair notice. Use of a Fair Disclosure Statement is not meant to provide pilots, crews, owners of aircraft, or any other person
protection from liability for negligence committed on their part.
C. It is further declared that both:
1. The prevention of creating or establishing airport hazards.
2. The elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation, or marking and lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for which political subdivisions
may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interest in land. (Ord. 2017-590, 4-6-2017)
7-7-3: SUMMARY OF EFFECT:
The provisions of this chapter may be summarized as follows:
A. For structures and trees on the airport property, heights may be restricted as determined by the Airport Board (subsection 7-7-6A1 of this chapter).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 80/201
B. For structures and trees off the airport property, heights of less than thirty feet (30') above airport elevation are exempted from the requirements of this
chapter (subsection 7-7-6A3 of this chapter) except that structures and trees in the Primary Zones (subsection 7-7-5A of this chapter) and Visual
Approach Zones (subsection 7-7-5C of this chapter) immediately off the ends of each airport runway may be prohibited or restricted in height.
C. For structures and trees off the airport property which may exceed thirty feet (30') above airport elevation, certain zones are established in section 7-7-5
of this chapter. These zones provide sloping criteria based on location from the active runway(s) at the airport. The zones are more restrictive to the
ends of the takeoff and landing runway(s) than to the sides of the runway(s). (Ord. 2017-590, 4-6-2017)
7-7-4: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
AIRPORT: The City of Rigby Airport (U56).
AIRPORT BOARD: A board of volunteers serving by appointment and pleasure of the Rigby City Council to act on matters involving the airport.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The established elevation as per the National Geodetic Survey designation N-227 as the highest point of the usable landing area.
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure, tree, tower or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the taxiing, taking off,
maneuvering, or landing of aircraft at the airport.
AVIGATION: Aerial navigation.
DATUM: Any level surface, line, or point used as a reference, in measuring elevations. A basis for horizontal surveys, consisting of the longitude and
latitude of a certain point.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Division of Aeronautics.
DIVISION OF AERONAUTICS: A division within the Department of Transportation of the State of Idaho as defined in Idaho Code title 21.
ELEVATION: The elevation of the City of Rigby Airport has been established by the NGS designation N227 as four thousand eight hundred forty five feet
(4,845') above sea level.
FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration. Title 14 CPR (FAR) part 77.
HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and shown on zoning maps. The datum shall mean at runway
1/19 above sea level elevation, unless otherwise specified.
INSTRUMENT APPROACH ZONE: The area encompassed by FAA terminal approach procedures defined distances from any runway having an FAA
approved instrument approach.
LAND USE PLANNING: As established by Jefferson County as part of each entity's comprehensive land use guidelines and made a part of this chapter by
reference.
LANDING AREA: The area of the airport used for taxiing, take off, maneuvering, or landing of aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any pre-existing structure, tower, tree, or natural growth or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter
or an amendment thereto.
PERMIT: To grant permission or to allow.
RUNWAY/TAXIWAY STRUCTURE: The paved surface(s) of an airport landing area or taxiing area. An object constructed or installed by man.
TREE: Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross
weight or less.
VARIANCE: Official permission to do something normally forbidden by regulation, especially by building in a way or for a purpose normally forbidden by a
zoning law or Building Code.
VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures, with no existing instrument procedures and no
instrument designation indicated on a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or military service-approved airport layout plan or by any other Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) or military planning document. It may however have runway and taxiway lighting as activated by pilot(s) upon take off(s) and
landings. (Ord. 2017-590, 4-6-2017)
7-7-5: ZONES:
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land and airspace within
Instrument Approach Zones, Visual Approach Zones, Transitional Zones, Horizontal Zones, and Conical Zones. Such areas and zones are shown in
approximation on the City of Rigby Airport Zoning Map on file in the City. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
A. Primary Zone: A Primary Zone is centered longitudinally on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared surface, the Primary Zone extends
two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface the Primary Zone ends at each
end of the runway. The elevation of any point on the Primary Zone coincides with the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 81/201
of a Primary Zone is two hundred fifty feet (250') for utility runways having non-precision instrument approach. The width of the Primary Zone of a
runway will be that width prescribed in this subsection for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway.
1. Effect: The Primary Zone has the effect of limiting the heights of structures or trees off the ends of active hard surface runways for a distance of two
hundred feet (200').
B. Approach Zone: An Approach Zone is longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extends outward and upward from each end of the
Primary Zone. An Approach Zone is applied to each end of each runway based upon type of approach available or planned for that runway end.
1. Inner Edge: The inner edge of the Approach Zone is the same width as the Primary Zone and it expands uniformly to a width of: a) one thousand two
hundred fifty feet (1,250') for that end of a utility runway with only visual approach; b) two thousand feet (2,000') for that end of a utility runway with
an instrument approach.
2. Approach: The Approach Zone for utility runways with a non-precision instrument approach and/or visual approach extends for a horizontal distance
of five thousand feet (5,000') at a slope of twenty to one (20:1).
3. Outer Width: The outer width of an Approach Zone to an end of a runway will be that width prescribed in this subsection for the most precise
approach existing or planned for that runway.
4. Effect: The effect of the Approach Zone at the City of Rigby Airport is to further extend the twenty to one (20:1) slope and height limitations of Visual
and Non-Precision Zones to a distance of five thousand feet (5,000') from the active runways.
C. Visual Approach Zone: A Visual Approach Zone is established at each of all visual runways. The Visual Approach Zone shall have a width of two
hundred fifty feet (250') at a distance of two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of four
hundred fifty feet (450') at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') beyond each end of the runway, the zone centerline being the continuation of the
centerline of the runway, and the zone slope will be twenty to one (20:1).
1. Effect: The Visual Zone has the effect of limiting the heights of structures or trees off the ends of visual approach runways for a distance of one
thousand feet (1,000') from the height of zero (0) on the airport property (section 7-7-6 of this chapter) to approximately fifty feet (50') in height at a
distance of one thousand feet (1,000') from the end of the active runways.
D. Nonprecision Approach Zone: A Nonprecision Approach Zone is established at each end of all non-precision runways for non-instrument landings and
takeoffs. The Nonprecision Approach Zone shall have a width of two hundred fifty feet (250') at a distance of two hundred feet (200') beyond each end
of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of four hundred fifty feet (450') at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') beyond each end of
the runway, the zone centerline will be the continuation of the centerline of the runway, and the zone slope will be twenty to one (20:1).
1. Effect: The effect of the Nonprecision Approach Zone is identical to that of the Visual Approach Zone, above.
E. Transitional Zone: Transitional Zones extend outwards and upwards at right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a
slope of seven to one (7:1) from the sides of the Primary Zone and from the sides of the Approach Zones. Transitional Zones for those portions of the
Precision Approach Zone which project through and beyond the limits of the Conical Zone, extend a distance of five thousand feet (5,000') measures
horizontally from the edge of the Approach Zone and at right angles to the runway centerline.
1. Effect: The effect of the Transitional Zone is to limit heights of structures or trees from zero (0) at the edge of the active runway (section 7-7-6 of this
chapter) to approximately one hundred fifty feet (150') above airport elevation at a horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000') from the edge of
the Primary Zone, on a slope of seven to one (7:1).
F. Horizontal Zone: A Horizontal Zone is established, consisting of a plane one hundred fifty feet (150') above the established airport elevation, the
perimeter of the Horizontal Zone being established by swinging arcs of specified radius from the center of each end of the Primary Zone of each
runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by line tangent to those arcs. The radius of each arc is: 1) five thousand feet (5,000') for all runways
designated as utility or visual; and 2) ten thousand feet (10,000') for all runways other than utility designated as instrument runways. The radius of the
arc specified for each end of a runway will have the same arithmetical value. That value will be the highest determined for either end of the runway.
When a five thousand foot (5,000') arc is encompassed by tangents connected to adjacent ten thousand foot (10,000'), the five thousand foot (5,000')
arc shall be disregarded on the construction of the perimeter of the Horizontal Zone.
1. Effect: The effect of the Horizontal Zone is to limit the height of structures or trees to less than one hundred fifty feet (150') above airport elevation for
a distance of approximately five thousand feet (5,000') horizontally from the active runway.
G. Conical Zone: A Conical Zone extends outwards and upwards from the periphery of the Horizontal Zone at a slope of twenty to one (20:1) for a
horizontal distance of four thousand feet (4,000').
1. Effect: The effect of the Conical Zone is to provide additional height limitations for structures or trees a distance greater than five thousand feet
(5,000') horizontally from the active runway.
As of January 1, 2016, the City of Rigby Airport has no approved or planned instrument approaches. The runways are open for visual approaches at
all hours of the day and night, weather permitting. However, nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting or discouraging future
development of instrument approaches at the airport. FAA regulations for such approaches may require future modifications of this chapter.
Runway/taxiway lighting can be activated by pilot(s) prior to a visual take off or landing and may remain active for a period of time following such
activities. (Ord. 2017-590, 4-6-2017)
7-7-6: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter no structure, tower, or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in any surface created
by this chapter to a height in excess of the height limit herein established for such a zone. Such height limitations are hereby established for each of the
zones in question as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 82/201
1. Conflict: Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail.
2. Airport Property: On the airport property, as established by the Airport Board in accordance with FAA guidelines.
3. Excepted Height Limitations: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting growth, construction, or maintenance of any tree or structure
off the airport property to a height up to thirty feet (30') above the airport, except as provided for Primary and Visual Approach Zones in subsections
7-7-5A and C of this chapter.
4. Nonprecision Instrument Or Visual Approach Zone: No tree(s) or structure may penetrate the Nonprecision Instrument or Visual Approach Zone for
any utility runway.
5. Transitional Zone: No tree or structure may penetrate the Transitional Zone for any runway.
6. Horizontal Zone: No tree or structure may penetrate the Horizontal Zone for any runway.
7. Conical Zone: No tree or structure may penetrate the Conical Zone for any runway. (Ord. 2017-590, 4-6-2017)
7-7-7: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of land within any zone established by this chapter in such a manner as to:
A. Create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft;
B. Make it difficult for aviators to distinguish between airport lights and other lights;
C. Result in glare, coherent light beams or other visual distractions to aviators using the airport;
D. Impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport; or
E. Otherwise endanger the taxiing off, maneuvering or landing of aircraft at the airport. (Ord. 2017-590, 4-6-2017)
7-7-8: NONCONFORMING USES:
A. Regulations are not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or
alterations of any structure(s) or tree(s) not in conformance with this chapter as of January 1, 2016, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any
nonconforming use reasonably established prior to that date. Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended
use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which began prior to January 1, 2016, and which has diligently prosecuted.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the owner(s) of any nonconforming structure(s) or tree(s) is hereby required to permit the
installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Airport Board, to indicate the
presence of such hazards to aviators in the vicinity of the airport. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained by the airport.
(Ord. 2017-590, 4-6-2017)
7-7-9: GIVING OF NOTICE:
A. The City encourages any person or entity selling, leasing, or otherwise providing for use of a property within the Transition Zone of the City of Rigby
Airport to provide written notice to the buyer, renter, leasing entity, or the property user of the existence of the City of Rigby Airport for the reason that
the property may be subject to some of the annoyances and inconveniences associated with proximity to airport operations (for example: noise,
vibrations, and odors). The transition area is defined as a one mile radius of the City of Rigby Airport.
The City encourages any person or entity who is providing written disclosure to a buyer, renter, leasing entity, or other property user to use the model
Idaho Fair Disclosure Statement as set forth below:
FAIR DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
FAIR DISCLOSURE STATEMENT DISCLOSURES BY (OWNER) (BUYER) OF REAL PROPERTY IN JEFFERSON COUNTY, IDAHO
This is a notification, disclosure, and acknowledgement by (Owner) (Buyer) of real property located in the vicinity of the City of Rigby Municipal
Airport in the City of Rigby, Idaho. (Owner) (Buyer) hereby acknowledges the following:
AIRPORT
1) Proximity to the Airport
The subject parcel, located in Section Township Range , is located within the City of Rigby Municipal Airport Transition Area which is defined being
located within a one (1) mile radius of the airport. As result, the subject property is located in the airport's Federal Aviation Regulation Part 77 Airspace
and one of seven land use zones Airplanes may fly at low elevations over the parcel as they operate to, from, or at the airport. The airport is
operational 24 hours per day. Flights may occur at all hours of the day or night.
2) Airspace
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 83/201
The subject parcel property lies under the Airport's FAR Part 77 Airspace and is subject to Federal law and all State and local laws. As such, it may
be necessary to clear and keep clear the Airspace of any portions of buildings, structures, or improvements of any and all kinds, and of trees,
vegetation, or other objects. This includes reserving the right of the City or County to; remove or demolish those portions of such buildings, structures,
improvements, trees or any other objects which extend into the Airspace; cut to the ground level and remove any trees which extend into the Airspace;
the right to mark and light, or cause or require to be marked or lighted, as obstructions to air navigation, any and all buildings, structures, or other
improvements, and trees or other objects now upon, or that in the future may be upon, said Parcel, and which extend into the Airspace
3) Future Improvements and Aircraft Operations
The airport may wish to expand its facilities and operations in the future. Expansion plans include, but are not limited to those shown on the
approved Airport Layout Plan (ALP). These improvements may result in increased aircraft operations, operations by larger aircraft, and increased
nighttime operations which could increase the noise levels within the vicinity of the airport.
4) Disclosure of Airport Impacts
Due to the proximity of the parcel to the City of Rigby Municipal Airport and the airport's Transition Area; owner(s) / buyer(s) should expect frequent
overflight and varying degrees of noise and other impacts from these overflying aircraft, which some persons may find intrusive. Further,
owner(s)/buyer(s) should expect varying degrees of vibration, fumes, dust, fuel, fuel particles, or other effects that may be caused by the operation of
aircraft landing at, taking off from, or operating on or at public airport facilities.
CERTIFICATION
This undersigned owner(s) / purchaser(s) of said parcel of land certify(ies) that (he/she/they) (has/have) read the above disclosure statement and
acknowledge(s) the pre or planned existence of the airport named above and the noise and other exposure due to the operation of said airport.
(SIGNED)Date
(Ord. 2017-590, 4-6-2017)
7-7-10: PERMITS:
A. Existing Uses: No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard, or that would allow a nonconforming use,
structure, or tree(s) to be made higher or to become higher, or become a greater hazard to aerial navigation, than it was on January 1, 2016.
B. Future Uses:
1. Except as specifically provided in this subsection, no material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree(s) shall be erected,
altered, planted or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit for such tree(s) or structure has been applied for and granted.
Each application for such permit shall indicate the purpose for which the structure or tree(s) is desired, with sufficient particularity to allow
determination as to whether the resulting use, structure or tree(s) would conform to the regulations contained in this chapter. If such determination
indicates conformity with this chapter, the permit shall be granted.
2. Permit application shall be made via the Jefferson County Planning and Zoning Office with consultation of the City of Rigby Planning and Zoning
Office. The City of Rigby Airport Board will be given the chance to give input or recommendation regarding permit application.
3. In the area lying within the limits of the Horizontal Zone and the Conical Zone, airport concurrence is not required for any tree or structure whose
highest point is less than seventy five feet (75') in vertical height above airport elevation, unless any point of such structure would extend above the
height limits prescribed for such zone.
4. In the area lying within the limits of the Transition Zone beyond the perimeter of the Horizontal Zone, airport concurrence is not required for any tree
or structure whose highest point is less than seventy five feet (75') of vertical height above airport elevation, unless any point of such structure would
extend above the height limits prescribed for such zone.
5. No part of this subsection shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration, or growth of any structure or tree(s) in
excess of any of the height limits established in this chapter except as set forth in section 7-7-5 of this chapter.
C. Nonconforming Uses Abandoned Or Destroyed:
1. Whenever the Jefferson County Planning and Zoning Commission determines, and with notification to the City of Rigby Airport Board that a
nonconforming structure(s) or tree(s) has been abandoned or more than eighty percent (80%) torn down, deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be
granted that would allow such structure(s) or tree(s) to exceed the applicable height limits or otherwise deviate from this chapter.
2. Variances permissible under this subsection may allow where literal application or enforcement of this chapter would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, and where the relief granted by variance will not be contrary to the public interest, or will not create undue hazard to aerial
navigation.
3. Variances may be allowed subject to such reasonable conditions as the Jefferson County Planning and Zoning Commission and the City of Rigby
Airport Board may deem necessary to affect the intent of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the condition that the owner of such structure(s) or
tree(s) install, operate and maintain at owners expense such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to aviators the presence of a flight
hazard. (Ord. 2017-590, 4-6-2017)
7-7-11: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Jefferson County Planning and Zoning Administrator shall enforce and regulate the prescribed regulations and provision of this chapter in consultation
with the input of the City of Rigby Airport Board, acting for and on behalf of the City of Rigby, Mayor and City Council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 84/201
B. Application for permits and variances within and outside of the actual airport boundaries shall be made to the Jefferson County Planning and Zoning
Office after consultation with the City of Rigby Planning and Zoning Department. (Ord. 2017-590, 4-6-2017)
7-7-12: APPEALS:
A. Any party aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision enacted under this chapter may appeal such decision to the Jefferson County
Commissioners in concert with the City of Rigby City Council.
B. The City of Rigby Airport Board reserves the right to provide input to the Jefferson County Planning and Zoning Commission regarding decisions in
such appeals, including right of appearance and testimony at any meeting or hearing regarding such appeal. (Ord. 2017-590, 4-6-2017)
7-7-13: PENALTIES:
A. Jefferson County shall consider any violation of this chapter, and shall render a decision on such matter. An appeal may be made before the County
Commissioners as to the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission after consultation with the Board of the Rigby City Airport.
Any violation of this chapter outside of airport property shall be considered a violation of Jefferson County Planning and Zoning rules and regulations,
and may be punished or corrected by such mechanisms as are provided in the Jefferson County ordinances regarding Planning and Zoning violations.
B. Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, nothing in this chapter supersedes the State of Idaho, Department of Transportation, Division of
Aeronautics and/or Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) rules and regulations, regarding the height of any tree(s) and/or structure(s) as noted in
section 7-7-5, "Zones", of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-590, 4-6-2017)
7-7-14: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
Where there arises a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations of laws, including the City of
Rigby, Jefferson County, Idaho, or Federal government (FAA) laws and regulations, applicable to the same area, whether the conflict is with respect to
height of structure(s) or tree(s), or the use of land, or any other matter, the most stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. (Ord. 2017-
590, 4-6-2017)
7-7-15: SEVERABILITY:
If any of the provisions of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalidated provision or application. To such end, the provisions of this
chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 2017-590, 4-6-2017)
7-7-16: MAPS:
Official map drawings of the City of Rigby Airport are on file in the City. These drawings will give location of each zone described in section 7-7-5 of this
chapter. (Ord. 2017-590, 4-6-2017)
Title 8
WATER AND SEWER
Chapter 1
WATER USE REGULATIONS
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CITY: The city of Rigby, Idaho.
COMMERCIAL BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind or for any type of
business or enterprise or for any other purposes not otherwise described or covered under the definition of "dwellings" in this section. Each business within
one structure, even though served by one line, shall be deemed individual connections, and charged as separate businesses as per category, even if
having only a single plumbing fixture.
CORPORATION STOP: Denotes the shutoff valve and tapping facilities connecting the water service line to the water main pipe.
CURB STOP: The city's service line shutoff valve that is to be placed as near as practicable to the line between the private property, common boundary
and the public right of way.
CUSTOMER LINE: Denotes the pipes, valves, and fittings leading from the curb stop into the premises served.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 85/201
DWELLINGS:
Auto Court, Motor Court, Motel, Hotel: The combination or group of two (2) or more dwelling units occupying a building site or area under one
ownership, used for the purpose of furnishing transient living accommodations.
Duplex: A building designed, built, rented, or leased for occupancy by two (2) families or persons living independently of each other.
Multiple-Family Dwelling Or Apartment House: Any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented, or leased, let, or hired out to be
occupied or which is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families or persons living independently of each other, which shall
include townhouses and condominiums.
Single-Family Dwelling: A building designed for or occupied by one family for living or sleeping purposes and having one kitchen or set of cooking
facilities.
Trailer House Or Mobile Home: Any vehicle used or so constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways
and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons.
METER: Includes the water meter, its enclosure valve, and related appurtenances.
OPEN HOSE: The use of water through a hose without nozzle or other limiting device.
PLUMBING FIXTURE UNIT: Includes each of the following types of plumbing facilities or items as a "unit": toilet, sink, bathtub, shower, combination
bathtub and shower, washing machine, dishwasher, etc.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The public works director of the city of Rigby.
SERVICE LINE: Denotes the pipe, valves and fittings laid from the water main to and including the curb stop, and which is under the jurisdictional control
of the city.
WATER MAIN: The pipe laid in a street, road, alley, or easement and running approximately parallel to said street, road or alley that is used for the
distribution of water to the customers, and which is owned, operated, controlled and maintained by the city. (1980 Code § 4.6.1; amd. Ord. 454, 5-7-1996,
eff. 6-1-1996; 1999 Code)
8-1-2: EXCLUSIVE MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL BY CITY:
It is hereby declared that the city shall have exclusive control and management of the city water system; shall have exclusive management and control of
the supply and distribution of water to the inhabitants thereof; and shall, from time to time, make such rules and regulations as are necessary for the
complete management, control, distribution, and supply of water to the said inhabitants. (1980 Code § 4.6.2)
8-1-3: GRANTING OF FRANCHISE PROHIBITED:
No person shall be granted any franchise or permit to furnish or supply any inhabitant within the city any water for domestic or culinary use or for sprinkling
of lawns and gardens within any portion thereof where the water mains have been extended or may hereafter be extended so as to supply said property
with water. (1980 Code § 4.6.3)
8-1-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
A. Supervision Of Water System: The public works director, under the direction of the mayor, shall be responsible for the supervision and management of
the entire water system including the operation and maintenance of all supply, distribution, and fire hydrant facilities. (1980 Code § 4.6.5; amd. 1999
Code)
B. Right To Turn Off Water: The public works director shall have the right to turn off the water at any point or to any place or building within the city when
he deems such action to be necessary or when duly ordered to do so. (1980 Code § 4.6.6; amd. 1999 Code)
8-1-5: EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS:
A. Within City: The public works director shall be authorized to construct, or cause to be constructed, extensions to the water system if one of the following
conditions exist:
1. The annual anticipated revenue made available to the city from the customers to be immediately served by such extension is not less than one-tenth
(1/10) of the actual cost to the city for the construction of said water main extension.
2. The public works director declares that the water main extension is needed for the overall benefit and improvement of the entire water distribution
system.
3. The city council approves a contract for the construction of the water main extension with a party or parties desiring water service. Provided,
however, that subdividers or developers within or adjacent to the city shall construct at their own expense all water mains, facilities and
appurtenances required within their subdivisions or developments except that the city will be responsible for those water line costs set forth in section
8-1-29 of this chapter. (1980 Code § 4.6.10; amd. 1999 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 86/201
B. Areas Contiguous To City: In areas contiguous to the city that may be annexed to the city, the city may require such areas to be annexed before water
service is provided. Prior to annexation, the city shall require the execution and approval of an annexation agreement which shall detail the conditions
for water service. (1980 Code § 4.6.11)
C. Outside City: Water mains shall not, without the city council's approval, be extended outside the corporate limits of the city; however, when, in the
opinion of the public works director, there will be special benefit and improvement to the water distribution system by reason of an extension outside the
city, special arrangements may be made with the council to allow said extension. Provided, however, that the areas to be serviced outside of the city
shall not benefit to a greater extent than like areas provided with water within the city; and provided, further, that no such arrangements shall be made
unless adequate excess water is available for such outside the city water service. (1980 Code § 4.6.12; amd. 1999 Code)
8-1-6: WATER METERS:
A. Power To Place Meters: When deemed advisable to do so, the public works director may, at any time, place a meter on any service line or any line
serving a category business in which metering is an option, and to change the method of payment from a flat rate to a metered rate. (Ord. 454, 5-7-
1996, eff. 6-1-1996)
B. Payment For Meters: All meters shall be paid for by the customer requesting or receiving city water service where a meter is required as part of a new
water service connection. Existing businesses, as of the date of adoption of this subsection will be responsible for the cost of installing a meter. New
businesses starting subsequent to June 1, 1996, if provided for by statute, shall pay the cost of the meter prior to service being established. (Ord. 454,
5-7-1996, eff. 6-1-1996; amd. 1999 Code)
C. Ownership: All water meters installed within the water system shall become and shall remain the property of the city and may be removed or replaced
or changed as to size and type by the water department whenever deemed necessary. (1980 Code § 4.6.15)
D. Maintenance: The water department shall maintain and repair all meters. Where a replacement, repair, or adjustment of any meter is rendered
necessary by this chapter, neglect or carelessness of the owner or occupant of any premises, any expense incurred by the water department thereby
shall be charged against and collected from the water consumer, and water service may be discontinued until the defect is corrected and the amount
charged collected. (1980 Code § 4.6.16)
E. Location And Access: Meters shall generally be located within a manhole near the property line, allowing for convenient access. The area adjacent to
the meter shall be kept from obstructions at all times. (1980 Code § 4.6.17; amd. 1999 Code)
F. Meter Reading: Meters shall be read and bills shall be rendered, as nearly as practicable, at monthly or bimonthly intervals for all metered water service
supplied during the preceding months. (1980 Code § 4.6.27)
G. Meter Rates For Multiple Meters: Where an individual consumer is supplied with water through more than one metered service, charges shall be
computed separately for each individual meter. (1980 Code § 4.6.28)
H. Bulk Water Metering: Any entity or person seeking use of bulk water outside of individually metered business shall pay a fee as established in
subsection 8-1-11F of this chapter to install a water metering device onto a hydrant. The fee shall be used to offset the cost of city personnel installing
the meter and to help defray purchase cost. Should the meter need to be reinstalled, an additional fee shall apply. Anyone who tampers with the meter
to avoid or minimize charges shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Res. 108, 9-24-2003)
8-1-7: APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE:
A. Filing Application; Permit Issuance: An application for a connection to the city water system and for the use of city water shall be made at the office of
the public works director and no connection shall be made to any water main without a valid permit therefor having been issued by the public works
director.
B. Planning And Zoning Permit: When a planning and zoning permit has not been issued, a water or sewer hookup shall not be made to any building in the
city. (1980 Code § 4.6.18; amd. 1999 Code)
8-1-8: WATER MAIN CONSTRUCTION CHARGE:
A. Determination Of Costs; Conditions:
1. Hereafter, any person, before obtaining a permit to connect to any water main constructed substantially at city expense, shall pay a water main
construction charge therefor at the rate of twelve dollars ($12.00) per front foot of property to be served by the permit. Said amount shall be effective
on both sides of the street, making the actual cost twice the said amount.
2. All water mains owned and/or maintained by the city shall be deemed to have been constructed substantially at city expense, except those mains
constructed within subdivisions having been platted since 1975, and in those cases where the permittee establishes to the satisfaction of the city that
the water main was not constructed substantially at city expense.
3. This charge may be changed from time to time by resolution of the city council as such change is deemed necessary, and the council may adopt a
schedule indicating actual cost.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 87/201
4. Installation costs not borne by the city shall be the responsibility of the developer, as set forth in section 8-1-29 of this chapter.
B. Application Of Charges: The above referenced water main construction charge applies only to property within the city limits. The water main
construction charge for property outside the city or for property being annexed to the city shall be as set forth in the outside the city water service
contract or the annexation agreement. (Ord. 454, 5-7-1996, eff. 6-1-1996)
8-1-9: WATER SERVICE LINE INSTALLATION FEE:
A. Fees Established: At the time an applicant or customer applies for city water service, a service line installation fee shall be charged. The service line
installation fee is intended to cover the costs incurred by the city in installing the service line from the main to the curb stop. In no circumstance shall
the city be responsible for installation of service past the curb stop. Effective December 1, 2003, the service line installation fee for the various sizes of
service lines shall be as follows:
1. Residential/business/commercial:
3/4 inch $ 800.00 plus $6.00 per linear foot
1 inch 1,000.00 plus $8.00 per linear foot
2. Business/commercial:
11/2 inch 2,000.00 plus $12.00 per linear foot
2 inch 3,000.00 plus $16.00 per linear foot
3. Rock excavation 60.00 per cubic yard
4. Street surfacing 2.00 per square foot
(Ord. 454, 5-7-1996, eff. 6-1-1996; amd. Res. 108, 9-24-2003)
B. Annual Review; Cost Recovery:
1. Said fees and costs shall be reviewed yearly and revised by resolution of the city council as required so that said fees and costs adequately cover
the costs actually incurred by the city in installing the service lines or repair of service lines. These fees and charges are deemed necessary. (Ord.
454, 5-7-1996, eff. 6-1-1996)
2. Should the line need to be replaced due to normal wear and tear or unforeseen damage and the line size is increased at the request of the applicant,
costs shall be as indicated by the schedule for the additional cost. For example, the difference between residential three-fourths inch (3/4") and one
inch (1") shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 454, 5-7-1996, eff. 6-1-1996; amd. Res. 108, 9-24-2003)
8-1-10: CONNECTION FEES:
A. Fees:
1. Rates Established: The following fees shall be paid for water connections:
Water Connection
First Unit Additional Unit
Single-family dwelling $1,300.00 n/a
Multi-family dwelling 1,300.00 $ 325.00
Townhouse 1,300.00 1,300.00
Business/commercial 1,300.00 325.00
(Per correspondence dated 7-20-2004; amd. Ord. 543, 5-5-2009)
2. Interpretation: For the purpose of this subsection A, the following structures shall be described as follows:
a. Townhouses are individual residences within a single structure characterized by separate ownership or anticipated separate ownership. Each
residence would be charged separately.
b. A condominium, while separately owned, is owned by a common entity and shall be treated the same or in a similar manner as apartments.
c. A "separate structure" shall be defined as a structure with no walls in common with another structure.
d. A trailer park is considered a multi-family dwelling. Expansion of a trailer park shall be considered as a new application with the first lot charged a
first unit fee and each additional lot charged as an additional unit. (Res. 114, 4-6-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 88/201
B. Payment; Applicability Of Fees:
1. The connection fees set forth above must be paid whenever service is requested and subsequently provided to any dwelling, trailer house, business,
commercial building, or any other such building or establishment that does not have a permit to connect to or actually is connected to the city's water
system on the effective date hereof. (Ord. 454, 5-7-1996, eff. 6-1-1996; amd. Res. 114, 4-6-2004; Ord. 543, 5-5-2009)
2. The above referenced connection fees will not apply to or be charged against the reconstruction of any existing service line serving any existing
dwelling, building, etc. It is intended that this connection fee be charged only where a new building is being constructed upon previously undeveloped
property.
3. These fees may be changed from time to time by resolution of the city council as such changes are deemed necessary. (Ord. 454, 5-7-1996, eff. 6-1-
1996; amd. Res. 114, 4-6-2004)
C. Disposition Of Funds:
1. Water: The funds accumulated from these fees shall be used only to provide the additional city well capacity, additional water line size or capacity
(above 8 inch diameter), and additional water line extensions as are deemed necessary by the mayor and city council to serve the expanding water
system needs of the community. (Ord. 454, 5-7-1996, eff. 6-1-1996)
8-1-11: RATES; UTILITY DEPOSIT:
A. Deposit Required: Effective October 1, 2012, there is required a two (2) month utility fee deposit for each residential, business, industrial and rental
property utility user.
For business and industrial users, the deposit shall be one-sixth (1/6) of the average yearly fee, if established. If not so established, the amount shall be
two (2) months of the estimated monthly usage. The usage shall be estimated by the city clerk using the current utility rates in effect. These deposits
shall apply to sanitation, sewer and water and any revenue bond(s). Any refund shall reflect an offset for outstanding balances. The balance of any
deposit shall be returned to the person posting the deposit after the property has been transferred to the new owner. Property owners are responsible
for ongoing utility services including revenue bonds until the new property owner takes title to the property. No interest will be paid upon funds to be
returned.
All utility deposits will be held for a period of twelve (12) months. If during the twelve (12) consecutive months the account has not been delinquent sixty
(60) or more days, either before the enactment of this subsection or after, the deposit will be refunded. If an account is delinquent more than sixty (60)
days and a water shutoff order is executed, a new deposit will be required to be made at the current utility rates and the holding period starts anew.
For owners of duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes or more than two (2) single-family rental units or multibusiness units, a single deposit equal to two (2)
months' utility billing for the unit having the highest monthly billing rate will be required. The deposit can be used on one or all of the properties owned.
If one or more of the accounts becomes delinquent and a shutoff notice is executed, a deposit for each unit will be required using the current utility
rates. At the end of the twelve (12) month period, and all of the accounts are current, the deposit will be refunded less the two (2) months' utility billing
for the unit having the highest monthly billing rate. (Ord. 2012-556, 7-17-2012)
B. Flat Rates: The following monthly rates or such other monthly rates as may be established and adopted by resolution of the city council from time to
time are hereby established by the city for customers located inside the city limits. The public works director shall have the authority to categorize each
structure for the purpose of collection of fees.
User Category Water Rate
Residential:
Condominium cost per unit
Duplex - cost per unit
Mobile homes (trailers)
Rental apartments - cost per unit
Single-family dwellings
Each of the above would be considered as 1 each single-family unit, all at base rate per
unit
$23.25. $14.25 is for the fee and $9.00 is for the bond
C. Business/Commercial Categories:
User Category Water Rate
Business/commercial category 1:
Estimated usage 0 to 10,000 gallons per month:
Barbers
Beauticians (less than 4 stations)
Certified public accountants
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 89/201
Daycare (daycare in a residence)
Financial institutions, including stockbrokers, financial planners, banks, etc.
Governmental offices (excluding jail facilities)
Insurance offices
Law offices
Light retail establishments (under 10,000 square feet total floor space)
State and local agencies
Telecommunication offices
Title offices
Each of the above base rate $23.25. $14.25 is for the fee and $9.00 is for
the bond
Business/commercial category 2:
Estimated usage 10,001 to 20,000 gallons per month:
Beauticians (4 or more stations)
Churches (under 20,000 square feet)
Daycare centers (not in residential home)
Dentists
Doctors
Florists
Funeral home
Medium retail establishments (from 10,000 to 20,000 square feet total floor space)
Publishers/newsprint
Veterinary clinics
Each of the above base rate $45.50. $28.50 is for the fee and $18.00 is for
the bond
Business/commercial category 3:
Estimated usage 20,001 to 30,000 gallons per month:
Auto dealerships
Bars
Convenience stores
Eating establishments (with seating capacity)
Jail facilities
Nursing homes/rest homes
Service stations
Supermarkets (under 20,000 square feet total floor space)
Tire stores
Each of the above base rate $69.75. $42.75 is for the fee and $27.00 is for
the bond
Business/industrial category 5 (metered option):
As provided in subsections 8-1-6A and B of this chapter, the following users shall be metered
at the city's option:
Estimated usage 30,001 to 50,000 gallons per month:
Car wash facilities
Churches (over 20,000 square feet)
Food processing plants
Hotels
Laundromats
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 90/201
Motels
Public school facilities
Supermarkets (over 20,000 square feet)
Water processing plants
Each of the above base rate $1.44/1,000 gallons. $45.00 for the bond, plus
usage
Water use only:
For water use over 50,000 gallons $0.067/1,000 gallons
For water only, any metered business using less than fifty thousand (50,000) and more than thirty thousand one (30,001) gallons each month shall be
charged at the rate set forth in category 5. Should monthly amount fall below the category threshold, i.e., thirty thousand one (30,001) gallons in category
5, that business shall be charged the base rate in the appropriate category. The monthly fees shall not be prorated within the categories 1 through 3.
Nothing herein shall affect the bond charges currently in place. Usage shall be rounded to the nearest one thousand (1,000) gallons. A water user may, at
his expense, and subject to the approval of the public works director, install a water meter to determine the appropriate category. (Ord. 468, 12-16-1997,
eff. 1-1-1999; amd. Res. 108, 9-24-2003; Res. 116-A, 9-21-2004; Ord. 543, 5-5-2009)
D. Irrigation Or Sprinkling Rates:
1. Rates Established: In addition to the regular monthly charges for the use of city water, the following annual rates are hereby established as those to
be charged to customers using city water for lawn sprinkling or irrigation:
a. Less Than One-Half Acre: Eleven dollars ($11.00) for each lot, business, premises, or property utilizing city water for lawn sprinkling or other such
irrigation use but having lawn or other such irrigated and/or cultivated area measuring less than one-half (1/2) acre.
b. More Than One-Half Acre: Twenty six dollars ($26.00) per acre or fraction thereof for each lot, business, premises or property with lawn or other
such irrigated and/or cultivated area measuring more than one-half (1/2) acre.
2. Annual Statement: During the third quarter of each calendar year, the city clerk shall furnish each property owner, landlord, or agent a statement of
the amount due for seasonal sprinkling or irrigation, such water charges to be included on a regular utility statement and paid at the office of the clerk
prior to the tenth day of the month following such billing.
3. Ditch Water: Where ditch water is available and usable, the above stated rates include the costs or rates for ditch water.
E. Rate Modification: The city council is authorized to modify the service rates set forth above (flat rates, metered rates, and irrigation rates or sprinkling
rates) from time to time by resolution as such changes are deemed necessary. (1980 Code § 4.6.22)
F. Bulk Water Rates1: The following fees shall become effective December 1, 2003:
Meter installation fee $20.00
Reinstallation fee $20.00 additional
Rate after installation $1.35 per 1,000 gallons
(Res. 108, 9-24-2003)
8-1-12: BUSINESS DEFINED FOR WATER RATE DETERMINATION:
A. Single Business: The following shall be used in determining the definition of "business", for the purpose of determining water rates:
1. Where a single business falls within two (2) business categories, the business shall pay the higher of two (2) rates. Similarly, a single business falling
into two (2) subdivisions of a single category, e.g., law office and title office, shall pay a single fee, as long as it is a single business.
2. A "single business" shall be defined as a commercial entity under a single ownership and control contained within a single structure. In determining
whether a commercial entity is a single business or multiple business, the city shall consider, but is not limited to, the following factors:
a. How it is treated for taxation purposes.
b. Legal status of the business, i.e., corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, limited liability company, or professional limited liability company.
c. Telephone number.
d. Advertisements.
e. How it holds itself out to the public.
f. Water consumption.
g. Any other factor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 91/201
h. Whether rent, if any, is paid from a single source. (Res. 65, 5-20-1997)
B. Multiple Business: A "multiple business" is defined as a business without common financial interest or instances of ownership. Multiple business use
must fall under the definition as defined by subsection 8-1-11C of this chapter, "business/commercial category 1". Business use not defined under
subsection 8-1-11C of this chapter, will be charged based on their classification for that business only. The building must service more than one
business with restrooms being shared among the businesses. Residential use as defined by this code, does not fall under multiple business.
The fee for a building having multiple business shall be assessed at the rate of a single category 1 business for the first business plus the rate as set by
city resolution for each subsequent business for water and sewer service only. (Ord. 2011-549, 3-15-2011)
8-1-13: MULTIPLE WATER LINES OR CURB STOPS; ADDITIONAL CHARGE:
It has come to the attention of the city that some residences are served by more than one line from the water main and/or more than one curb stop. The
city does not encourage such connections, but recognizes some have been allowed in the past. As a result of increased water consumption, these homes
served by one or both of the above systems shall be charged an additional fourteen dollars twenty five cents ($14.25) per month for each month or part
thereof the additional line is in operation, and said homeowner shall be responsible for notifying the city at the time of use, of both start and termination, of
use of the additional line. (Ord. 457, 8-20-1996; amd. Res. 108, 9-24-2003; Res. 116-A, 9-21-2004)
8-1-14: WATER SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT FUND:
A. Fund Established; Disbursement: There is hereby established a water system improvement fund to be maintained by the city clerk in managing the
fiscal affairs of the city. All revenues derived from the charging of any fees, charges, or rates, as such are set forth herein shall be deposited in said
fund and shall be disbursed only for the purposes of maintaining, repairing, studying, controlling, enlarging, extending, enhancing, or improving the
water system of the city. (1980 Code § 4.6.23)
8-1-15: BILLING PROCEDURE AND PERIODS:
A. Issuance Of Bills: Accounts shall be charged a monthly rate in accordance with the rate schedule found in section 8-1-11 of this chapter (or as such
may hereinafter be amended and revised by the city council) and said bill may be included separately or in conjunction with the monthly or bimonthly
sewer bill or garbage bill.
B. Liability For Payment: The city clerk shall furnish to each property owner, landlord, or other such authorized agent, a monthly or bimonthly statement of
the amount due for water for that month. The failure of any water user to receive said statement will in no way affect the obligation of the user to remit
monthly or bimonthly as such may be required. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as relieving a landowner of liability for nonpayment of billing.
A landowner's agreement with his tenants or lessees will not bind the city without specific authorization from the city.
C. Proration Of Cost: The initial billing for premises occupied less than one month shall cover only that portion of the month during which the premises
were actually occupied. (Ord. 432, 5-19-1994)
D. Due Date: Bills rendered for water service are payable upon receipt and become past due ten (10) days from the date on which rendered. When the
past due date falls on a legal holiday or on a day when city offices are not open for business, the next regular business day is considered the past due
date. When remittances are made by mail, bills shall be deemed paid on the date the city has received the payment. (1980 Code § 4.6.25; amd. Ord.
543, 5-5-2009)
8-1-16: DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
A. Discontinuance Of Service For Nonpayment:
1. Shut Off Order: When bills are not paid within thirty (30) days from the past due date, the city clerk shall issue an order to shut off and discontinue
service to such delinquent customers, unless payment is received within ten (10) days.
2. Fee For Restoration Of Service: In case service is discontinued for delinquency, it shall not be restored until the delinquency is paid, or
arrangements for the payment of said delinquency has been approved by the city clerk, together with the collection of a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00)
for discontinuing and restoring service. The fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be payable whenever a service trip is made for the purpose of
discontinuing water service because of nonpayment even though an actual shutoff may not have actually occurred.
B. Time Period For Payment; Minimum Payment: Said time periods for payment of delinquency shall begin not later than ten (10) days after notice of
delinquency. While the terms of the payment are within the discretion of the City Clerk and/or Public Works Director, there shall be a minimum payment
of one-third (1/3) of the arrearages plus any current or accruing costs prior to reinstatement of water or avoidance of shutoff.
C. Multiple Housing Units: In cases where a single line or turnoff serves multiple housing units, such as in apartments or duplexes or triplexes, delinquent
payment of one account will be deemed permission by the City to install a valve to shut off water and bill the landowner for costs of installation. Water
will not be restored until all accounts are brought current. Should the landowner deny the City entry, the City may shut off all water. Nothing herein limits
the ability of the City to pursue all other legal remedies against the landowner. (Ord. 432, 5-19-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
8-1-17: VACATION OR SHUT DOWN RATES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 92/201
(Rep. by Res. 108, 9-24-2003)
8-1-18: WATER SERVICE SHUTOFF AND TURN ON FEES:
When any person determines that his home, business, etc., is going to be vacant, not used, or shut down for an extended period of time, he may notify the
City Hall that he wants the water service to said home, business, etc., discontinued and shut off. A shutoff fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) will be charged for
this permanent or semipermanent discontinuance of water service. A turn on fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) will subsequently be charged when it is
requested that water service be reestablished to said home, business, etc. Said fees are irrespective of the reason for the shutoff or turn-on, other than for
repairs of water service. (Ord. 457, 8-20-1996)
8-1-19: SERVICE CALL CHARGE:
The Public Works Director may require a service charge, in an amount not to exceed the actual cost to the City, for service calls which are requested and
which are only for the convenience and benefit of the customer. (1980 Code § 4.6.31; amd. 1999 Code)
8-1-20: WATER SERVICE AND RATES OUTSIDE CITY:
A. Service Contract Required: The Public Works Director shall not provide any water service to any consumer whose residence or place of business is
outside of the corporate limits of the City until an "outside-the-City water service contract" has been executed between the consumer and the City.
(1980 Code § 4.6.33; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Service Rates: The following monthly rates are hereby designated as those to be charged for water furnished outside the City limits, whether metered or
nonmetered, namely: two (2) times the rates charged for water furnished inside the City limits. The water connection fee (section 8-1-10 of this chapter)
and the water service line installation fee (section 8-1-9 of this chapter) shall be the same irrespective of whether they are "inside of" or "outside of" the
City. (1980 Code § 4.6.32)
8-1-21: FIRE SERVICE CONNECTION:
A. Installation: Any fire service connection between the City water main and the adjacent property line shall be installed and maintained by the Public
Works Director at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises so served, and shall be the property of the City.
B. Filing Of Plans; Requirements Specified: At the time of making application for said fire service connection, the applicant shall file with the Public Works
Director detailed plans showing all piping installed or to be installed for fire protection, all fire gates, automatic sprinklers and all other outlets, gates or
appurtenances. Each fire service connection shall have a gate valve with an adequate valve box installed between the City water main and the
property line of the premises served. No fire service connection larger than six inches (6") shall be installed without a special analysis of the City water
main system and pressure in the vicinity of the requested fire service connection to determine whether or not the water main system can adequately
provide the fire flow requirements for said fire service connection. This water main analysis and any adjacent water main reconstruction required to
provide adequate water main size or pressure for the fire service connection shall be paid for by the owner or occupant of the premises requesting said
fire service connection.
C. Determine Charge: Upon receipt of an application for a fire service connection, the Public Works Director shall determine the charge to be made for the
installation of said fire service, taking into consideration the length and size of pipe, condition of street and sidewalk, all relative to the character of
service, and the charge for said fire service connection shall be paid for by the applicant before said installation shall be made. (1980 Code § 4.6.34;
amd. 1999 Code)
8-1-22: FIRE HYDRANTS:
A. Authority Of Public Works Director: All public fire hydrants shall be kept in repair by the Public Works Director. Members of the Fire Department and
such other persons as may be authorized shall have free access to such hydrants. No other person shall draw or attempt to draw any water from a fire
hydrant unless he is an authorized employee of the City or has the written permission of Public Works Director to do so. The Public Works Director may
assess an equitable charge for water drawn from the fire hydrant and shall designate what system or arrangement or valves, vacuum breakers, etc.,
are required in conjunction with the use of said hydrants.
B. Obstructing Hydrants Prohibited: No person shall obstruct the approach to a fire hydrant, or place or allow to be placed, any obstructions within a
distance of three feet (3') from a fire hydrant.
C. Liability For Damage To Hydrants: No person shall wilfully or carelessly drive or run any vehicle against any fire hydrant or park any vehicle within
fifteen feet (15') of any fire hydrant. Any person who shall injure or damage any fire hydrant by accident, or by carelessness, or otherwise, shall
immediately report such injury or damage to the Public Works Director and such person so injuring or damaging said hydrant shall be liable for any
damage caused thereby. (1980 Code § 4.6.35; amd. 1999 Code)
8-1-23: WATER SERVICE LINES:
A. Installation And Maintenance:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 93/201
1. When a permit for a water service connection has been granted, the corporation valve and connection at the main, and the service line pipe from the
main to and including the curb stop valve shall be installed by the City at the expense of the customer, but thereafter shall be maintained by and at
the expense of the Water Department and kept within and under its exclusive control and jurisdiction. All water service lines and connections within
any public right-of-way or easement shall be constructed by the City, except that water service lines and connections within new subdivisions may be
installed as part of the construction of the new water main system within said subdivision; and provided further, that said water service lines and
connections are constructed, inspected, tested, and certified as being in conformance with the City standard drawings and standard specifications
governing the construction of water service lines and connections.
2. Water service lines may also be constructed by contract in conjunction with City sponsored projects or when, in the opinion of the Public Works
Director, it is in the City's best interests to have or to allow said water service lines to be installed by other than City personnel.
B. Independent Lines And Valves Required: The service line(s) and customer line(s) shall be so arranged that the water supply to each individual building,
place of business, or tract of land shall be controlled by a separate service line, curb stop (placed near the property line) and customer line. The
customer service line shall be controlled by a shut-off valve located within the building but as near as practical to the point where the water service line
enters the building.
C. Service Pits: When a new home and/or a new commercial building either in a subdivision or on a vacant lot is being constructed which requires a new
service line, the owner (or developer) shall install a service pit and water meter (as specified by the City) at their expense. When a new service line is
installed from the main water line to the curb stop, a service pit must be installed, as directed by the Public Works Director.
D. Existing Branch Service Lines: Where water is now supplied through one service line to several customers (branch service lines), the City, by resolution
of its Council, may decline to continue to so furnish water until separate service lines are provided at the owner's expense. Where more than one
dwelling is served from one such service line, the established rate shall be charged for each customer in the same manner as if each did, in fact, have
an individual water service line.
E. Length Of Service Line:
1. Where the water main is in a public right-of-way, the curb stop shall be placed at the right-of-way line nearest the property to be served for the
standard service line installation fee, provided the length of said service line does not exceed the width of the right-of-way.
2. Where the main is on private property, the maximum length of service line furnished and installed by the City for the standard service line installation
fee shall be thirty feet (30').
3. If, in either case cited above, the length of service line exceeds the maximum stated, an additional charge shall be made. This charge shall be based
on the actual cost to the City to install the extra length of water service pipe as such is determined by the Public Works Director.
F. Customer Line Maintenance: All water users shall keep their customer lines, connections, and other appurtenances in good repair and shall protect such
from frost at their own expense, and in such condition that they shall not waste or permit the waste of water. (Ord. 2018-593, 2-15-2018)
8-1-24: EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED2:
No person shall dig into any street, or under any sidewalk, or any alley, or in any easement for the purpose of laying, removing or repairing any customer
line, without having first obtained the proper permit(s) or approval(s) from the Public Works Director and Digline must be contacted prior to digging.
Customer may be required to pay line location fees. (1980 Code § 4.6.41; amd. 1999 Code)
8-1-25: PLUMBING CONNECTIONS OR CHANGES; PERMISSION REQUIRED:
No plumber or other person shall be allowed to make any connections with or to the City water mains, or to make alterations in any conduit, pipe, or other
fixture connecting therewith, or to connect pipes where they have been disconnected, or to turn water off or on at the curb stop controlling the water supply
to any premises without having first obtained permission from the public works director to do or to perform such actions. (1980 Code § 4.6.42; amd. 1999
Code)
8-1-26: WATER SYSTEM MATERIALS AND INSTALLATION:
A. All water main pipe shall be ductile iron or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) - AWWA C900, C905, or C909.
B. All water main fittings, i.e., tees, crosses, bends, etc., shall be ductile iron.
C. All water main materials and installation shall be in accordance with the city standard specifications for the construction of water lines and the applicable
standard drawings depicting various water main installation details. A minimum shall be the following:
1. Pipe Bury Depth: Sixty inches (60") minimum.
2. Pipe Bedding Material:
a. Material: Three-quarter inch (3/4") sixty percent (60%) crushed or fractured gravel and sand meeting the following graduation:
Sieve Size Percent Passing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 94/201
3/4 inch 100 to 80
3/8 inch 70 to 20
No. 4 20 to 5
No. 200 3 to 0
Bedding material may be created from excavated material by screening, sifting, or blending.
b. Bedding System: Four inches (4") below and six inches (6") above pipe.
c. Bedding Compaction: Ninety two percent (92%) relative density (AASHTO T99) minimum.
3. Full Trench Compactive Effort:
a. Ninety five percent (95%) density (AASHTO T99) minimum within three feet (3') of an asphalted service or within a currently traveled or proposed
or future traveled graveled or asphalted roadway.
b. Ninety two percent (92%) relative density (AASHTO T99) minimum outside of the three foot (3') roadway prism and within existing or future right of
way.
4. Surface Restoration:
a. Asphalted Surface:
(1) Subbase: A minimum of eight inches (8") of city approved three-quarters inch (3/4") minus road base compacted to ninety five percent (95%)
relative density (AASHTO T99) or match existing, whichever is greater.
(2) Asphalt Mat: A minimum of two inches (2") of city approved hot plant mix or match existing, whichever is greater.
b. Nonasphalted Surfaces:
(1) Subbase And Surface: A minimum of six inches (6") of city approved three-quarters inch (3/4") minus road base compacted to ninety five
percent (95%) relative density (AASHTO T99) or match existing, whichever is greater.
c. Agriculture Or Pasture Surfaces: Match existing. (Ord. 510, 6-22-2004, eff. 6-22-2004)
D. All water service line materials and installations shall be in accordance with the city standard specifications for the construction of water lines and the
applicable standard drawings depicting the various water service line installation details. (1980 Code § 4.6.44)
E. All water system materials shall be of the class, strength and thickness necessary to safely accommodate or provide for a water system pressure of a
minimum of two hundred (200) psi. (Ord. 510, 6-22-2004, eff. 6-22-2004)
F. All water system materials shall be of the class, strength, thickness, etc., necessary to accommodate or provide for the depth of cover over the pipe, the
type of material and bedding around the pipe, and the type, magnitude, and extent of the external loads being applied to the pipe. (1980 Code § 4.6.44)
G. All materials must be approved by both the public works director and appointed city engineer. (Ord. 510, 6-22-2004, eff. 6-22-2004)
8-1-27: WATER SYSTEM DESIGN:
A. All water line plans must be designed and sealed by a registered licensed professional engineer in the state of Idaho.
B. All water lines and water wells shall be designed in accordance with requirements of water resources or department of environmental quality as
required by law.
C. Minimum water main size shall be six inch (6") diameter. Larger sizes shall be as required by the city's water main master plan or as are needed to
provide adequate water quantity and pressure to the area (and surrounding developable area) being developed and/or annexed to the city.
D. Water lines shall have at least five feet (5') of cover (from the top of water line pipe to the ground or street surface).
E. All dead end water lines shall have a fire hydrant or approved type of flush out valve installed on the end thereof.
F. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than four hundred feet (400') apart within residential areas. Within commercial or industrial areas, there shall be
one fire hydrant for every eighty thousand (80,000) square feet of subdivision or development area (including streets and alleys) with the fire hydrants
located in proximity to the buildings as approved by the public works director. Sprinkling systems may be required within the interiors of buildings
having a high potential fire hazard or fire risk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 95/201
G. Water lines shall be valved at every intersection so that every block of city water line can be shut off and isolated from the rest of the water system to
facilitate maintenance and repair work while keeping public inconvenience to a minimum. Where blocks are exceptionally long, additional valves shall
be installed at such additional approved locations as are necessary so that no more than a six hundred foot (600') length of water line has to be shut off
or out of service at any one time to accommodate repairs, etc.
H. Water lines and sanitary sewer lines shall, whenever possible, be located on opposite sides of the street. Preferably, water lines shall be located
thirteen feet (13') west or north of the street centerline and the sanitary sewer at thirteen feet (13') east or south of the street centerline. Where storm
drains are needed, these shall preferably be located along the street centerline. The above referenced locations and dimensions may be varied to
accommodate unusual circumstances; however, a ten foot (10') (out to out) horizontal separation between water line facilities and sewer facilities
(either sanitary or storm) and an eighteen inch (18") (out to out) vertical separation between said facilities shall always be maintained unless a specific
variance to this requirement is obtained from the Public Works Director. The applicable separation requirements of Water Resources or Department of
Environmental Quality as required by law shall also be complied with.
I. All drawings shall be on linen or mylar in pencil or ink, and of such quality that they clearly show the dimensions, locations, sizes, etc., of all facilities
represented thereon. All water line appurtenances shall be clearly shown and identified by name and by station or other means of horizontal location.
Water lines shall be shown in both plan and profile if other utilities such as sanitary sewer or storm drain will be adjacent to said water line. If a profile of
the water line is not provided, it shall be located in the vertical plane by elevations on the top of the pipe at all fittings, valves, etc., and at intervals not
exceeding two hundred feet (200'). Drawings shall be drawn on a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), unless the amount of detail,
topography, etc., necessitates their being drawn on a larger scale (i.e., one inch equals 50 feet or one inch equals 40 feet) to provide the clarity and
completeness needed on the drawings.
J. The design of all water lines and all water line plans must be approved by the Public Works Director. (1980 Code § 4.6.45; amd. 1999 Code)
8-1-28: AS-BUILT DRAWINGS; CERTIFICATION:
A. As-built or record drawings of water line plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer and the corrected original drawings or a duplicate mylar
copy of the corrected original drawings shall be provided to the City.
B. As-built plans shall include a certification thereon signed by the registered professional engineer in charge of the work that the as-built drawings of the
water lines are true and correct and that he (the registered professional engineer) has inspected the construction of the water line installation and that
the materials and installation of same was all done in conformance with the City standard specification for water line construction. (1980 Code § 4.6.46)
8-1-29: OWNER OR DEVELOPER RESPONSIBLE FOR WATER LINES:
A. The owner or developer of any piece of property or tract of land is responsible for the construction of the water line (or for the water line costs) along
any of the property sides or frontages of the property along which a water line is needed for the overall completeness and continuity of the City's water
main system. If it is a large tract of land, the owner or developer of said land shall also be responsible for the necessary and required system of water
lines within the interior of the tract of land.
B. The owner or developer of any piece of property shall construct all needed water lines (of the approved size) within and along all sides or frontages of
any piece of property prior to the time any building constructed thereon is occupied or utilized unless "phased" construction of the water main system is
specifically allowed or provided for in the annexation or development agreement. In lieu of actually constructing said required water line or water lines,
the property owner or developer may deposit adequate monies with the City to fully cover the costs of said required water line construction.
C. The owner or developer of any property or subdivision will normally be responsible only for the cost of up to an eight inch (8") diameter water line. The
additional cost of providing a water line of a diameter or size greater than eight inches (8") will normally be a City responsibility. The City will reimburse
the developer for the extra cost of the additional water line size (over the 8 inch diameter size referenced above) as set forth in the annexation or
development agreement between the developer and the City. Provided, however, that if proposed subdivision or development is of such size or
magnitude that it requires a water main size larger than eight inches (8") in diameter, then the owner or developer of said subdivision or development
shall be responsible for the entire cost of whatever size of water main is required for said subdivision or development.
D. If the property owner or developer owns or is developing the property on only one side (as compared to both sides) of any street, alley, or easement
where a water line is located or required, he shall be responsible for only one-half (1/2) of the cost of said water line while the property owners on the
other side of said street, alley, or easement shall be responsible for the other half of the cost of said water line construction. However, in the absence of
any mutual agreement between the two (2) (or more) property owners, the City will participate with the first owner or developer to the extent of paying
for one-half (1/2) the cost of up to an eight inch (8") diameter water line along or across said referenced property frontage. The second (or other)
property owners will thereafter be responsible for reimbursing the city for his half of the costs of this water line construction at the time he (the other
adjacent property owner or developer) began to develop or build upon his property that is adjacent to the water line installed by the first property owner.
(1980 Code § 4.6.47)
E. Provided further, however, that if the water line construction is for an area or a development that is outside of the city limits or if the length of water line
construction in which the city would be participating (as referred to above) exceeds one thousand (1,000) linear feet, the city may decline to participate
in the cost of said water line construction except to pay for the extra cost differential between an eight inch (8") diameter line and the actual size of line
that the city designates shall be installed to meet its master plan requirements. When this situation or set of circumstances exists, the property owner or
developer who first initiates or actually begins the development of his property shall be responsible for "front ending" the entire cost of the water line
construction and for actually constructing said water line. The second (or both) property owners will thereafter be responsible for reimbursing the first
property owner for his share of the costs of the water line construction along his frontage at the time he (the other adjacent property owner or
developer) begins to develop or build upon his property adjacent to the water line installed by the first property owner. In the absence of any agreement
between the first property owner or developer and the other adjacent property owners or developers covering the cost of said water lines, the
referenced other adjacent property owners or developers shall pay to the city the amount of twelve dollars ($12.00) per linear foot (or such other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 96/201
amount as the city council may hereinafter establish and adopt by resolution) for the length of water line across his frontage. The city, in turn, will
reimburse the same amount to the first party, which reimbursement shall be deemed adequate and appropriate compensation for his share of the cost
of said water line. (1980 Code § 4.6.47; amd. 1999 Code)
8-1-30: CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES:
The city shall not be liable for damages caused by scarcity of water caused by the interruptions of water supply due to accidents to the waterworks or
mains or interruptions during the time of alterations, additions, or repairs to the water system or for any other unavoidable causes. (1980 Code § 4.6.4)
8-1-31: WASTE OF WATER PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any water user to waste water or allow it to be wasted by improper use or by faulty facilities. Irrigation by open hoses is prohibited;
except that an open hose may be used if same is "handheld". (1980 Code § 4.6.7)
8-1-32: WATER CONSERVATION:
A. Alternate Day Watering: It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize water from the city of Rigby water supply system for the watering of lawns or
landscaping except on an alternate day basis.
B. Watering Days Specified: Further, for those properties in the city that utilize water from the city of Rigby water supply system the sprinkling of lawns
shall be restricted to Monday, Wednesday and Friday for addresses ending in odd numbers and Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday for addresses ending
in even numbers of each week. Sunday is a free watering day for all residents.
C. Hours: No watering shall be permitted between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and two o'clock (2:00) P.M.
D. Landscape Irrigation: Landscape irrigation for the purpose of watering newly planted grass and foliage may be implemented for the first forty five (45)
days after initial installation.
E. Wasting Of Water: It shall also be unlawful to operate or cause the operation of any irrigation system or device in a manner causing water to be wasted,
including, but not limited to, unnecessary watering of impervious areas, other than that which may occur incidental to the proper operation of the
primary irrigation system.
F. Penalties: For the first violation prohibited by this section a citation will be issued in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00). For the second violation
the penalty shall double; and for each subsequent violation the penalty shall be doubled from that of the former.
G. Emergency: The mayor of the city of Rigby is empowered to declare an emergency and to limit the use of all or any part of the public water system in
the event the supply or pressure of the water in the water supply system should for any reason become diminished or in danger of becoming
diminished and for the protection of the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city.
H. Levels Of Emergency: Upon the declaration of an emergency, the mayor may invoke any or all of the following levels of emergencies which shall
become effective immediately and shall be followed thereafter by the passage of a resolution by the city council formalizing the emergency steps taken
by the mayor as follows:
1. Vehicle Washing Prohibited: Vehicle washing shall include washing cars, trucks, campers, trailers and boats. This restriction shall not include
commercial car wash facilities.
2. Nonconsumptive Use Prohibited: Nonconsumptive uses shall include any domestic use of water other than culinary, bathing, or health related
purposes by residential users and water required for production by commercial customers.
3. As Deemed Necessary: As the city council deems is necessary and in the best interest of the residents of the city. (Ord. 2013-559, 4-16-2013)
8-1-33: FREE ACCESS FOR INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
Free access for inspection shall, upon such reasonable notice as the circumstances permit, be allowed to the public works director or to any other
authorized person to all places supplied with water from the city water system. (1980 Code § 4.6.9; amd. 1999 Code)
8-1-34: TAMPERING WITH WATER SYSTEM OR APPURTENANCES:
It shall be unlawful to disturb, destroy, damage, adjust, molest, meddle or otherwise interfere with any portion of the city water system or appurtenances
located in either public or private property. Should any damage result, either intentionally or unintentionally, from handling or otherwise tampering with the
water system, the violator shall pay for all costs incurred in connection with the repairs of said system and/or for any damages that may result from the
tampering with or shutoff of said water system. (1980 Code § 4.6.43)
8-1-35: CITATION FOR VIOLATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 97/201
A. Service Of Notice To Appear: Whenever it is determined by any police officer or other duly authorized officer that any person has violated any provisions
of this chapter, the said officer shall provide in quadruplicate and serve upon such person a written citation containing a notice to appear in a
designated court of competent jurisdiction within the city. This citation shall contain the name and address of the person charged, the offense charged,
the time and place when and where the offense charged occurred, and the time when the person charged shall appear in said court, and such other
pertinent information as may be necessary; and such person shall appear in said court within five (5) days after such citation is issued and served. The
issuance of a citation shall not be the exclusive method of summoning offenders hereunder. (1980 Code § 4.6.48)
B. Failure To Appear: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or neglect to appear in response to and as required by the citation regardless of the
disposition of the charge upon which such citation was originally issued. Appearance in court shall be deemed complied with upon appearance by the
person cited or his attorney. (1980 Code § 4.6.49)
8-1-36: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (1980 Code § 4.6.50; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 2
SEWER USE REGULATIONS
8-2-1: PURPOSE AND DEFINITION OF TERMS:
A. Purpose: This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the POTW for the City of Rigby and enables the City to comply with all applicable
State and Federal laws including the Clean Water Act and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, part 403). The objectives of this chapter
are:
1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with the operation of the POTW;
2. To prevent the passage of pollutants through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible
with the POTW;
3. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludge's from the system;
4. To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public;
5. To establish an equitable distribution of the cost of operating the POTW;
6. To establish an equitable means, through the collection of a sewer main connection fee, of requiring persons connecting to an existing sewer main
which directly benefits their property, to participate in the costs of installing such main; and
7. To establish an equitable means through a sewer service connection fee of requiring persons who connect to the sanitary sewer system and the
wastewater treatment plant to participate in the capital costs of constructing the entire system and to pay the direct costs of making such connection.
B. Definitions: Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings herein given to them.
ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251, et seq.
APPLICABLE: For any specified pollutant, City prohibitive standards, City pretreatment standards, State of Idaho pretreatment standards, or EPA's
categorical pretreatment standards, whichever standard is appropriate or most stringent.
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The Public Works Director of the City of Rigby or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen, expressed in parts per million by weight, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under standard laboratory determinations made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the side sewer which begins two feet (2') outside the outer face of the building wall.
CATEGORICAL: A user covered by one or more categorical pretreatment user standards.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance
with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter
N, parts 405 - 471.
CHLORINE REQUIREMENT: The amount of chlorine, in parts per million by weight, which must be added to the sewage to produce a specified
residual chlorine content, or to meet the requirements of some other objective, in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
CITY: The City of Rigby.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The Clean Water Act of 1977 as codified in 33 USC section 1251 et seq.
CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS: The United States Code of Federal Regulations.
COLOR: The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance
is equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 98/201
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff (storm drainage) and wastewater (sanitary sewage).
COMMERCIAL BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind or for any
type of business or enterprise or for any other purposes not otherwise described or covered under "dwellings" as defined herein.
COMMERCIAL USER: All persons not specifically classified as domestic or as an industrial waste contributor.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time.
COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or
finished product. Cooling water may be generated from any use, such as air conditioning, heat exchangers, cooling or refrigeration to which the only
pollutant added is heat.
DESIGN STANDARDS: The standards used to design a public sanitary or storm sewer system within the incorporated Municipal City limits. These
standards can be used for a public sanitary and storm sewer system outside of the incorporated Municipal City limits when such development
construction is within the established area of impact and/or final treatment of such sewage will be completed by the City of Rigby. These standards
include, but are not limited to, all parts of the following: the State of Idaho Administrative Code IDAPA 58.01.16, the "Idaho Standards for Public
Works Construction" (latest edition), and the City approved "Design Standards for Public Sanitary and Storm Sewer Systems" (current edition).
DWELLINGS:
Auto Court, Motor Court, Travel Trailer Court, Motel, Hotel, Etc.: The combination or group of two (2) or more dwelling units occupying a building
site or area under one ownership, used for the purpose of furnishing transient living accommodations.
Duplex: A building designed, built, rented, or leased for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other.
Multiple-Family Dwelling Or Apartment House: Any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be
occupied or which is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families or persons living independently of each other and doing their
own cooking within the premises, which shall include townhouses or condominiums.
Single-Family Dwelling: A building designed for or occupied by one family for living or sleeping purposes, and having one kitchen or set of cooking
facilities.
Trailer House Or Mobile Home: Any vehicle used or so constructed as to permit it being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways
and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY: The United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water
Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING USER: For non-categorical users an "existing user" is defined as any user which is discharging wastewater prior to January 5, 1984.
FEDERAL PRIORITY POLLUTANT LIST: The list of toxic pollutants identified in the list included in 40 CFR, part 403.
GARBAGE: The residue from the preparation and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of food products and produce.
GROUND GARBAGE: The residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will
be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any
dimension.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any flow discharged to the wastewater treatment system identified in the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", 1972,
Office of the Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under the following divisions:
1. Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.
2. Division B - Mining.
3. Division D - Manufacturing.
4. Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitation Services.
5. Division I - Services.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, either: 1) inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations; 2) inhibits or disrupts its sludge processes, use or disposal; or 3) is a cause of a violation of the City's
NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or
permits issued thereunder, or more stringent State or local regulations: section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA),
including title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any State sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; and the Toxic Substances Control.
mg: Million gallons.
mgd: Million gallons per day.
NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit Program as administered by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 99/201
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water developed by naturally occurring
process of nature.
NEW SOURCE: 1. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter in accordance with that section, provided that:
a. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
b. The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an
existing source; or
c. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing
source, should be considered.
2. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection 1b or 1c of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
3. Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has commenced if the owner or operator has:
a. Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 1) any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or 2) significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
b. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility,
engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition.
NEW USER: A "new user" is not a "new-source" and is defined as a user that applies to the City for a new building permit or any person who
occupies an existing building and plans to discharge wastewater to the City's collection system after January 5, 1984. Any person that buys an
existing facility that is discharging non-domestic wastewater will be considered an "existing user" if no significant changes are made in the
manufacturing operation.
POTW: The publicly-owned treatment works of the City, consisting of all sewage treatment facilities, equipment and appurtenances for the treatment
and disposal of sewage.
PARTS PER MILLION: A weight to weight ratio; the parts per million value multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million
gallons of water.
PASS THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or dischargers from other sources, in a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES permit (including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERMITTEE: A person or user issued a wastewater discharge permit.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, group, or other entity.
pH: The logarithm (base-10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in moles per liter and is a measure of the acidity or
alkalinity of a solution. It shall be determined by one of the procedures outlined in "Standard Methods".
POLLUTANT: Any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the
characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, chemical oxygen demand (COD), toxicity or odor).
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. This reduction or alteration
can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the
pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local
limits established by the City/POTW.
PRIVATE SEWER: A sewer serving two (2) or more buildings, residences or properties, constructed by private contract outside of the public right-ofway
and remaining under private ownership and jurisdiction and which shall be maintained by said private owners. Private sewers shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained by said private owners to the same design, construction, and maintenance standards as are public sewers.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the City. It shall also include sewers within or outside the City boundaries that
serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the City sanitary or combined sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with City funds. All public sewers shall be located in dedicated public rights-of-way or easements. Public sewers shall be at least eight
inches (8") in diameter.
REPLACEMENT: Any expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances, which are necessary during the service
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 100/201
life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and
maintenance" includes replacement.
SANITARY SEWAGE: Wastes that are derived principally from dwellings, business buildings, institutions, and the like, exclusive of storm and surface
waters and industrial waste.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys sanitary sewage or industrial wastes, or a combination of the two (2), and into which storm, surface, and
ground waters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
SERVICE CHARGE: The charge levied on all users of the sewage system for the purpose of repayment of City indebtedness for the construction
and installation of the system and for its efficient maintenance and operation, and in establishing such rates and charges the City has taken into
account the cost and value of the system, operation and maintenance expenses, possible delinquencies, proper allowance for depreciation,
contingencies and any amounts necessary to retire all bonds payable from net revenues and the reserve required for these.
SERVICE CONNECTION: A sewer line connected to the sewer main.
SEWAGE: Wastewater.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Wastewater treatment plant or other like facilities.
SEWER: Any pipe or conduit used for conveying wastewater or any other waste liquids, including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
SEWER MAIN: The pipe laid in a street, road, alley or easement and running approximately parallel to the street, road, alley or easement for the
collection of wastewater from the customers, which is owned, operated, controlled, and maintained by the City.
SEWER SUPERINTENDENT: The Public Works Director of the City of Rigby or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
SIDE SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer and is sometimes referred to as the sewer service connection or sewer
service line.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: 1. A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
2. A user that:
a. Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) GPD or more of process wastewater into the POTW (excluding sanitary non-contact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); or
b. Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or
c. Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating
any pretreatment standard or requirement.
3. Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection 2 of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a
petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a
significant industrial user.
STANDARD METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes", published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the
Federation of Sewage and Industrial Wastes Association.
STANDARD SEWAGE: Sewage and acceptable wastes that are within specifications regarding pH, BOD dissolved oxygen, suspended solids and
grease.
STORM DRAIN: Any pipe or conduit conveying storm, surface and ground water drainage, but excluding sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: The portion of the rainfall that is drained into the sewers.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS): Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste and which are
removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in
"Standard Methods".
TOXIC POLLUTANT: One of one hundred twenty six (126) pollutants, or combination of those pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by
EPA under section 307 (33 USC 1317) of the Act.
TREATMENT WORKS: Those devices and systems defined in section 35.905-23 of the Federal Register, volume 39, number 29, part III, published
February 11, 1974.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Any water or liquid containing none of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalis; substances that may
impart taste, odor or color characteristics; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; odorous or otherwise obnoxious
gases. It shall contain no more than thirty (30) parts per million each of suspended solids or biochemical oxygen demand. Analytical determination
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
WASTEWATER: The water carried human, animal or household wastes in a public or private sewer, and may include groundwater infiltration, surface
drainage and industrial wastes.
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM (Also Termed SEWAGE COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM): All facilities for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 101/201
collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of domestic, commercial and industrial waste, and includes sewers as well as the wastewater treatment
plant.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT: An assemblage of devices, structures, equipment, and holding ponds or lagoons for treating domestic,
commercial, and industrial waste.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
C. Abbreviations: The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ASPP: Accidental spill prevention plan.
BOD: Biochemical oxygen demand.
CFR: Code of Federal Regulations.
COD: Chemical oxygen demand.
EPA: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
GPD: Gallons per day.
IWA: Industrial waste acceptance (optional if the City uses an IWA).
L: Liter.
LEL: Lower explosive limit.
mg: Milligrams.
mg/L: Milligrams per liter.
NPDES: National pollutant discharge elimination system.
O&M: Operations and maintenance.
POTW: Publicly-owned treatment works.
RCRA: Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
SIC: Standard Industrial Classifications.
SIU: Significant industrial user.
SWDA: Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901, et seq.).
TSS: Total suspended solids.
USC: United States Code.
WTP: The wastewater treatment plant. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-2: CONNECTION TO SANITARY SEWER REQUIRED:
Every parcel of land or premises within the boundaries of the City of Rigby, improved for occupancy and occupied or used by any person or persons, or as
commercial business, shall be connected to the public sanitary sewer system. The owner or person in charge of such land shall make or cause to be
made, such connection within sixty (60) days after receiving official notice from the City to so connect. All charges associated with the laying of pipe from
the home or facilities to be served to the City's mains and all other costs incurred in connecting to said mains shall be borne by the property owner. All
such connections to the City's mains shall be properly designed and in conformity with requirements specified by the City. All work performed in the public
right-of-way must be performed by a licensed public works contractor. If deemed necessary by the City, such connections may require video inspection. If
a parcel of land is not within three hundred feet (300') of a sewer, connection may be negotiable. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-3: UNPOLLUTED WATER NOT PERMITTED IN SANITARY SEWER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or
other unpolluted water to enter any sanitary sewer without having received written permission from the Sewer Superintendent to take such action. (Ord.
2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-4: UNPOLLUTED WATER DISCHARGED TO STORM DRAIN:
Stormwater shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm drains, or to a natural outlet approved by the
Sewer Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged upon approval of the Sewer Superintendent to a storm
drain, combined sewers, or natural outlet. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 102/201
8-2-5: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
A. General Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or
interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other national, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. Specific Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
1. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than
one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
2. Wastewater having a pH less than 6.5 or more than 9.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment in the WTP;
3. Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater
than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension;
4. Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by
interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;
5. Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the WTP resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes
the temperature at the introduction into the WTP plant to exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F) (40°C) unless the City approves
alternate temperature limits;
6. Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
7. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quality that may cause acute worker health and safety
problems;
8. Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the City;
9. Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
10. Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the City's NPDES permit. Color in combination with
turbidity shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten
percent (10%) from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life;
11. Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved in writing by the Director in compliance with applicable
State or Federal regulations;
12. Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Director;
13. Any sludge, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes or from industrial processes;
14. Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Director;
15. Wastewater causing, along or in conjunction with other sources, the WTP's effluent to fail toxicity test;
16. Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
17. Any liquid, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances
to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive readings
on an explosion meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading
over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter;
18. Grease, garbage other than ground garbage, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood,
feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dusts, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops,
waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or
polishing wastes;
19. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or other disposal system permits;
20. Any wastewater, which in the opinion of the Director can cause harm either to the sewers, WTP or equipment, have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance, unless allowed under special agreement by the
Director, except that no special waiver shall be given from categorical pretreatment standards;
21. The contents of any settling tank or other vessel owned or used by any person in the business of collecting or pumping sewage, effluent or
septage;
22. Any hazardous waste as prohibited or regulated by the State of Idaho or in EPA Rules 40 CFR part 261;
23. Persistent pesticides and/or pesticides regulated by the Federal Insecticide Fungicide Rodenticide Act (FIFRA). Pollutants, substances or
wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
C. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards: The national categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 -
471, or as may be promulgated by the EPA hereafter, are hereby incorporated by reference. One copy of such standards shall be filed with the City
Clerk and two (2) copies of such standards shall be kept on file at all times in the Office of the Director. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 103/201
8-2-6: STATE REQUIREMENTS:
State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by all users which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they
are more stringent than Federal requirements and limitations, or those in this chapter or other applicable chapter. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-7: LOCAL LIMITS:
The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess
of the following daily maximum allowable discharge limits.
Arsenic 0.05 mg/L
BOD 200 mg/L
Cadmium 0.01 mg/L
Chromium (total) 1.2 mg/L
Copper 2.0 mg/L
Cyanide 1.20 mg/L
Lead 0.16 mg/L
Mercury 0.0005 mg/L
Nickel 0.05 mg/L
Oil and grease (animal and vegetable-based) 250.00 mg/L
Oil and grease (petroleum and vegetable-based) 100.00 mg/L
Oil and grease (petroleum or mineral oil products) 100.00 mg/L
Silver 0.02 mg/L
Stoddard solvent 0.00 mg/L
TSS 140 mg/L
Zinc 2.5 mg/L
1,1,1-trichloroethylene 2.00 mg/L
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW (end of the pipe). All concentrations for metallic substances are for
"total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The Director may impose mass limitations in addition to (or in place of) the concentration-based limitations above.
Where a user is subject to a categorical pretreatment standard and a local limit for a given pollutant, the more stringent limit or applicable pretreatment
standard shall apply. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-8: APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR WASTEWATER:
Review and acceptance of the Sewer Superintendent shall be obtained prior to the discharge into the public sewers of any water or wastes having:
A. A total of more than thirty (30) pounds of suspended solids in any one day.
B. A total of more than thirty (30) pounds of BOD in any one day.
C. An average flow of 0.01 mgd or more. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-9: RIGHT OF REVISION:
The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the
POTW. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-10: DILUTION:
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment
standard or requirement. The Director may impose mass limitations on users which he believes may be using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-11: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS 1:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 104/201
The City reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case
will a special agreement waive compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard or Federal pretreatment requirement. However, the user may request
a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment
standard from the approval authority in accordance with 40 CFR 403.13. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-12: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements set out in this chapter within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the State, of the Director, whichever is more stringent.
Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the City shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed
plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City for review, and shall be acceptable to the City before
construction of the facility. The review plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as
necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the City under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-13: PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS:
Compliance by existing users covered by categorical pretreatment standards shall be accomplished within three (3) years of the date the standard is
effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate standard. The City shall establish a final compliance deadline date for any
existing user not covered by categorical pretreatment standards or for any categorical user when the local limits for said user are more restrictive than
EPA's categorical pretreatment standards. New source dischargers and "new users" are required to comply with applicable pretreatment standards within
the shortest feasible time not to exceed ninety (90) days from the beginning of discharge. New sources and new users shall install and have in operating
condition, and shall "start-up" all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge.
Any wastewater discharge permit issued to a categorical user shall not contain a compliance date beyond any deadline date established in EPA's
categorical pretreatment standards. Any other existing user or a categorical user that must comply with a more stringent local limit, which is in noncompliance
with any local limits shall be provided with a compliance schedule placed in an industrial wastewater permit to ensure compliance within the
shortest time feasible. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-14: STATE REQUIREMENT:
State standards and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by all users where such standards are more stringent than the standards in this or
any other applicable chapter. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-15: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES/SLUG CONTROL PLANS:
A. The Director may require any user to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan ("ASPP"). Where deemed necessary by the City,
facilities to prevent accidental discharge or slug discharges of pollutants shall be provided and maintained at the user's cost and expense. An
accidental spill prevention plan/slug control plan showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City for
review and approval before implementation. The City shall determine which user is required to develop a plan and require said plan to be submitted
within thirty (30) days after written notification by the City that an ASPP is required. Each user shall implement its ASPP as submitted or as modified
after such plan has been reviewed and approved by the City. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the City shall not relieve
the user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
B. Any user required to develop and implement an ASPP shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following:
1. Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;
2. Description of stored chemicals;
3. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which
would violate any of the standards in sections 8-2-9 through 8-2-12 of this chapter; and
4. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents) and/or measures and
equipment for emergency response.
C. Users shall notify the Superintendent immediately upon the occurrence of a "slug" or "accidental discharge" of substances regulated by this chapter.
The notification shall include location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume and correlative actions. Any affected
user shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the POTW, including the amount of any fines imposed on the City on account thereof under
State or Federal law.
D. Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the Superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense,
loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
E. Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the user's premises advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug or accidental
discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency notification procedures.
(Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 105/201
8-2-16: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the Superintendent.
Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater
discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to
comply with all Federal and State pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State and local law. The
Superintendent may require other users, including liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits (as necessary) to carry out the purposes of
this chapter. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-17: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING; EXISTING SIU:
Any SIU that was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this Code, and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future
shall submit, within sixty (60) days after notification by the Superintendent a permit application to the City in accordance with section 8-2-19 of this chapter.
The City's notification to SIU shall comply with the 180-day submittal deadline date established in 40 CFR section 403.12(b). (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-18: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING; NEW SOURCE AND NEW USER:
At least ninety (90) days prior to the anticipated start-up, new sources, sources that become a user subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard and new users which are SIUs, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit. A new source or new user cannot
discharge without first receiving a wastewater discharge permit from the City. New sources and new users shall be required to include in their application
information on the method of pretreatment the user intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-19: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS:
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit, at a minimum, the following information. The Superintendent shall approve a form
to be used as a permit application. Categorical users submitting the following information shall be deemed to have complied with 40 CFR 403.12(b).
A. Identifying Information: The user shall submit the name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owners;
B. Permits: The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility;
C. Description Of Operations: The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of
the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could
accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; number and type of employees; hours of operation; produced by type, amount, process or
processes, and rate of production; type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day) and the time and duration of
discharges. This description should also include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated or
manufacturing processes. Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections,
inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-20: FLOW MEASUREMENT:
A. Categorical User: The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
each of the following:
1. Regulated or manufacturing process streams;
2. Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e).
3. The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for each regulated or manufacturing process.
4. In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass) where required by the
categorical pretreatment standard or as required by the City of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated or manufacturing process.
Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations
and shall conform to sampling and analytical procedures.
5. The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection A.
6. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) for a categorical user covered by a
categorical pretreatment standard this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted as part of the application.
B. Non-Categorical User: The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW
from each of the following:
1. Flow: Total process flow, wastewater treatment plant flow, total plant flow or individual manufacturing process flow as required by the Superintendent.
The City may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations.
2. Applicable Standards: The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for its wastewater discharge.
3. Sampling And Analysis: In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass
where required by the City) of regulated pollutants contained in both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 106/201
reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations.
4. Minimum Sample: The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of
this subsection B.
5. Alternate Concentration Or Mass Limits: Where the Superintendent developed alternate concentration or mass limits because of dilution, this
adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted as part of the application.
6. Certification: A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the user and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether the
applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (hereafter referred
to as "O and M") or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
7. Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment or O and M will be required to meet the applicable pretreatment standards the user shall submit a
compliance schedule indicating the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O and M.
8. Other Information: Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Superintendent to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit
application. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-21: SIGNATORY AND CERTIFICATION REQUIRED:
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and shall contain the following
certification statement:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
(Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-22: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS:
The Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the Superintendent will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. Upon a determination
to issue, the permit shall be issued within thirty (30) days of full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished. The Superintendent may deny any
application for a wastewater discharge permit if the application fails to conform to this chapter in any respect. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-23: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS:
Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the Superintendent to prevent pass through or
interference, to protect the quality of the body of water receiving the treatment plant's effluent, to protect worker health and safety, to facilitate sludge
management and disposal and to protect against damage to the POTW.
A. Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions:
1. A statement that indicates the duration of the wastewater discharge permit, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years;
2. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is non-transferable without prior notification to and approval from the City, and provision for
furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
3. Applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, including any special State requirements;
4. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, submittal of technical reports, compliance schedules and record-keeping requirements. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type based on Federal,
State and local law; and
5. A requirement for immediate notification to the City where self-monitoring results indicate non-compliance;
6. A requirement to report a by-pass or upset of a pretreatment facility;
7. A requirement for an SIU who reports non-compliance to repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results thereof to the City within thirty (30)
days after becoming aware of the violation;
8. A statement of applicable civil, criminal and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule.
B. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:
1. Limits on the average or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
2. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to
reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
3. Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary
to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 107/201
4. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
5. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharge to the POTW;
6. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;
7. A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable
Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit;
8. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Superintendent to ensure compliance with this chapter and State and Federal laws, rules and
regulations. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-24: REFUSAL OF USE OF SYSTEM:
The Sewer Superintendent may prohibit the discharge into the public sewer of sewage that does not comply with the limitations set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-25: INDEPENDENT SEWER SERVICE LINE REQUIRED:
The sewer main line and sewer service line(s) shall be so arranged that there is a separate and independent sewer service line to each individual building,
place of business, or tract of land.
After the effective date hereof, a separate and independent side sewer (building service line) shall be provided for every new building connecting to the
sanitary sewer system of Rigby, Idaho. Separate side sewers are not required for each trailer space in overnight trailer courts, nor for each cabin in cabin
courts; however, separate side sewers (sewer service lines) are required for trailer houses on individual lots or for long term trailer rental units in mobile
home courts. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-26: EXISTING BRANCH SERVICE LINES:
Where sewer service is now provided through one sewer service line to several customers (branch service lines), the City by resolution of its Council, may
decline to continue to accept sewage from said premises until separate sewer service lines are provided at the owner's expense. Where more than one
dwelling is served from one such service line, the established rate shall be charged for each customer in the same manner as if each did, in fact, have an
individual sewer service line. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-27: SEWER SERVICE LINE MAINTENANCE:
All sewer users shall keep their individual sewer service lines in good repair and shall keep them in such good condition that they shall not allow excessive
amounts of groundwater to enter into the sewer system. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-28: INJURY TO OR TAMPERING WITH SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful to disturb, destroy, damage, adjust, molest, meddle, or otherwise interfere with any portion of the City sewage collection or treatment
system or its appurtenances, located on either public or private property. Should any damage result, either intentionally or unintentionally, from handling or
otherwise tampering with or plugging said sewer system, the violator shall pay for all costs incurred in connection with the repairs of said system and/or for
damages that may result from the tampering with or plugging of said sewer system.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any substance which may tend to obstruct the flow of the sewer, in any sewer opening. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-
2017)
8-2-29: GREASE TRAPS REQUIRED:
In all cases where a building is used as a hotel, boarding house, restaurant, service station, garage, etc., the owner or occupant shall provide a properly
constructed grease trap through which all wastes of a greasy nature shall be drained. The Sewer Superintendent shall have authority, and he is hereby
authorized and directed to compel any person to provide and use a grease trap as aforesaid whenever, in his judgment, the same is necessary. (Ord.
2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-30: INTERCEPTOR OR REMOVAL FACILITIES REQUIRED TO REMOVE HARMFUL INGREDIENTS:
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors or other necessary removal facilities shall be installed on the premises when, in the opinion of the Sewer
Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, high concentrations of blood, fruit,
vegetable, or grain liquors, milk wastes, or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients. All interceptors or removal facilities shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the Sewer Superintendent and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Where
installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner or occupant, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
(Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-31: DUTIES OF THE SEWER SUPERINTENDENT REGARDING SIDE SEWERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 108/201
The Sewer Superintendent of the City is hereby empowered, and it is hereby made his duty, in all cases where there is a public sanitary sewer within three
hundred feet (300') to notify every owner or person in charge of land, or premises, requiring a sanitary sewer building connection as required by this
chapter within ninety (90) days or cease to use or occupy the land. A lessee of land shall be deemed to be in charge. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-32: PERMITS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to install or alter any sanitary sewer or plumbing within the City of Rigby, Idaho, or to tap onto or connect to any sanitary sewer line
whether lateral, main, or interceptor, without having first obtained from said City a permit therefor.
An application for a connection to the City sewer system shall be made at the Office of the Sewer Superintendent and no connection shall be made to any
sewer main without a valid permit therefor having been issued by the Sewer Superintendent.
It shall be unlawful for any person to uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof,
without first obtaining a written permit to perform said work from the Sewer Superintendent. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-33: EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED:
No permit shall be granted to do sewer work in any street, alley or public easement until the applicant has first obtained an excavation permit as required
by the City. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-34: SIDE SEWER EXTENSION OR REPAIR PERMIT REQUIRED:
When any sewer service line (side sewer) or private sewer connected with any public sewer becomes obstructed, broken or out of order, on private
property (outside of any public right-of-way or easements) the owner, agent, or tenant of such premises shall repair the same at his own expense. No
person shall construct, re-lay, repair, or extend any side sewer or private sewer until the person doing said work has obtained the appropriate sewer permit
for same.
It shall be unlawful for any person to extend any private sewer or side sewer beyond the limits of the building or property for which a permit has been given
without obtaining a new permit for the desired extension. The existence of a sewer permit shall in no way be construed as making permissible any work for
which an excavation permit may be required by the City. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-35: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SEWER SERVICE LINE:
When a permit for a sewer service line (side sewer) has been granted, the sewer tap at the sewer main and the sewer service line from the sewer main to
a point ten feet (10') beyond the street or alley right-of-way line or sewer easement line shall be installed by the City or a licensed public works contractor
at the expense of the person or firm desiring sewer service, but thereafter the sewer service line within the public right-of-way or easement shall be
maintained by the Sewer Department at its expense and kept within and under its exclusive control and jurisdiction.
All sewer service lines (side sewers) within any public rights-of-way or easements shall be constructed by the City; except that sewer service lines in any
new subdivisions may be installed as part of the construction on the new sewer collection system within said subdivision and provided, further, that said
service lines are constructed, inspected, tested, and certified as being in conformance with the City standard drawings and standard specifications
governing the construction of sewer service lines. Sewer service lines may also be installed by contract in conjunction with City sponsored projects or
when, in the opinion of the Sewer Superintendent, it is in the City's best interest to have or allow said sewer service lines to be installed by other than City
personnel. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-36: RIGHT TO REVOKE PERMISSIONS:
Permission given to connect sewers and drains shall be upon the express condition that the Sewer Superintendent may for good cause revoke the same
and the person making such connection, or his successor in interest, shall have no right to claim any damage in consequence of such permission being
revoked. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-37: SEWER CONSTRUCTION, PLAN, SPECIFICATIONS, AND INSPECTION:
All construction or reconstruction of public, private and side sewers shall be in accordance with the City standard drawings and standard specifications and
subject to inspection by the City.
Plan and profile drawings shall be prepared for all new sewer mains (whether public or private) and for all sanitary sewer extensions, reconstructions, or
renovations; and all such plan and profile drawings must be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer, and Idaho DEQ before any construction work on
said sewer lines is started. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-38: RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES FOR INSPECTION:
The Sewer Superintendent shall have the right to enter upon any premises connected with any public sewer at all reasonable hours to determine that there
is compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If conflict is noted, the owner of said premises or his agent shall be directed to alter, repair, or reconstruct
said sewer facilities to conform to the requirements of this chapter within fifteen (15) days. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-39: INDUSTRIAL WASTES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 109/201
Each person or firm desiring to make a connection to the public sewer for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes thereto shall prepare and file with
the City Engineer a report that shall include actual or predicted data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the waste to be discharged. Private
treatment facilities may be authorized by the City, provided that all Federal, State, and local laws and regulations are fully complied with.
Industrial waste charges may be based upon the amount of flow, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), and suspended solids or any combination thereof as
may be recommended by the City Engineer or this chapter.
The sewage collection and treatment charges for industrial waste shall completely pay for all collection and treatment costs associated with said wastes.
(Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-40: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS 2:
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any persons or
organization whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the wastewater collection and treatment system either
before or after pretreatment, provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the wastewater treatment system by reason of the admission of
such wastes, and extra costs are incurred by the City without recompense by said person or organization. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-41: EXTENSION OF SEWER MAINS WITHIN CITY:
The Sewer Superintendent shall be authorized to construct, or cause to be constructed, extensions to the sewer system if one of the following conditions
exists:
A. The annual anticipated revenue made available to the City from the customers to be immediately served by such extension is not less than one-tenth
(1/10) of the actual cost to the City for the construction of said extension.
B. The Sewer Superintendent declares the sewer main extension is needed for the overall benefit and improvement of the entire sewage collection
system.
C. The City Council approves a contract for the construction of the extension with a party or parties desiring sewer service. Provided, however, that
subdividers or developers within or adjacent to the City shall construct at their own expense all sewer mains within their subdivisions or developments
except the City will be responsible for those sewer line costs set forth in section 8-2-45 of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-42: EXTENSION OF SEWER MAINS IN AREAS CONTIGUOUS TO CITY:
In areas contiguous to the City that may be annexed to the City, the City may require such areas to be annexed before sewer service is provided. Prior to
annexation the City shall require the execution and approval of a development agreement which shall detail the conditions for sewer service. (Ord. 2017-
589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-43: EXTENSION OF SEWER LINES OUTSIDE CITY:
Sewer lines shall not, without City Council's approval, be extended outside the corporate limits of the City; however, when in the opinion of the Sewer
Superintendent, there will be special benefit and improvement to the City by reason of an extension outside the City, special arrangements may be made
with Council to allow said extension. Provided, however, the areas to be serviced outside of the City shall not benefit a greater extent than like areas
provided with sewer service within the City, and provided, further, that no such arrangement shall be made unless adequate sewer line capacity and
sewage treatment capacity is available for such outside the City sewer service. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-44: SEWER SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY:
The Sewer Superintendent shall not provide sewer service to any consumer whose residence or place of business is outside of the corporate limits of the
City until an "outside the City sewer contract" has been executed between the consumer and the City. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-45: SYSTEM OF CHARGES:
All systems of charges and fees to users, within and without the City, shall assure that each recipient of wastewater collection and treatment services will
pay its proportionate share of the costs of operation and maintenance (including equipment replacement) of any wastewater collection and treatment
services provided by the City. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-46: SEWER CONNECTION FEE:
Before any sewer connection permit can be issued for the installation of any sewer service connection (side sewer), the person making the application
therefor shall pay to the City a sewer connection fee.
The sewer connection fee must be paid whenever sewer service is requested and subsequently provided to any dwelling, trailer house, business,
commercial building, or any other such building or establishment that does not have a permit to connect to or actually is connected to the City's sewer
system at the passage date hereof. The above referenced sewer connection fee will not apply to or be charged against the reconstruction of any existing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 110/201
sewer service line serving any existing dwelling, building, etc. It is intended that this sewer connection fee be charged only where a new building is being
constructed upon previously undeveloped property.
These fees may be changed from time to time by resolution of the City Council as such changes are deemed necessary. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-47: SEWER MAIN CONSTRUCTION CHARGE:
Hereafter, any person, firm, or corporation before obtaining a permit to connect to any public sanitary sewer, whether lateral, main, or interceptor, shall pay
a sewer main charge therefor at the rate of ten dollars ($10.00) per front foot of property to be served by the permit. Said sewer main construction charge
shall be in addition to any other connection fees or permits required. Provided, however, that no sewer main construction charge shall be required if said
sewer service connection is within a subdivision having been platted since 1975 and within which the sanitary sewer system has been constructed at the
expense of the developer of said subdivision. This charge may be changed from time to time by resolution of the City Council as such change is deemed
necessary.
The above referenced sewer main construction charge applies only to property within the City limits. The sewer main construction charge for property
outside of the City or for property being annexed to the City shall be as set forth in the outside the City sewer contract or the development agreement.
(Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-48: SERVICE LINE INSTALLATION FEE:
At the time an applicant applies for City sewer service, a service line installation fee shall be charged. The service line installation fee is to cover the costs
incurred by the City in installing the sewer service line from, and including the sewer tap, the main to a point ten feet (10') beyond the edge of the street or
alley right-of-way or easement line.
Said fees and costs shall be reviewed yearly and revised by resolution of the City Council so that said fees and costs adequately cover the costs actually
incurred by the City in installing these service lines. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-49: SERVICE CALL CHARGE:
The Sewer Superintendent may require a service charge in an amount not to exceed the actual cost to the City, for service calls which are only for the
convenience and benefit of the customer. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-50: MONTHLY SEWER RATES:
A. General: This is a user charge system for a small community which follows model number one in appendix B of the "Federal Register", dated
September 27, 1978. This treatment works is primarily dependent and will utilize the equivalent user concept. The equivalent user system has been set
up based on flow.
A sewer user charge shall be levied on all users of the sewage collection and treatment facilities, to cover the actual or estimated cost of operation,
maintenance, replacement, and financing of this facility. The user charge system distributes these costs to each user or user class in approximate
proportion to such user's contribution to the total wastewater load of such facilities.
B. Basis For Rates: The sewer user rates for each user (or user class) shall be based on the user's contribution to the total wastewater loading of the
treatment facilities in comparison to a standard equivalent user as defined below. Each user (or user class) shall be assigned a number of equivalent
users to be multiplied by a constant monthly cost factor to determine the basic user rate. Special users contributing sewage of excessive flow and/or
strength, for which the tabulated equivalent users below do not apply, shall be individually calculated as provided below. The constant monthly cost
factor shall be set by resolution of the Rigby City Council.
C. Equivalent User Schedule: The number of equivalent users to be assigned to each user and/or user class, shall be in accordance with the following
equivalent user schedule. Assignment of equivalent users shall apply for one year until the next annual user charge review. Users so indicated or not
included in this schedule shall be considered special users and shall be evaluated separately as provided below. If the information indicates the
strength of sewage contributed by any of the following users is in excess in comparison with the allowable limits listed above, then a surcharge shall be
levied against such users as provided below. Any of the users in the following schedule may be classified as special users if information on their
contribution flow and/or strength indicates a need to do so. A single user having more than one classification of use shall be the total sum of the fees.
The minimum monthly sewer user charge shall be one equivalent user.
EQUIVALENT USER SCHEDULE
(1.0 Minimum)
Classification Equivalent Users
Airport terminal for each 2,000 square feet 1.00
Apartments, duplex and trailers in trailer courts (per each) 1.00
Assembly hall or auditorium for each 200 seats 1.00
Bank or savings and loan for each 3,000 square feet 1.00
Bar or tavern: 1.00
Additional per 20 seats 0.50
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 111/201
Barber and beauty shop per chair: 1.00
Additional per station over 2 0.50
Bowling alley: 1.00
Additional per lane over 3 0.20
Cafe:
Per customer seating capacity (minimum 2.00) 0.10
Drive-in, for each seat (minimum 1.00) 0.05
Campsite (and KOA) for each trailer unit: 1.00
For each campsite 0.46
Additional for RV dump 4.00
Car dealer:
No repair or wash facilities 1.00
With wash bays and/or stalls 0.46
Additional per stall 0.50
Car washes, per stall 2.00
Churches for each 50 seats 1.00
Club or lodge for each 50 seats 1.00
Condominium per unit 1.00
Dentist for each practitioner 2.00
Department store for each 3,000 square feet 1.00
Doctor for each practitioner 2.00
Drugstore for each 3,000 square feet 1.00
Florist for each 1,500 square feet 1.00
Fourplex per each unit 1.00
Garage automotive repair: 1.00
Additional per stall over 2 0.50
Storage only: 1.00
Additional per stall over 2 0.02
Hardware store for each 3,000 square feet 1.00
Hospital and/or convalescent home: 1.00
Additional per bed 0.30
Hotel/motel first unit: 1.00
Additional per unit 0.25
Industrial use Staff calculated
Jail: 1.00
Additional per bed 0.50
Laundry self-service up to 10 machines: 4.00
Additional machine over 10 0.25
Commercial Staff calculated
Mobile home and trailer park for each unit 1.00
Multiple living unit for each unit 1.00
Office building for each 2,500 square feet 1.00
Photo lab, printing shop Staff calculated
Post Office for each 2,500 square feet 1.00
Residential units 1.00
Restaurant:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 112/201
Fast food per customer seating capacity (minimum 1.00) 0.05
Sit down, per customer seating capacity (minimum 2.00) 0.10
Retail food store for each 1,500 square feet 1.00
Retail store for each 3,000 square feet 1.00
Schools per 25 students 1.00
Service station:
Gas and restroom only per set of pumps 1.00
Full service and convenience store 1.00
Tire store automotive repair: 1.00
Additional per stall over 2 0.50
Storage only: 1.00
Additional per stall over 2 0.02
Warehouse/storage unit for each 10,000 square feet 1.00
D. Surcharge For Excessive Strength: When any user contributes wastewater having an average BOD and/or suspended solids loading in excess of the
designated allowable limits hereinafter designated, a surcharge shall be levied against such user. Said surcharge shall be based on the average
degree of excess loading, and applied as a percentage of the basic user charge as provided in the above schedule, or otherwise for special users. The
BOD and suspended solids loading shall be determined from estimates or tests made by the City officials or its engineer. This user's monthly surcharge
shall be computed by use of the following equation:
US = ((b/B) - 1) + (s/S) - 1 x (UMC)
2
Where:
US Represents the user's monthly surcharge to be added to the basic user's monthly charge,
UMC
Represents the basic user's monthly charge (for treatment only) and shall not be less than 1.0,
b Represents the average BOD loading above which is a user's wastewater contribution, expressed in parts per million,
B Represents the allowable limits of BOD loading above which a user's surcharge shall be levied, hereby designated as being 200 parts per
million,
s Represents the average suspended solids loading of the user's wastewater contribution, expressed in parts per million, and
S Represents the allowable limits of suspended solids loading above which a user's surcharge shall be levied, hereby designated as being
140 parts per million.
A copy of the list of users surcharged, the characteristics of their sewage, and the surcharge for each shall be kept on file at all times in the Office of the
City Clerk.
E. Special Users: If, in addition to excessive strength, a user is determined to add flow to the wastewater treatment facilities in excess of nine thousand six
hundred (9,600) gallons per month, the above formula may be increased by a factor of total flow divided by nine thousand six hundred (9,600) gallons
per month multiplied by one equivalent user. In order to determine the flow of this special user, the City may monitor sewer and water flow in order to
determine total flow. The value of UMC used in the formula above will be the same value as assigned to single dwelling units.
A copy of the list of special users, the characteristics of their sewage, and the special user's monthly charge shall be kept on file at all times in the
Office of the City Clerk.
F. Review And Revision Of Rates: The sewer user charges shall, as a minimum, be reviewed annually and updated by resolution of the Council to reflect
actual costs of operation, maintenance, replacement, and financing of the sewage collection and treatment facilities. Any revisions of the user charges
shall be based on actual operations, maintenance, replacement, and financing expenses, and/or on significant changes in the total number of
equivalent users, the total daily flow, the total daily BOD, and/or the total daily suspended solids. The City may install flow measuring devices and/or
collect wastewater samples at any time in any user's service line to determine actual usage as a basis for revisions of the user's charge. Revisions due
only to changes in expenses and user class shall be made by the City. Revisions involving user's flow, BOD and/or suspended solids shall normally
only be made upon the recommendation of a registered professional engineer. All changes in user charges applicable to this chapter shall be
computed by the methods outlined herein.
G. User Request For Rate Change: Any sewer user, who feels his user charge is unjust and inequitable as applied to his premises within the spirit and
intent of the foregoing provisions, may make written application to the City Council requesting a review of his user charge. Said written request shall,
where necessary, show the actual or estimated average flow and strength of his wastewater in comparison with the values upon which the charge is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 113/201
based, including how the measurements or estimates were made. Any flow measurements and/or testing of wastewater shall be approved in detail by
the City and/or its engineer. Review of the request by the City Council shall determine if it is substantiated or not, including recommended further study
of the matter for the City and/or user by a registered professional engineer.
Any and all costs pertaining to application shall be borne by the applicant. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-51: METERED SERVICE:
Whenever the Council shall deem it appropriate and in the best interests of the City and its citizens to require a user to have the sewer and/or water
service to his facilities metered to more appropriately determine the amount of service provided such user by the system, the Council may by resolution
require said user to install a meter and/or meters which will accurately measure the service provided; and the Council may further establish by resolution
the rate to be charged for such service as will properly pay the fair share of the services provided such user. The cost of the meter and its installation shall
be borne by the user.
Rates for metered usage shall be based on actual usage used times the per thousand gallon rate as set by City resolution for sewer maintenance and
operation rates. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-52: OUTSIDE THE CITY SEWER RATES:
The following monthly rates are hereby designated as those to be charged for sewer service to customers "outside the City limits", namely: two (2) times
the rates charged for sewer service to "inside the City limits" customers.
The sewer connection fee and the sewer service line installation fee for "outside of" the City shall be two (2) times the rate charged to "inside the City
limits" customers. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-53: BILLING PROCEDURE AND PERIODS:
Accounts shall be charged a rate in accordance with the rate schedule as set by City resolution. The City Clerk shall furnish to each property owner,
landlord, or agent, a monthly statement of the amount due for sewer service for that month(s). The failure of any sewer user to receive notice or statement
will in no way affect the obligation of the user to remit monthly as required. Each property owner will be responsible for payment of utilities for their property
regardless of rental or occupancy.
The initial billing for premises occupied less than one month shall be charged only for that portion of the month during which the premises were occupied.
(Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-54: DUE DATE:
Bills rendered for sewer service are payable upon receipt and become past due twenty (20) days from the date on which rendered. When the past due
date falls on a legal holiday or on a day when City offices are not open for business, the next regular business day is considered the past due date. When
remittances are made by mail, bills shall be deemed paid on the date the City has received the payment. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-55: DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
When bills are not paid within thirty (30) days from the past due date, the City Clerk may issue an order to shut off and discontinue water service to such
delinquent customers. In case service is discontinued for delinquency, it shall not be restored until the delinquency is paid, or until arrangements for
payment satisfactory to the City Clerk have been made, together with a fee as defined by resolution and as amended from time to time and shall be
payable whenever a service trip is made for the purpose of discontinuing and restoring service because of nonpayment even though an actual shutoff may
not actually have occurred.
In the event that a delinquent customer fails to pay his bill within the time set forth above, the City may discontinue City water service or remove or close
sewer connections, and enter upon the property for accomplishing such purposes.
The expense of digging up and plugging the sewer service line as well as expense of restoring said sewer service line back to an operable condition is a
debt due to the City and may be recovered by legal action against the sewer user in addition to a fifteen dollar ($15.00) fee. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-56: WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT FUND:
There is hereby established a Wastewater Collection and Treatment System Improvement Fund to be maintained by the City Clerk in managing the fiscal
affairs of the City. All revenues derived from the charging of any fees, charges, rates, etc., as such are set forth herein shall be deposited in said fund and
shall be disbursed only for the purposes of paying existing or future indebtedness connected with or relating to maintaining, repairing, studying, controlling,
enlarging, extending, enhancing or improving the wastewater collection and treatment system of the City of Rigby. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-57: SEWER SYSTEM MATERIALS AND INSTALLATIONS:
A. All sanitary sewer main line and storm drain main line materials, manholes, inlet boxes, French drains, etc., and their installation shall be in accordance
with City of Rigby standard specifications of the construction of sanitary sewers and storm sewers and the applicable standard drawings depicting
various sewer line installation details.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 114/201
B. All sewer service line materials and their installation shall be in accordance with the City of Rigby standard specifications for the construction of sanitary
sewers and storm sewers and the applicable standard drawings depicting the various sewer service line installation details.
C. All sewer system materials shall be of the class, strength, thickness, etc., necessary to accommodate or provide for the depth of cover over the pipe,
the type of material and bedding around the pipe, and the type, magnitude, and extent of the external loads being applied to the pipe.
D. All materials must be approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-58: SEWER SYSTEM DESIGN:
A. Plans: The plans for all sewer lines, sewage lift stations, sewage treatment facilities, shall be designed in accordance with the City's approved design
standards. All plans will be signed, and sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State of Idaho.
B. Compliance With State Requirements: All sewer lines, lift stations, sewage treatment facilities, etc., shall be designed in accordance with Idaho DEQ.
C. Minimum Size: Minimum sanitary sewer main size shall be eight inch (8") diameter. Minimum storm drain size shall be eight inch (8") diameter. Larger
sizes shall be as required by the City's overall sewer system Master Plan or as are needed to provide adequate sewage carrying capacity for the area
(and surrounding developable area) being developed and/or annexed to the City. Minimum building service line size shall be four inch (4") diameter.
D. Pressure Sewer Lines: Pressure sewer lines shall be a minimum of six inch (6") diameter with a cleanout every five hundred feet (500').
E. Depth: In general, sewers shall be sufficiently deep so as to receive sewage from basements and to prevent freezing. Sewer lines shall have at least
five feet (5') of cover (from the top of sewer line pipe to the ground or street surface) unless a special design is approved by the City Engineer whereby
the sewer line is protected from freezing by special means or methods and the sewer is protected from "heaving" by the installation of crushed gravel
backfill material under, around, and over the pipe.
F. Slope: All sewer mains shall be designed and constructed to provide mean velocities, when flowing full, of not less than 2.0 feet per second. All sewer
service lines (side sewer) shall be designed and constructed to provide mean velocities, when flowing full, of not less than 3.0 feet per second. The
following are minimum slopes which should be provided; however, slopes greater than these are desirable:
Sewer Size
Minimum Slope In
Feet Per 100 Feet
4 inch 2.00
6 inch 1.00
8 inch 0.40
10 inch 0.28
12 inch 0.22
15 inch 0.15
18 inch 0.12
21 inch 0.10
24 inch 0.08
27 inch 0.067
30 inch 0.058
36 inch 0.046
Under special conditions, if detailed justifiable reasons are given, slopes slightly less than those required above (i.e., to provide 2.0 or 3.0 fps velocity
when flowing full) may be permitted. Such decreased slopes will only be considered where the depth of flow will be 0.3 of the diameter or greater for the
design average flow. Whenever such decreased slopes are proposed, the design engineer must furnish with his report his computations of the depths of
flow in such pipes at the minimum and average rates of flow for a typical day.
Sewers shall be laid with uniform slopes between manholes; i.e., a manhole shall be constructed at each point where the sewer line slope or grade
changes.
G. Manholes: Manholes shall be located no more than four hundred feet (400') apart on lines fifteen inches (15") in diameter or smaller. Manholes may be
located up to six hundred feet (600') apart on lines larger than fifteen inches (15") in diameter. Manholes shall be installed at all locations where sewer
lines eight inches (8") in diameter or larger intersect, join together, or make a bend. All dead end sewer lines shall have a manhole installed on the end
thereof.
H. Sewer Mainline Drop Through Manholes: The flow line of the main sewer line as it enters and leaves any manhole shall be dropped as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 115/201
Mainline Bend Of Drop Of
0 to 10 degrees Regular pipe slope
10 to 45 degrees 0.05 feet
45 to 90 degrees 0.10 feet
I. Lateral Sewer Line Connections At Manholes: Lateral sanitary sewer lines shall not enter a manhole at the elevation appreciably higher than the sewer
main line. The flow line(s) of any lateral line(s) shall be positioned with the manhole as follows:
The flow line of the main sewer line shall be at least 0.05 feet below the flow line of any of the lateral sewer lines entering the manhole. Where the
diameter of the main line and the lateral line differ by less than 0.05 feet, the top of the lateral line shall be positioned even with the top of the main line
on its high (inlet) side.
Where the diameter of the main and lateral differ by 0.05 of a foot or more, the 0.8 depth points of the two (2) sewer line inverts shall be positioned at
the same elevation.
Where a lateral sewer line would enter a manhole at an elevation of four feet (4') or more above the main sewer line, "drop manhole" construction shall
be utilized to locate or position the flow line of the lateral line (in relation to that of the main line) as indicated above.
Where a lateral line would enter a manhole at an elevation of less than three feet (3') above the main sewer line, the grade or slope of the lateral shall
be adjusted so that its flow line is located (in relation to that of the main line) as indicated above.
Individual building service lines may not enter manholes; except that no more than two (2) individual building service lines may enter a "dead end"
manhole (a manhole on the upstream and permanent end of a sewer line) and provided further that the individual building service lines must enter the
manhole at such elevation that the top of the service line is level with the top of the sewer main line and that the poured in place concrete floor of the
manhole brings the flow lines of the service lines into the flow line of the main line in a smooth continuous manner.
J. Location Of Lines: Sanitary sewer lines and water lines shall, wherever possible, be located on opposite sides of the street. Preferably, water lines shall
be located thirteen feet (13') west or north of the street centerline and the sanitary sewer at thirteen feet (13') east or south of the street centerline.
Where storm drains are needed these shall preferably be located along the street centerline. The above referenced locations and dimensions may be
varied to accommodate unusual circumstances; however, a ten foot (10') (out to out) horizontal separation between water line facilities and sewer
facilities (either sanitary or storm) and an eighteen inch (18") (out to out) vertical separation between said facilities shall always be maintained unless a
specific variance to this requirement is obtained from the City Engineer. The applicable separation requirements of the State Health Department shall
also be complied with.
K. Drawings: All drawings shall be on linen or mylar in pencil or ink and of such quality that they clearly show the dimensions, locations, sizes, etc., of all
facilities represented thereon. All sewer line manholes, inlet boxes, building service lines, etc., shall be clearly shown and identified by name and by
station or other means of horizontal location. Sewer lines shall be shown in both plan and profile unless the length of said sewer lines or sewer line
extensions is so short that the City Engineer waives this requirement. If a profile of the sewer line is not provided it shall be located in the vertical plane
by elevations on the flow line of the pipe at all manholes, inlet boxes, etc., and at other such locations and intervals as the City Engineer may require.
Drawings shall be drawn on a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') unless the amount of detail, topography, etc., necessitates their
being drawn on a larger scale (i.e., 1 inch = 50 feet or 1 inch = 40 feet) to provide the clarity and completeness needed on the drawings.
L. Approval By City: The design of all sewer lines and all sewer line plans must be approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-59: "AS BUILT" DRAWINGS AND ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATION:
A. "As built" or "record" drawings of sewer line plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer and the "corrected" original drawings or a duplicate
mylar copy of the "corrected" original drawing(s) shall be provided to the City.
B. "As built" plans shall be stamped and signed by the registered professional engineer in charge of the work that the "as built" drawings of the sewer lines
are true and correct and that he (the registered professional engineer) has inspected the construction of the sewer line installation and that the
materials and installation of same were all done in conformance with City "Standard Specifications for the Construction of Sanitary Sewers and Storm
Sewers". (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-60: SUBDIVISION DEVELOPER'S OR PROPERTY OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR SEWER LINES:
A. The owner or developer of any piece of property or tract of land is responsible for the construction of the sewer line (or for the sewer line costs) within
any of the property sides or frontage of the property along which a sewer line is needed for the overall completeness and continuity of the City's sewer
main system and according to the City's Sanitary Master Plan. If it is a large tract of land, the owner or developer shall also be responsible for the
necessary and required system of sewer lines within the interior of the tract of land.
B. The owner or developer of any piece of property shall construct all needed sewer lines (of the approved size) within and along all sides or frontages of
any piece of property prior to the time any building constructed thereon is occupied or utilized unless "phased" construction of the main system is
specifically allowed or provided for in the development agreement. In lieu of actually constructing said required sewer line or sewer service lines, the
property owner or developer may deposit adequate monies with the City to fully cover the cost(s) of said required sewer line construction.
C. The owner or developer of any property or subdivision will be responsible for the cost of an eight inch (8") diameter sanitary sewer line. Provided
further, however, that if any proposed subdivision or development is of such size or magnitude that it requires or necessitates a sewer size larger than
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 116/201
an eight inch (8") diameter line or if the type of development is such as to produce a wastewater flow in excess of the capacity of an eight inch (8")
diameter sewer line, then the owner or developer of said subdivision or development shall be responsible for the entire cost of whatever size of sewer
line is needed to accommodate his development. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-61: SUBDIVISION DEVELOPER'S OR PROPERTY OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR SEWAGE LIFT STATIONS:
Sewer mains shall be kept as deep as practical to keep sewage lift stations to the smallest number possible. When a sewage lift station and its related
facilities are required, it and the sewer system directing sewage to it shall generally be designed for an entire definable area and not just to serve a single
property owner or developer. The cost for the sewage lift stations and all related appurtenances shall be the sole responsibility of the single property owner
or developer. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-62: CITATION; APPEARANCE:
Whenever it is determined by any police officer or other duly authorized officer that any person or persons have violated any provisions of this chapter the
said officer shall provide in quadruplicate and serve upon such person or persons a written citation containing a notice to appear in a designated court of
competent jurisdiction within the City of Rigby, Idaho. This citation shall contain the name and address of the person charged, the offense charged, the
time and place the offense charged occurred, and the time when the person charged shall appear in said court, and such other pertinent information as
may be necessary; and such person or persons shall appear in said court within five (5) days after such citation is issued and served. The issuance of a
citation shall not be the exclusive method of summoning offenders hereunder. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-63: FAILURE TO APPEAR UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to fail or neglect to appear in response to and as required by the citation regardless of the disposition of the
charge upon which such citation was originally issued. Appearance in court shall be deemed complied with upon appearance by the person cited or his
attorney. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-64: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as defined by Idaho State Statute 18-113, and as amended from time to
time. Each day said violation occurs shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-65: CONFLICTS:
All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, insofar as they are in conflict, shall be and the same are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-66: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS:
A. Any person, including the user, may petition the City to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days of its issuance.
B. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
C. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.
D. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
E. If the City fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater
discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final administrative
actions for purposes of judicial review.
F. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with a court of
competent jurisdiction within thirty (30) days after the date such decision was signed and mailed or physically delivered to the user. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-
4-2017)
8-2-67: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION:
Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years, at the discretion of the Superintendent. Each
wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-68: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION:
The Superintendent may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 117/201
A. To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater
discharge permit issuance;
C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
D. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the City's POTW, City personnel or the receiving waters;
E. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
F. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
G. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
H. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
I. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-69: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER:
Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days' advance
notice to the Superintendent and the Superintendent approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Superintendent must include a
written certification by the new owner or operator which:
A. States that the new owner or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes;
B. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
C. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. If such certification is delivered to the Superintendent and
there are no significant changes to the manufacturing operation or wastewater discharge, the new owner will be considered an existing user and be
covered by the existing limits and requirements in the previous owner's permit. Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater
discharge permit voidable as of the date of facility transfer. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-70: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION:
Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for, but not limited to, the following reasons:
A. Failure to notify the Superintendent of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
B. Failure to provide prior notification to the Superintendent of changed conditions;
C. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
D. Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
E. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
F. Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility premises and records;
G. Failure to meet discharge limitations;
H. Failure to pay fines;
I. Failure to pay sewer charges;
J. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 118/201
K. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
L. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility; or
M. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits
issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-71: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE:
A user, required to have a wastewater discharge permit, shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater
discharge permit application, in accordance with section 8-2-19 of this chapter, a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
wastewater discharge permit. A user, whose existing wastewater discharge permit has expired and has submitted its re-application in the time period
specified herein, shall be deemed to have an effective wastewater discharge permit until the City issues or denies the new wastewater discharge permit. A
user, whose existing wastewater discharge permit has expired and who failed to submit its reapplication in the time period specified herein, will be deemed
to be discharging without a wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-72: SAMPLING REQUIREMENTS FOR USERS:
A. A minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, and oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organics. The Superintendent
will determine on a case-by-case basis whether the user will be able to composite the individual grab samples. For all other pollutants, 24-hour
composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The City may waive flow-proportional
composite sampling for any user that demonstrates that flow-proportional is infeasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through timeproportional
composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
B. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated or
manufacturing process if no pretreatment exists or as determined by the City and contained in the user's wastewater discharge permit. For categorical
users, if other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and concentrations
necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the applicable categorical
pretreatment standards. For other SIUs, for which the City has adjusted its local limits to factor out dilution flows, the user should measure the flows
and concentrations necessary to evaluate compliance with the adjusted pretreatment standards.
C. All sample results shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges from the
user. If a user samples and analyzes more frequently than what was required in its wastewater discharge permit, using methodologies in 40 CFR part
136, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge as part of its self-monitoring report. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-73: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-74: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
The City shall have the right to enter the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purposes of this chapter, and any wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, are being met and whether the user is complying with all requirements thereof. Users shall allow the Superintendent ready access
to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying and the performance of any additional duties.
A. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make
necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the Superintendent will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
B. The Superintendent shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or
metering of the user's operations.
C. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the
written or verbal request of the Superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Superintendent access to the user's premises shall be a violation. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-75: PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 119/201
The City shall publish annually, in the official newspaper, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken
during a six (6) month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable criteria [1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH];
C. Any other discharge violation that the City believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including
endangering the health of City personnel or the general public);
D. Any discharge of pollutants that have caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the City's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or
H. Any other violation(s) which the City determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord. 2017-589,
5-4-2017)
8-2-76: NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION:
When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of violation, by certified letter.
Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to
include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for
any violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the City to take any action,
including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-77: CONSENT ORDERS:
The Superintendent may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any
user responsible for non-compliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the non-compliance within a time
period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative order and shall be judicially enforceable.
Use of a consent order shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-78: SHOW CAUSE HEARING:
The Superintendent may order a user which has violated or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the Superintendent and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Such notice
may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-79: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing
that the user come into compliance within a time specified in the order. If the user does not come into compliance within the time specified in the order,
sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated.
Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the non-compliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices
designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-80: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 120/201
When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Superintendent may issue an
order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
A. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
B. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-81: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or which causes an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons. The Superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the
operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment.
A. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge into the POTW. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Superintendent shall take steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of
the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Superintendent shall
allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that the period of endangerment has
passed, unless the termination proceedings are initiated against the user.
B. A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing
the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Superintendent, prior to the date of any show
cause or termination hearing. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to an emergency suspension under this section.
(Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-82: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE (NON-EMERGENCY):
In addition any user that violates any of the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
A. Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
B. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
C. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
D. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
E. Violation of the pretreatment standards. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show
why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the City shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
8-2-83: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may petition the Seventh Judicial District of the State of Idaho, Jefferson
County through the City Attorney, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The City may also seek
such other action as is appropriate for legal or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for
injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 2017-589, 5-4-2017)
Chapter 3
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
8-3-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the public health of water consumers by the control of actual and/or potential cross-connections. (1980 Code
§ 8.4.1)
8-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 121/201
All definitions contained in the Idaho Regulations for Public Drinking Water, as the same may hereafter be revised or amended, shall be considered as
definitions within the meaning of this Chapter, and the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
BACKFLOW: The flow, other than the intended direction of the flow, of any foreign liquids, gases or substances into this district's public water supply
distribution system.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device to counteract back pressure or to prevent back siphonage.
CONTAMINATION: The entry into or the presence into the City water supply of any substance which may be detrimental to health and/or quality of water.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system,
sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste
or liquids of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply system of the City as a result of
backflow. (1980 Code § 8.4.2)
8-3-3: CROSS-CONNECTIONS:
A. Protection Required: No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or continued in use in the City unless the water supply is protected
by backflow protection devices as may be required by this Chapter and by the State Department of Health and Welfare in Idaho Regulations for Public
Drinking Water Systems sections 1-8306.01 through 1-18306.08.
B. Endangering Water Supply Prohibited: The installation or maintenance of a cross-connection which will endanger the water quality of the potable water
supply of the City shall be unlawful and is prohibited.
C. Nuisance Declared: Any such cross-connection now existing or hereafter installed is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the same shall be
abated.
D. Compliance With State And Local Regulations: The control or elimination of cross-connections shall be in accordance with this Chapter and Idaho Code
provisions. The City may establish requirements for cross-connection control within the City that are more stringent than the State regulations, if they
determine that conditions so dictate. (1980 Code § 8.4.3)
8-3-4: INSTALLATION PERMIT REQUIRED:
If cross-connection control device(s) are found to be necessary, the owner of the property served must apply to the Public Works Director for a specific
installation permit. (1980 Code § 8.4.6; amd. 1999 Code)
8-3-5: USE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
A. Installation Under Certain Circumstances: Backflow prevention devices shall be installed where, in the judgment of the Public Works Director, the nature
and extent of activities or the materials stored on the premises would present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health and/or be detrimental to
the quality of the water should a cross-connection occur; even though such cross-connection does not exist at the time. Backflow prevention devices
shall be installed under circumstances, including but not limited to, the following:
1. Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless the quality of the auxiliary supply is in compliance with the State of Idaho Drinking Water
Regulations and is acceptable to the Public Works Director of the City.
2. Premises having internal cross-connections that are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impracticable to ascertain
whether or not cross-connections exist.
3. Premises where entry is restricted so that inspection for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to
assure that a cross-connection does not exist.
4. Premises having a repeated history of cross-connection being established or reestablished.
5. Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to permit entry into the public water supply, or where cross-connection could
reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of processed waters and cooling waters.
6. Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled in such a way that if back siphonage should occur, a serious health hazard
might result.
7. The following types of facilities will fall into one of the above categories where a backflow prevention device is required to protect the public water
supply. A backflow prevention device shall be installed at these facilities unless the Public Works Director of the City determines that no hazard
exists:
Chemical plants using a water process.
Food or beverage processing plants.
Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, laboratories.
Metal plating industries.
Petroleum processing or storage plants.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 122/201
Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
Sewage treatment plants.
Others specified by the City.
8. Other premises, as specified by the City, where backflow prevention devices are required to protect the public water supply.
B. Type Of Device; Conditions: The type of protective device shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists:
1. An air-gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public water supply may be
contaminated with sewage, industrial wastes of a toxic nature, or other contaminant which could cause a health or system hazard.
2. In the case of a substance which may be objectionable but not hazardous to health, a double check valve assembly, air-gap separation, or a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed.
C. Location: Backflow prevention devices required by this Chapter shall be installed at the meter, at the property line of the premises when the meters are
not used, or at a location designated by the Public Works Director. The device shall be located so as to be readily accessible for maintenance and
testing, and further, where no part of the device will be submerged.
D. Supervision: Backflow prevention devices required by this Chapter shall be installed under the supervision, and with the approval, of the Public Works
Director.
E. Approval Of Protective Device; Customer Responsible For Cost: Any protective device required by this Chapter shall be a model approved by the City.
A double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device will be approved if it has successfully passed a
performance test of the American Water Works Association (AWWA) or other testing laboratories satisfactory to the City. These devices shall be
furnished and installed by and at the expense of the customer.
F. Inspection, Tests And Maintenance: Backflow prevention devices installed pursuant to this Chapter, except atmospheric vacuum breakers, shall be
inspected and tested annually, or more often if necessary. Inspections, tests and maintenance shall be at the customer's expense. Whenever the
devices are found to be defective, they shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the customers expense. Inspections, tests, repairs and records
thereof shall be accomplished under the City's supervision by certified testers.
G. Underground Sprinkling Devices: No underground sprinkling device will be installed without adequate backflow prevention devices at the point from
which the water for irrigation is taken from the public water supply.
H. Failure Of Customer To Cooperate: Failure of the customer to cooperate in the installation, maintenance, testing or inspection of backflow prevention
devices required by this Chapter shall be grounds for the termination of water service to the premises, or, in the alternative, the installation of an air-gap
separation at the customer's expense. (1980 Code § 8.4.4; amd. 1999 Code)
8-3-6: CROSS-CONNECTION INSPECTION:
A. Inspection Required: No water shall be delivered to any structure hereafter built within the City or within areas served by City water until the same shall
have been inspected by the Public Works Director for possible cross-connections and been approved as being free of same.
B. Hazardous Facilities: Any construction for industrial or other purposes which is classified as hazardous facilities where it is reasonable to anticipate
intermittent cross-connections, or as determined by the City, shall be protected by the installation of one or more backflow prevention devices at the
point of service from the public water supply or any other location designated by the Public Works Director.
C. Periodic Inspections: Inspections shall be made periodically of all buildings, structures, or improvements of any nature now receiving water through the
City system, for the purpose of ascertaining whether cross-connections exist. Such inspections shall be made by the Public Works Director. (1980
Code § 8.4.5; amd. 1999 Code)
8-3-7: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
In the event an improper cross-connection is not corrected within the time limit set by the City, or in the event the Public Works Director is refused access
to any property for the purpose of determining whether or not cross-connections exist, delivery of water to the property shall cease until the deficiency is
corrected to the Public Works Director's satisfaction. In addition, the Public Works Director may effect the necessary repairs or modifications at the
expense of the property owner and refuse delivery of water to the property until the cost thereof shall have been paid. (1980 Code § 8.4.7; amd. 1999
Code)
8-3-8: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Chapter or the rules
and regulations as adopted by the Public Works Director shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be, for each offense,
subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1980 Code § 8.4.8; amd. 1999 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 123/201
Title 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS
9-1-1: BUILDING CODES:
A. Adoption: Certain documents, three (3) copies of each code of which are on file in the office of the city of Rigby, public works department, being marked
and designated as the international building code, 2009 edition, the international residential code, 2009 edition, the international mechanical code,
2009 edition, the international fuel gas code, 2009 edition, and the international energy conservation code, 2009 edition, all published by the
International Code Council, the NFPA 70 national electrical code as currently required by the state of Idaho and the uniform plumbing code as currently
required by the state of Idaho and published by the International Association Of Plumbing And Mechanical Officials are hereby adopted as the building
code of the city of Rigby, in the state of Idaho for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary
and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such
structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said building code on file in the office of the city of Rigby public works department are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions and deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of
this section.
B. Amendments: The following sections are hereby revised:
1. For the 2009 international building code, the following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.4.3. Replace the language "international plumbing code" with the following:
Uniform plumbing code or edition as currently required by the state of Idaho as published by International Association Of Plumbing And
Mechanical Officials AND the current edition of the Pacific Northwest section of American Water Works Association (AWWA) Manual.
Section 903.2.8. Insert following the section:
Exception: One and two unit dwellings are not required to be sprinklered as per the state of Idaho revisions of the 2009 international building
code.
Section 1612.3. Insert: city of Rigby, Idaho.
Section 1612.3. Insert: 19 day of July, 2011.
Section 3412.2. Insert: January 1st, 1985.
2. For the 2009 international residential code, the following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: city of Rigby, Idaho.
Table R301.2(1).
Insert: Ground snow: 50 lb; wind speed: 90 mph; topographic effects: no; seismic design category: D-1; weathering: severe; frost line depth: 36
inches; termite: slight; winter design temp: -5 degree; ice shield underlayment required: yes; flood hazards: flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
dated September 26, 2008; air freezing index: 2000; mean annual temperature: 42 degree.
Table R302.6.
Delete the box that reads: not less than 1/2" gypsum board applied to the garage side.
Insert in place: not less than 5/8" "type X" gypsum board applied to the garage side.
Delete chapters 25 through 43. The governing electrical code and plumbing code shall be that as most currently adopted by the state of Idaho
division of building safety.
3. For the 2009 international mechanical code, the following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: city of Rigby, Idaho.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 124/201
Section 106.5.2. Insert the following:
The mechanical fee schedule shall be as per state of Idaho statutes, title 54, chapter 50, Installation Of Heating, Ventilation And Air Conditioning
Systems - 54-5017. Permits - Applications - Fees, or as the same may from time to time be modified. A copy of which shall be kept at the city of
Rigby public works department.
Section 106.5.3. Insert: 50% in both locations.
Section 108.4. Insert: Misdemeanor punishable by fines of $300 per day and up to 30 days in jail.
Section 108.5. Insert: $200 (minimum fine) and $2000 (maximum fine).
4. For the 2009 international fuel gas code, the following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: city of Rigby, Idaho.
Section 106.5.2. Change section to read:
Fees are covered elsewhere. See section 106.5.2. of the 2006 international mechanical code.
Section 106.5.3. Insert 50% in both locations.
Section 108.4. Insert: Misdemeanor punishable by fines of $300 per day and up to 30 days in jail.
Section 108.5. Insert: $200 (minimum fine) and $2000 (maximum fine).
5. For the 2009 international energy conservation code, the following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: city of Rigby, Idaho.
6. For the current uniform plumbing code, insert the following:
The plumbing fee schedule shall be as per state of Idaho statutes, title 54, chapter 26, Plumbing And Plumbers - 54-2619. Municipal Fees For
Permits, Inspections - Exceptions, and in accordance with IDAPA 07 title 2 chapter 03, or as the same may from time to time be modified. A copy
of which shall be kept at the city of Rigby public works department.
C. Fees Collected: Building permit fees and other inspection fees not identified in subsection B of this section, shall be collected at time of building permit
issuance and shall be as identified by table 1A of the 1997 uniform building code.
D. Penalty: Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of the building code as described in subsection A of this section, shall upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a general misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for
not more than six (6) months, or by both said fine and imprisonment for any single violation, in addition to any penalty for any sanction provided for in
the adopted building code as described in subsection A of this section. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2011-551, 7-19-
2011, eff. 7-19-2011)
9-1-2: HOUSING QUALITY STANDARDS:
A. Adoption: The city hereby adopts the housing quality standards for the HUD section 8 existing housing program, as published in the HUD publication,
"Housing Inspection Manual", section 8 existing housing program, March 1985.
B. Definitions: The city hereby adopts the following definitions:
HOUSING, STANDARD CONDITION: A dwelling unit that has been inspected by a qualified housing inspector who works in, or is familiar with, the
section 8 existing housing program, and the summary decision in the inspection report indicates that the unit "passes".
HOUSING, SUBSTANDARD CONDITION BUT SUITABLE FOR REHABILITATION: All of the following conditions must be met:
1. A dwelling unit that has been inspected by a qualified housing inspector who works in, or is familiar with, the section 8 existing housing program,
and the summary decision in the inspection report indicates that the unit "fails";
2. For such a dwelling that "fails" the section 8 housing inspection, the cost estimates as prepared by an architect or general contractor to
rehabilitate the dwelling unit into a "standard condition" as defined herein make rehabilitation of the unit "uneconomic" as determined by
professionals knowledgeable in the field such as professional public housing personnel, certified architects, loan officers, etc. (Res., 7-5-1989)
9-1-3: COMPLIANCE WITH AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 125/201
Each building permit issued as of January 4, 1995, by the city shall bear the following inscription, in addition to all other provisions currently in effect:
NOTICE: All new construction of commercial facilities and public accommodations as defined by law must comply with the construction requirements of
the Americans With Disabilities Act, as such Act is amended.
(Res. 21, 1-3-1995)
9-1-4: BUILDINGS IN BUSINESS DISTRICT:
A. Approval Of Plans And Specifications; Permit And Fee:
1. No wall, structure, building or part thereof shall be built, enlarged or altered within the business district of the city until the plans, specifications of the
proposed work or construction together with a statement of the materials to be used shall first be filed with the city clerk, who shall present said
application to the city council for approval or rejection.
2. If the city council decides that the materials to be used and the style and nature of the buildings are in keeping with the architecture of the
surrounding buildings, as in size, materials used, value and other considerations, then they shall authorize the city clerk to issue a permit upon
paying a fee for such issuance. (1980 Code § 4.2.1)
B. Duty Of Public Works Director:
1. The object of this section is to have in the business district such buildings as may be more uniform in materials, value and symmetry for the
appearance of the business district of the city.
2. The public works director may, when so commanded by the mayor and city council, observe the building of any structure in order to ascertain if the
orders of the city council are being observed and report the same to the mayor when so required. (1980 Code § 4.2.2; amd. 1999 Code)
C. Application Of Section: This section shall be read and understood to be a part of any other chapter or section of this code as applies in any way in the
proper observance of the same. (1980 Code § 4.2.3)
D. Penalty: Any person who violates any subsection of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1980 Code § 4.2.4; amd. 1999 Code)
9-1-5: THEATERS; EXITS AND AISLES:
A. Types Of Exits: Every theater within the city shall have two (2) exits, one in the front and one in the rear of the building, with standard exit doors. (1980
Code § 4.3.1)
B. Exit Doors: Every required exit door shall be a standard exit door. No single door or leaf to a double door shall be less than four feet (4') wide. No two
(2) doors shall be hinged together. No rolling, sliding, or revolving doors shall be counted as an exit from any theater; nor shall any such door be
permitted in any theater where it would be liable to be used by the public as an exit. (1980 Code § 4.3.2)
C. Width Of Aisles: Cross aisles leading to exit in rear of theater shall not be less than four feet (4') wide. (1980 Code § 4.3.3)
D. Surface Of Ground On Outside At Rear Exit: The surface of the ground at the rear exit of any theater shall be level with the ground floor of the theater at
said rear exit. (1980 Code § 4.3.4)
E. Obstructions: All aisles or passageways shall be kept free from camp stools, chairs and other obstructions, and no person except an employee shall be
allowed to stand in or occupy any of the aisles, foyers, or passageways during any performance or public gathering. (1980 Code § 4.3.5)
F. Violation; Penalty: Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be unlawful, and any person so violating such provisions shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1980 Code § 4.3.6; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 2
MANUFACTURED HOMES
9-2-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter establishes the minimum standards for the approval of manufactured housing. (Ord. 474, 5-18-1999)
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure attached to or located adjacent to a manufactured home such as awnings, carport, garages, porches or steps.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 126/201
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure that bears the Department of Housing and Urban Development certification that it has been constructed in
conformance with the mobile home construction and safety standards in effect at the time of its construction, and is to be used as a permanent residential
dwelling.
PERMANENTLY AFFIXED: A manufactured home which has the running gear and towing hitch or similar devices removed and is set up per
manufacturer's instructions on permanent footings, with supports having an anchoring system that is totally concealed under the structure and complies
with Department of Housing and Urban Development Standards. (Ord. 474, 5-18-1999)
9-2-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The use of a manufactured home as a permanent residential dwelling on an individual lot shall be permitted in any zoning district of the Chapter which
permits installation of a single-family site-built dwelling, provided the following standards are met:
A. Is multi-section and at least twenty feet (20') wide.
B. Has a minimum floor area of one thousand (1,000) square feet.
C. Has roofing materials which are generally acceptable for site-built housing. Any roofing materials may be used provided it has the appearance of a
nonmetallic shingle, shake or tile roof. Roofs shall also have a minimum slope of twenty five percent (25%) (3:12) and overhanging eaves.
D. Has siding materials which are generally acceptable for site-built housing. Any siding materials may be used provided it has the appearance of wood,
masonry or horizontal metal siding. Reflection from horizontal metal siding shall be no greater than that from siding coated with white, gloss enamel.
E. Has a foundation of concrete or other material allowed by the Uniform Building Code for site-built homes which is aesthetically compatible with the
manufactured home having the appearance of site-built construction. This means the exterior foundation shall be an extension of the siding or be of
materials having the appearance of site-built foundations such as brick, concrete or concrete block.
F. Is permanently affixed per manufacturer's instructions. Concrete footings shall be thirty six inches (36") below grade.
G. Has a crawl space with the following minimum measurements: 1) eighteen inches (18") of clearance; 2) twelve inches (12") of clearance under beams;
and 3) an eighteen inch by twenty four inch (18" x 24") door.
H. Complies with all applicable lot size, setback, and other requirements of the zoning district in which it is to be located.
I. Provides two (2) off-street parking spaces.
J. Provides right-of-way improvements in the same manner as site-built construction, in accordance with the Uniform Building Code.
K. Manufactured home owners or purchasers shall own or be purchasing the land upon which their home is to be placed. The owner or purchaser shall
record with the County Recorder a nonrevocable option declaring the manufactured home as real property.
L. Manufactured homes shall meet the requirements of the 1995 Edition of the Model Energy Code or other equivalent standard approved by the City.
(Ord. 474, 5-18-1999)
9-2-4: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
Accessory structures to manufactured housing shall be constructed in compliance with the standards specified by the Rigby Comprehensive Zoning
Ordinance, Uniform Building Code, and the Department of Housing and Urban Development Standards. Structures shall be aesthetically compatible with
the home to which they are associated. (Ord. 474, 5-18-1999)
9-2-5: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Application: Application shall be made to the Public Works Director on the prescribed form. The completed application shall be filed with the Planning
and Zoning Department. The application shall include all information necessary to determine conformity with required development standards of this
Chapter, including: exterior dimensions, siding material, roofing material, eaves overhang and any other applicable information. The applicant shall also
attach to the application: 1) a copy of the manufacturer's instructions for installation of the home on permanent footings; and 2) a plot plan showing
existing conditions and the proposed location of the home and other improvements at a scale of at least one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20'). (Ord.
474, 5-18-1999; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Certificates And Inspection:
1. The applicant shall sign the completed application certifying the manufactured home meets the required development standards of this Chapter and
that site development will be in accordance with the plot plan submitted stating that once the manufactured home is permanently affixed the applicant
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 127/201
will comply with the requirement for the home to be declared as real property for taxation purposes. These certifications shall be made prior to the
moving of the home to the building site.
2. Following application and plot plan approval by the Planning and Building Departments the Building Official may issue a building permit for the
footings and foundation. Upon satisfactory inspection of the footings and foundation for the attachment of the manufactured home, the Building
Official shall verify, in writing, that all development standards have been met as certified by the applicant. The home may then be attached to the
foundation in accordance with the manufacturer's instruction, City codes for permanent utility connections, and other building requirements.
3. Prior to occupancy a final inspection shall be made to assure proper attachment of the home to the foundation and placement of a proper foundation
facia. (Ord. 474, 5-18-1999)
9-2-6: NONCONFORMING MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOMES:
A manufactured/mobile home which has been placed and maintained upon an individual lot prior to January 2, 1982 shall be a legal nonconforming use.
Such manufactured/mobile homes shall not be relocated within the City without conforming to all applicable provisions contained herein. (Ord. 474, 5-18-
1999)
Chapter 3
EXISTING BUILDINGS LIFE SAFETY
9-3-1: SCOPE OF APPLICATION:
The following is a noninclusive list of life safety issues for all existing apartment buildings (including duplex, triplex, fourplex and single-family homes
hereinafter referred to as apartments) that are rented in the city of Rigby city limits. This list is for existing apartments and rented single-family homes. All
new apartments and existing buildings being converted to apartments shall be built in accordance with the codes that are in place at the time the structure
is built. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a reasonable degree of safety to persons occupying existing apartment buildings built and/or converted
prior to the effective date hereof. Apartments built or converted after the effective date hereof shall comply with the code and ordinances in place at the
time of construction or conversion. Nothing in these guidelines should be interpreted as precluding the city of Rigby from upgrading the requirements for
approval at any time. (Ord. 2012-552, 2-21-2012)
9-3-2: LIFE SAFETY ISSUES:
A. Exits: Every floor above the first story or basement used as apartments serving over four (4) persons shall have a minimum of two (2) exits. One of
these exits for an upper floor may be a fire escape built within the standards set forth in section 3407.4 of the 1997 uniform building code (UBC) (copy
available). An exit ladder device may be used in lieu of a fire escape when approved by the central fire district. For apartment units requiring two (2)
exits that have a floor level of not more than twenty feet (20') above grade and basement apartments requiring two (2) exits, one exit will be allowed
when all bedrooms have egress windows that meet the requirements of subsection F of this section, but also must have a minimum opening area of
5.7 square feet. All doors or windows providing access to a fire escape shall be provided with fire escape signs. Exit signs shall be provided at exits
where more than one exit is required and in corridors used for exiting from multiple units. Exit signs shall be as per the 1997 uniform building code.
Primary entrance to an apartment is not allowed through a garage. A one hour firewall shall be erected to separate the apartment entrance from the
garage. If a door is needed from the apartment entrance firewall to the interior of the garage, it must be a door as described in subsection C of this
section.
B. Stairs: All stairs used as part of an exit shall have a maximum riser height of eight inches (8"), a minimum run of nine inches (9") and a minimum width
of thirty inches (30") (exclusive of handrails). An eight and one-half inch (81/2") riser will be allowed if the minimum tread is increased to ten inches
(10"). Every stairway with over three (3) risers shall be provided with a handrail. All stairs require landings with a minimum dimension of thirty inches
(30") run in direction of travel at each point of access to stairwell. All stairwells will have minimum six feet six inches (6'6") headroom.
C. Exit Corridors: Exit corridors serving occupant loads of ten (10) or more occupants shall have walls and ceilings of not less than one hour fire resistive
construction. Wood lath and plaster of one-half inch (1/2") drywall is acceptable in corridor construction. Openings with fixed wired glass set in steel
frames are allowed in corridors. Doors entering into corridors (with exception of those opening directly outside) shall be twenty (20) minute fire rated
assemblies, or solid wood doors not less than one and three-fourths inches (13/4") thick. Where the existing frames will not accommodate a one and
three-fourths inch (13/4") thick solid wood door, a one and three-eighths inch (13/8") thick solid bonded wood core door or equivalent insulated steel
door shall be permitted. Transoms must be covered with one-half inch (1/2") drywall unless approved by the city building official or central fire district.
The city building official may nullify the above corridor requirements when an approved sprinkler system is provided.
D. Sprinkler System: An approved sprinkler system shall be installed in basements or stories exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of
habitable area and not having a minimum thirty inch by eighty inch (30" x 80") door or a minimum thirty inch by forty two inch (30" x 42") window in
every fifty (50) linear feet of exterior wall (or fraction thereof) on at least one side of the building. A sprinkler system shall be installed in any portion of
the basement or upper story that is over seventy five feet (75') from opening as described above.
E. One Hour Separation: One hour dwelling separation shall be provided between all apartment units. Wood lath and plaster and one-half inch (1/2")
drywall is acceptable as one hour separation when in good shape and continuous on both sides of walls and on ceilings, provided the floors above are
of a double layer variety. Buildings with sprinkler systems have different area separation requirements. Consult the city of Rigby building official for
more information.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 128/201
F. Windows: Window egress is required. Each bedroom will have a window that meets the minimum size requirements of twenty inches wide by twenty two
inches high (20" x 22"). The windows will not be required to meet the minimum opening area of 5.7 square feet. A permanent object (footlocker or seat)
will be allowed to be built against a wall below a window to allow sill heights greater than forty four inches (44"). Window wells are required to have a
clear opening twenty four inches (24") in front of window and to have steps if window well is deeper than forty four inches (44"). Door hardware must
not be able to be locked so that it cannot be opened from the inside without the use of a key or some special knowledge. Aisles, corridors and hallways
or any part of the exit, exit access or exit discharge shall not be blocked and shall be a minimum of thirty inches (30") wide. Stairs shall be secure.
Guardrails shall be installed at any walking surface adjacent to a drop of thirty inches (30") or greater. Doors or any part of exit, exit access or exit
discharge to be in operable condition.
G. Area To Be Kept Free Of Garbage: Exits and access to fire extinguishers shall be unobstructed. Garbage and trash need to be removed from the
premises on a timely basis. Outside trash containers must be kept at a proper distance from building for fire safety.
H. Fire Extinguisher: All apartments shall be equipped with an approved wall mounted fire extinguisher. The minimum size is a 2A-10BC, unless a smaller
1A extinguisher already exists. The existing 1A shall be replaced when it is six (6) years old with a 2A-10BC, therefore, all apartments' 1A fire
extinguishers shall be replaced before six (6) years from the adoption date of this life safety code. The extinguisher shall be mounted in a conspicuous
location near the kitchen.
I. Smoke/Carbon Monoxide Detectors: Smoke detectors with carbon monoxide detectors shall be provided on each floor of each unit. The detectors shall
be placed on a wall near ceiling but not closer than six inches (6") of the ceiling. Smoke detectors may be battery operated or may receive their primary
power from the building wiring when such wiring is served from a commercial source. Wiring shall be permanent and without disconnecting switches
other than those required for overload protection. Each apartment owner or manager shall check detectors annually for operation and for battery
function.
J. Electrical: Romex or other wire for greater than one hundred (100) volt use shall be encased in a wall, floor, ceiling cavity or in any NEC approved
conduit or chase. Open wiring is not allowed. Electrical panels must not be blocked or obstructed in any manner. Electrical panel doors must be able to
be closed and latched. All openings in the service panels must be plugged. All outlets and switches will have covers. All electrical connections will be
provided with a junction box and cover. No frayed wires will be allowed. All outlets in bathrooms, kitchens, garages and outdoors to be replaced with
ground fault devices. Improperly sized fuses or breakers must be replaced with properly sized units. All wire entrances into metal boxes will be made
with NEC approved connectors. Overloaded panels must be replaced with adequate service. Electrical conduits to be fastened securely to structure.
Overhead wires from outbuildings to be at least ten feet (10') above any ground surface (including decks or raised walking surfaces). All stairs between
floors to be provided with lighting. Exterior stairs to be provided with lighting. Heating system shall not require the use of portable electric heaters to
adequately heat building. All light fixtures are required to have canopies and to be securely attached to structure. Extension cords are not allowed to
replace proper wiring. Electrical in general to be in safe working manner. Electrical inspector or city inspector to inspect when any question arises.
K. Gas Appliances; Heaters: Require all gas meters, pipes or appurtenances to be protected from vehicles. Require combustion air to gas appliances
located in small, unventilated rooms. Require gas water heaters greater than four feet (4') tall with flexible connections to be strapped to structure.
Require two inches (2") minimum space for flue vents from any combustible construction. Require twenty four inches (24") clear space in front of water
heaters and furnaces. This requirement may be met by the opening of a door or an access panel. Gas water heaters or furnaces located in a bedroom
or a bedroom closet must be totally isolated from the bedroom with a tightfitting door and must receive combustion air from another source besides the
bedroom. Require proper clearance for heating equipment (water heaters and furnaces). Require that all high efficiency gas furnace flue discharge
points be located in areas that are not below doors or windows that can be opened or within four feet (4') from such windows or doors. Storage or trash
shall not be allowed within twenty four inches (24") of gas water heater or furnace. Gas water heater and furnace flues must be connected with at least
three (3) screws at all joints and must be tightly installed. Require that all gravity venting between forty five degrees (45°) and sixty degrees (60°) be
considered as horizontal venting and require that the total run of horizontal vent be less than seventy five percent (75%) of the vertical height of the
vent. Portable gas heaters are not allowed. Corroded pressure relief valves must be replaced.
L. Backflow Prevention: Require backflow prevention for lawn sprinkler systems.
M. Structural Components: All wooden structural components (headers, beams, columns, rafters, trusses, joists, bearing walls, etc.) to be free of stress
cracks, fastened securely and free of rot. Steel and concrete structural components (beams, columns, slabs, girders, purlins, footings, etc.) to be free
from defects, stress cracks, strain or fatigue that could cause loss of structural integrity. Roof to be without leaks.
N. Addresses: Address must be posted on building so that it is clearly visible from the street in a manner that is compliant with emergency services.
Contact emergency services for more information.
O. Exterior Property Maintenance: Exterior property maintenance, appearance, and upkeep includes, but is not limited to, the following requirements:
1. Building and outbuildings should be in good repair. Paint, siding, rain gutters, roof, doors, and screens need to be in place and functioning.
2. Parking lots and sidewalks should be clean, free from hazards (such as uneven or broken concrete).
3. Stairwells, railings, and steps must be safe and free from deterioration, as well as snow and ice.
4. Yard and landscaping needs to be well maintained, mowed, trimmed, weeded, and have a neat appearance.
5. The owner of the property is responsible for the enforcement of this code relating to abandoned, inoperable, discarded or unused objects or
equipment such as automobiles, implements, and/or machinery and personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes
for which it was manufactured, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, or containers.
6. The owner of the property will ensure an adequate and approved refuse container is provided each apartment and the area around the containers is
kept free of overflow and accumulation on the ground.
P. Sleeping Areas: Space and room arrangements include, but are not limited to, the following requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 129/201
1. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor space per occupant, not including closet space.
2. No more than four (4) occupants shall sleep in a single bedroom.
Q. Bathroom Facilities:
1. Every bathroom shall have an outside window or exhaust fan. It is encouraged that all apartments have fans installed to prevent mold growth.
2. There shall be at least one toilet, washbasin, and bathtub or shower in good working condition with hot and cold water and approved drainage for
every six (6) tenants. They must be clean, free from mold and decaying caulk and grout, and reasonably free from stains.
3. All bathroom facilities shall be located within the dwelling so as to be reasonably accessible to all persons sharing such facilities.
R. Cooking And Eating Apartment Requirements:
1. Every apartment shall contain a kitchen sink that is connected with hot and cold water and is also connected to the sewer drain. Damaged areas
beneath the sink must be cleaned to prevent mold growth.
S. Parking: Parking shall comply with city ordinances allowing for either on street or off street parking. Parking stalls must be contained in designated lots
and not on grass, sidewalks, or the like.
T. Safety:
1. No accumulation of rubbish or combustibles shall be permitted in the building.
2. No flammable materials (clothing, paper products, boxes, etc.) shall be stored within twenty four inches (24") of the furnace or water heater.
3. Landlords shall make arrangements to reasonably remove snow and ice from stairways, walkways and parking lots.
U. Inspection Needed For Occupancy: When an apartment is vacant and without utility services for a period of sixty (60) days an inspection will be needed
as to compliance to this chapter before tenant occupancy can occur. (Ord. 2012-552, 2-21-2012)
9-3-3: ADMINISTRATION AND APPEAL:
The above list is not intended to address every safety issue that may present itself. The inspector at his/her discretion may identify additional safety items
that need to be remedied. Situations may arise that cannot be feasibly remedied to satisfy this list. If at any time an owner or manager thinks that the
inspection requested is excessive or unnecessary he/she may submit the matter to the Rigby board of technical review for appeal. The board of technical
review shall consist of the city police chief, representative from central fire district, and city building official/inspector. The board will then make their
recommendations to the city of Rigby city council. The council will have final say on the matter.
If the owner or manager of an apartment complex has reason to think that alternative technology may satisfy the requirements of any of the life safety
issues, he/she may submit the idea to the city of Rigby building official for review. If the official rejects the alternative, the owner or manager may opt to
submit the matter to the Rigby board of technical review for appeal and/or review. The board will then make their recommendations to the city of Rigby city
council. The council will have final say on the matter.
The inspector will notify the state of Idaho electrical inspector if any electrical problems exist that are out of the inspector's area of expertise. It is our intent
to have only one inspector represent the city of Rigby at the time of inspection and one inspector from the fire department.
All apartments renting must obtain a "permit to rent license" from the city. The city will provide each owner with a checklist which requires compliance to
which the owner will attest his/her compliance. The city may conduct inspections to verify compliance. Where noncompliance is noted, the owner shall
have ninety (90) days to correct the deficiencies. License will not be granted until work is completed satisfactorily according to the plan of compliance, at
which time if owner is not compliant, such premises shall be vacated. All apartment owners in the city of Rigby not seeking a permit to rent license will be
sent notices to provide the city of Rigby clerk with a proposal for compliance within ninety (90) days of such notice. Initial inspections will be scheduled at
this time. (Ord. 2012-552, 2-21-2012)
9-3-4: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or who, having obtained a permit hereunder, wilfully fails to continue to
comply with the conditions set forth in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, may be fined in accordance with state statutes.
Any apartment failing to obtain and pass an annual inspection and permit to rent will have sixty (60) days for corrective action. If not corrected within the
sixty (60) day period, the occupancy permit will be voided and notice to vacate premises issued on the apartment with suspension of utilities services.
(Ord. 2012-552, 2-21-2012)
Title 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
TITLE, PURPOSE, DECLARATION AND INTENT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 130/201
10-1-1: TITLE:
This Ordinance shall be known and entitled as THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF RIGBY, IDAHO, and may be cited and pleaded. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
The zone boundaries and regulations which apply within each of the zones have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan designed to
promote the health, safety, peace, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of Rigby:
A. To promote the orderly growth and development of the City;
B. To promote economy in the cost of fire and police protection and other governmental services;
C. To lessen congestion in the streets and reduce the waste of excessive amounts of streets;
D. To protect the tax base;
E. To foster industry;
F. To protect property values;
G. To avoid undue concentration of population, and prevent the overcrowding of land;
H. To facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewage, schools and other public requirements; and
I. To provide adequate light and air, and foster a wholesome, serviceable and attractive City. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-1-3: DECLARATION:
In establishing the zones, the boundaries thereof, and the regulations applying within each of the zones, due and careful consideration was given among
other things to the suitability of land for particular uses with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land
throughout the City. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-1-4: INTERPRETATION AND INTENT:
It is the intent of the City Council that the regulations and restrictions as set forth in this Title shall be so interpreted and construed as to further the purpose
of this Title and objectives and characteristics of the respective zones. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-1-5: AUTHORITY1:
These zoning regulations are authorized by title 50, chapter 13 and title 67, chapter 65 of the Idaho Code as amended or subsequently codified and article
12, section 2, of the Idaho constitution.
This Title, as prepared, is meant to conform to above and further interpretations may be secured therefrom above and will conform thereto. (Ord. 402, 5-5-
1987)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS AND USAGE:
Words not defined herein shall be given the meaning ordinarily applied to such words. The word "structure" shall include the word "building" and any
construction or obstruction that is more than three feet (3') in height, and the word "lot" shall include the word "plot".
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: A subordinate building or use which is located on the same lot on which the main building or use is situated and which
is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such building or to the main use.
ACREAGE: Any tract or parcel of land which has not been subdivided, or platted.
ALLEY: A street or way shown on the official plat of the Municipality or its additions and designated thereon as an alley.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 131/201
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure, which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a housekeeping unit for
a single family.
AUTO WRECKING OR JUNKYARD: Any place where two (2) or more motor vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof, and land, building or
structure used for wrecking or storing vehicles or farm machinery or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition; and
including the commercial salvaging and scavenging of any other goods, articles, or merchandise.
AUTOMOBILE: A passenger vehicle.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR: General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and
repair of motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: An establishment where automotive fuels and lubricants, accessories and services are sold at retail; however, where
the sale of such is only incidental, the establishment or premises shall be classified as a public garage.
BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground where not more than thirty percent (30%) of its height is above the average level of the adjoining
ground; as measured from the floor level of the basement. A basement shall not be counted as a story for purpose of height measurement.
BILLBOARD: Any structure or portion thereof upon which are placed posters, removable advertising material or paper material pasted in place, designed
to be changed periodically, and making pictures or lettering designed to offer services or merchandise for sale.
This definition does not include any bulletin boards used to display official court or public office notices or church announcements, theater marquees or
signs attached to theater advertising films showing, real estate office signs, with changeable metal or plastic letters, offering property for sale or sign
advertising the sale or lease of the premises on which the sign is located.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel or restaurant, where meals are provided for compensation for four (4) or more persons but not
exceeding twelve (12) persons.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, and designed or intended for the shelter support, enclosure, or protection of
persons, animals, or chattels.
BUILDING AREA: The buildable area of a lot is the space remaining after adherence to the minimum open space requirements of this Title.
BUILDING LINE: For the purpose of this Title, the building line is the same as a front yard setback line.
CARPORT: A structure which is open to the weather on at least two (2) sides, intended for the use of sheltering not more than two (2) motor-driven
vehicles.
CLINIC: A structure containing more than one doctor's office or dentist's office where consultation is conducted and sick or injured persons are given
primary treatment.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Rigby, Idaho.
COURT: An open unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building and bounded on two (2) or more sides by such building.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof, but not an automobile house trailer, designed exclusively for residential occupancy, including hotels, boarding
and lodging houses, which meets the minimum requirements of the Uniform Building Code.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A detached building designed exclusively for occupancy by one family.
DWELLING, ROW: A row of three (3) or more attached one-family dwellings.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling or apartment hotel designed primarily for occupancy by one family for living or sleeping purposes.
FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood or marriage or a group of not more than six (6) living together as a single-housekeeping
unit in a dwelling unit.
FRONTAGE: All property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets, or natural barriers.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building for the storage of not more than three (3) motor vehicles of which not more than one shall be a commercial
vehicle of not more than two (2) ton rating.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building other than a private garage used for the care, repair, or equipment of automobiles, or for vehicles parked or stored for
remuneration, hire or sale.
GUESTHOUSE: A structure for human habitation, containing one or more rooms with a bath and toilet facilities, but not including a kitchen or facilities
which would provide a complete housekeeping unit.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any use customarily conducted entirely within the dwelling, occupying not more than fifty percent (50%) thereof, and carried on by
the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, and which is served by the usual
entrances to the home, and which does not change the character thereof; and provided that no article is sold or offered for sale except such as may be
produced on the premises by members of the immediate family. Clinics, doctor's offices, hospitals, dress shops, millinery shops, real estate offices,
tearooms, tourist homes, sales, servicing or repair of motor vehicles or internal combustion motors, animal hospitals and kennels, among others, shall not
be deemed to be home occupations.
HOSPITAL OR SANITARIUM: An institution open to the public in which sick patients or injured persons are given medical or surgical care; or for the care
of contagious diseases or incurable patients.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 132/201
HOTEL: A building designed for occupancy as the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without meals, in which there
are six (6) or more guest rooms, and in which no provisions are made for cooking in any individual room or suite.
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public or semipublic use.
KENNEL: A lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs are kept, regardless of age, excepting puppies up to six (6) weeks old.
LABORATORY: A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing. Manufacturing of a product or products is not to be permitted within
this definition.
LOADING SPACE: An off-street space or area on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials and which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
LODGING HOUSE: A building where lodging is provided for compensation pursuant to previous arrangement, but not open to the public or transients.
LOT: A parcel or plot of land occupied or suitable for occupancy by one main building or use, with accessory buildings and having its principal frontage
upon a public street or highway.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
LOT, DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a public street.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot the rear of which abuts upon the side of another lot, and which faces a street running at right angles to the alley.
LOT, WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot line.
MAY/SHALL: The word "may" is permissive. "Shall" is mandatory.
MOBILE HOME: A manufactured, relocatable dwelling unit which may not meet the minimum requirements of the Uniform Building Code.
MOBILE HOME COURT: A tract of land retained under one ownership for the purpose of lease or rental of spaces for the placement of mobile homes as
defined in this Title.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A tract of land subdivided according to the rules and regulations of the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Rigby, to
provide for the sale of individual lots for the express purpose of placement of mobile homes.
NONCOMFORMING USE: Any building, structure or land lawfully occupied by a use or lawfully situated which does not conform to the regulations of this
Title.
NURSING HOME OR REST HOME: A private hospital for the care of children, the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering physical or mental
disorders, but not including facilities for the treatment of sickness or injuries or for surgical care.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE: An open area for the parking of privately owned automobiles and not for public use.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: An open area, other than a street, used for the temporary parking of more than four (4) automobiles and available for public
use whether free, for compensation or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE: An area, enclosed or unenclosed, which has adequate access to public street or alley, sufficient in size to store one automobile.
PORCH: A roofed entrance to a building, projecting out from the wall or walls of the main structure and commonly open in part to the weather.
RESIDENCE: See definition of Dwelling and Dwelling Unit.
SHALL/MAY: The word "shall" is mandatory. "May" is permissive.
SIGNS, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING: A sign of any type or material, installed any place for outdoor advertising purposes.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of the floor next above it or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor
and the ceiling next above.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls,
columns, beams or girders. Structural alteration shall not include interior or exterior decorating or redecorating.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, either on the ground or on something having location on the ground, fences, hedges, four feet (4') above
the established grade shall be regarded as structures.
TERRACE, OPEN: A level and rather narrow plain or platform, which for purposes of this Title, is located adjacent to one or more faces of the main
structure and which is constructed not more than four feet (4') in height above the average of the adjoining ground.
TOURIST COURT: A group of attached or detached buildings, including auto courts, motels or motor lodges, containing individual sleeping or living units,
designed for or used by tourists or transients, with garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit.
TOURIST HOME: A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests.
TRAILER: A vehicle without motive power, designed to be moved by another motor vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 133/201
TRAILER CAMP, AUTOMOBILE: Any premises occupied or designed to accommodate more than one automobile house trailer.
TRAVEL TRAILER: Shall mean and include all living accommodation units which are capable of unrestricted highway use, and not placed upon any
foundation. The term shall include, but not be limited to, travel trailer, motor home units, campers mounted on automotive vehicles and camping tents.
TRAVEL TRAILER COURT: A tract of land retained in one ownership, for the purpose of rental of spaces for temporary placement of travel trailers, as
defined in this Title.
USE: The purpose for which land or a building is intended, designed, arranged or maintained.
YARD: An open space unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, on the same lot with a main building.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building.
YARD, SIDE: That part of the yard lying between the main building and a side lot line, and extending from the required front yard (or from the front lot line,
if there is no required front yard) to the required rear yard.
ZONE: A section or sections of the incorporated area of the City for which the regulations and provisions governing the use of buildings and land use
uniform for each class of use permitted therein. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
Chapter 3
AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
10-3-1: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
A. Planning Commission: It is hereby provided that the city planning commission shall also function as, and members thereof shall serve as, the zoning
commission of the city.
B. Board/Council: Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practices require, the board/council may, by ordinance
after receipt of recommendation thereon from the commission and subject to procedures provided by law, amend, supplement, change or repeal the
regulations, restrictions and boundaries or classification of property. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-3-2: INITIATION OF ZONING AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to this title may be initiated in one of the following ways:
A. By adoption of a motion by the commission;
B. By adoption of a motion by the board/council; and
C. By the filing of an application by a property owner or a person who has existing interest in property within the area proposed to be changed or affected
by said amendment. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-3-3: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
Applications for amendments to the official zone map adopted as part of this title shall contain at least the following information:
A. Name, address and phone number of applicant;
B. Proposed amending ordinance, approved as to form by the board/council;
C. Present land use;
D. Present zoning district;
E. Proposed use;
F. Proposed zoning district;
G. A vicinity map at a scale approved by the administrator showing property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning and such other items as
the administrator may require;
H. A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land considered;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 134/201
I. A statement on how the proposed amendment relates to the comprehensive plan, availability of public facilities and compatibility with the surrounding
area; and
J. A fee as established by board/council. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-3-4: REQUEST TO COMMISSION:
Zoning districts shall be amended in the following manner:
A. Requests for an amendment to the zoning ordinance shall be submitted to the commission which shall evaluate the request to determine the extent and
nature of the amendment requested;
B. If the request is in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan, the commission may recommend and the board/council may adopt or reject the
ordinance amendment under the notice and hearing procedures as herein provided; and
C. If the request is not in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan, the request shall be submitted to the planning or planning and zoning
commission or, in its absence, the board/council, which shall recommend and the board/council may adopt or reject an amendment to the
comprehensive plan under the notice and hearing procedure provided in section 67-6509, Idaho Code. After the comprehensive plan has been
amended, the zoning ordinance may then be amended as hereinafter provided for. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-3-5: PUBLIC HEARING:
The commission shall hold a public hearing and make recommendations on proposed zoning amendments. Zoning amendments may consist of text or
map revisions.
A. Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment: The commission, prior to recommending a zoning ordinance text amendment to the board/council shall conduct at
least one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of time
and place and the amendment shall be published in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the jurisdiction. Following the
commission's hearing, if the commission makes a material change from what was presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be
provided before the commission forwards the amendment with its recommendation to the board/council.
B. Zoning Ordinance Map Amendment: The commission, prior to recommending a zoning ordinance map amendment that is in accordance with the
comprehensive plan to the board/council shall conduct at least one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. At
least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of time and place and the amendment shall be published in the official newspaper or paper of general
circulation within the jurisdiction.
Additional notice shall be provided by mail to property owners and residents within the land being considered; three hundred feet (300') of the external
boundaries of the land being considered; and any additional area that may be impacted by the proposed change as determined by the commission.
When notice is required to two hundred feet (200') or more property owners or residents, in lieu of the mail notification three (3) notices in the official
newspaper or paper of general circulation is sufficient, provided that, the third notice appears ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. Following the
commission's hearing if the commission makes a material change from what was presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall be
provided before the commission forwards the amendment with its recommendation to the board/council. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-3-6: RECOMMENDATION BY COMMISSION:
Within sixty (60) days from the receipt of the proposed amendment, the commission shall transmit its recommendation to the board/council. The
commission may recommend that the amendment be granted as requested, or it may recommend a modification of the amendment requested, or it may
recommend that the amendment be denied. The commission shall ensure that any favorable recommendations for amendments are in accordance with
the comprehensive plan and established goals and objectives. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-3-7: ACTION BY BOARD/COUNCIL:
The board/council, prior to adopting, revising or rejecting the amendment to the zoning ordinance as recommended by the commission shall conduct at
least one public hearing using the same notice and hearing procedures as the commission. Following the board/council hearing, if the board/council
makes a material change from what was presented at the public hearing, further notice hearing shall be provided before the board/council adopts the
amendment.
The board/council shall accept the recommendation of the commission's report unless rejected by a vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members.
Upon granting or denying an application to amend the zoning ordinance, the board/council shall specify:
A. The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
B. The reasons for approval or denial; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 135/201
C. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a permit.
In the event the board/council shall approve an amendment, such amendment shall thereafter be made a part of this title upon the preparation and
passage of an ordinance. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-3-8: RESUBMISSION OF APPLICATION:
No application for a reclassification of any property which has been denied by the board/council shall be resubmitted in either substantially the same form
or with reference to substantially the same premises for the same purposes within a period of one year from the date of such final action; unless there is
an amendment in the comprehensive plan which resulted from a change in conditions as applying to the specific property under consideration. (Ord. 402,
5-5-1987)
10-3-9: ZONING UPON ANNEXATION:
Prior to annexation of an unincorporated area, the council shall request and receive a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission, or the
planning commission and the zoning commission, on the proposed comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance changes for the unincorporated area. Each
commission and the city council shall follow the notice and hearing procedures provided in chapter 10 of this title. Concurrently or immediately following
the adoption of an ordinance of annexation, the council shall amend the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-3-10: VARIANCES:
When it is made to appear by application to the zoning commission and when it is recommended by said zoning commission after a public hearing
preceded by fifteen (15) days' public notice in the official newspaper, the city council may grant a variance from any provision or provisions of this title
providing it is made to appear at such hearing, by clear and convincing evidence, that strict application of the provisions and restrictions of this title would
work an extreme hardship and a unique hardship upon a particular property owner or upon particular property owners. Whenever a hearing is held upon
the application for a variance, a record shall be kept and transcribed of the same and all expenses of said hearing, including costs of transcript and notice,
shall be borne by the applicant. It is further provided that a variance may be granted only upon a clear showing that there will not be a detrimental effect by
granting said variance upon the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the community and only upon a clear showing that the purpose and intent of
this title will be preserved insofar as possible without resulting in an unnecessary and unreasonable hardship upon the particular property owner petitioning
for said variance. It is further provided that when a variance is granted, it must be shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the hardship, relied
upon in said petition for a variance, is related primarily to the particular property for which the variance is desired as distinguished from conditions which
create hardships of similar nature to all property owners in the respective zone. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-3-11: FEES:
A. Effective October 1, 2002, a fee in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for requests for special use, variance, ordinance change or any other
administrative decision requiring hearing, or for such additional costs which may be incurred.
B. The two hundred dollar ($200.00) fee shall be used to pay for the following costs: mailing, copying, posting, advertising and associated labor.
C. The fee may be modified by resolution of the city council subject to the limitations of law. (Ord. 501, 10-1-2002)
Chapter 4
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
10-4-1: ZONES ENUMERATED:
A. In order to accomplish more fully the objectives and purposes of this title, Rigby, Idaho, is hereby divided into zones which shall be known by the
symbols and names as follows:
RP Residence park zone
R-1 Residence zone - single-family dwellings
R-2 Residence zone - multi-family dwellings
C Commercial zone
I Industrial zone
RMH Residential mobile home zone
(Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-4-2: ZONING MAP:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 136/201
A. The location and boundaries of each of the zones shall be detailed on a map to be entitled, "Official Zone Map Of Rigby, Idaho", and said map with all
notations, references and other information shown thereon is hereby declared to be an official record and a part of this title.
B. The official zone map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and shall bear the seal of the city under the following
words:
I hereby certify that this is the Official Zone Map of Rigby, Idaho, which was adopted by the City Council of the said City on this day of , 20 .
C. The official zone map shall be located in the office of the city clerk and shall accurately designate the current boundary lines of the several zones within
Rigby, Idaho.
D. Whenever amendments are made in zone boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zone map, said official zone map shall be promptly
changed by the zoning administrator.
E. Any area annexed to the municipality shall, upon annexation be automatically zoned residence R-1 until otherwise zoned.
F. No amendment to the official zone map shall become effective, however, until the map has been duly changed in accordance with an amending
ordinance, and the amending ordinance has been signed by the mayor and attested to by the city clerk. In the event of a conflict between this or an
amending ordinance and the zone map, this or an amending ordinance shall govern. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-4-3: DETERMINATION OF BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of various zones, the following rules shall apply:
A. Where the intended boundaries on the zone map are approximately street or alley lines, said street or alleys shall be construed to be the zone
boundaries.
B. Where the indicated boundaries are approximately lot lines, said lot lines shall be construed to be the zone boundaries, unless otherwise indicated.
C. Where land has not been subdivided into lots, the zone boundary shall be determined by the use of a scale of measurement shown on the map.
D. Where other uncertainty exists, the zoning commission shall interpret the map, subject to review by the city council. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-4-4: IMPACT MAP AND AREAS:
The impact map is on file in the city clerk's office. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
Chapter 5
REGULATIONS WITHIN ZONES
10-5-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. All streets, alleys, and railroad rights of way, not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately
abutting upon such alleys, streets or railroad rights of way. Where the center lines of a street or alley serve as a district boundary, the zoning of such
street or alley to the center line unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be that of the abutting property.
B. No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used for any
purpose other than is permitted in the district in which the building or land is located.
C. No required yard or other open space around an existing building or which is hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying with
provisions of this Title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, nor shall any other building, nor shall any yard or
any other required open space on an adjoining lot to be considered as providing the yard or open space whereon a building is to be created or
established.
D. The minimum yards or other open spaces, including lot areas per family required by this Title for each and every building existing or for any building
hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as yard or open space requirements for any other building.
E. Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to provide dwelling units shall be located on a "lot" as herein defined and in no case shall there
be more than one such building in one lot unless otherwise provided in this Title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 137/201
F. Any separate lot, the title of which was of record at the time of the adoption of this Title, that does not meet the requirements of this Title for yards, courts
or other area of open space, may be utilized for single residence purposes; provided, the requirements for such yard or court or net area, width, depth,
or open space is within sixty percent (60%) of that required by this Title, if this variance is approved by the City Council. The purpose of this provision is
to permit utilization of recorded lots which lack adequate width or depth as long as reasonable living standards can be provided.
G. No building shall be constructed upon a lot or parcel of land which does not abut upon a public street unless a variance of this provision be granted by
action of the City Council.
H. No wall, fence, or shrubbery shall unreasonably obstruct or interfere with traffic visibility.
I. No residential structure shall be erected upon the rear of a lot with another dwelling, except that there may be constructed a guesthouse (without
kitchen) or rooms for guests within an accessory building; provided such facilities are used for the occasional housing of guests of the occupants of the
main structure and not for permanent occupancy by others.
J. An area indicated on the Official Zone Map or other records as a public park, or recreation area, public utility area, cemetery, public school site, or
semipublic open space, shall not be used for any other purpose and when the use of the area is discontinued, it shall automatically be zoned
"Residence" (R-1) until otherwise zoned. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
ARTICLE A. RP RESIDENCE PARK ZONE
10-5A-1: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
A. The objective in establishing the RP Residence Park Zone is to encourage the creation and maintenance of residential areas within the City which is
characterized by large lots at least fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet on which single-family dwellings are situated, surrounded by well-kept lawns,
trees and other plantings. A minimum of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and quiet residential conditions favorable to family living and the rearing of
children shall also be characteristic of this Zone.
B. In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this Title, and to promote the characteristics of this Zone, the following regulations shall apply in
the RP Residence Park Zone. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-5A-2: USE REQUIREMENTS:
The following uses shall be permitted in the RP Residence Park Zone:
Agriculture and gardening.
Churches, by special permit of the City Council to be considered subsequent to recommendation of the Planning Commission provided adequate off-street
parking is provided.
Customary household pets, including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, and canaries; but not including the breeding of dogs.
Fences, walls and hedges.
One-family dwellings and the following accessory buildings and structures: a) private garage and/or carport for the storage of automobiles owned by
persons residing on the premises; b) greenhouses for private use only; c) private swimming pools; d) pergolas and arbors. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-5A-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Area Requirements: An area of not less than fifteen thousand feet (15,000') shall be provided and maintained for each one-family dwelling and uses
accessory thereto.
B. Width Requirements: The minimum width of any building site for a dwelling shall be one hundred (100) linear feet.
C. Setback: All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty feet (30') from any public street, except as herein provided and required under the
provisions of this Title.
D. Side Yard: There shall be a side yard on each side of a building of not less than twenty feet (20').
E. Height Of Buildings: No building shall be erected to a height of greater than two (2) stories. Roofs above the square of the building, chimneys, flagpoles,
television antennas and similar structures not used for human occupancy, are excluded in determining height. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
ARTICLE B. R-1 RESIDENCE ZONE
10-5B-1: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 138/201
The objective in establishing the R-1 residence zone is to provide a residential environment within the city which is denser residential environment than is
characteristic of the RP residence park zone. Also characteristic of this zone are residential amenities adequate to maintain desirable residential
neighborhoods. The principal permitted uses in the R-1 residence zone shall be one-family dwellings and certain other public facilities which are necessary
to promote and maintain stable residential neighborhoods.
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to promote the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall
apply in the R-1 residence zone. (Ord. 486, 1-2-2001)
10-5B-2: USE REQUIREMENTS:
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 residence zone:
Any use permitted in the RP residence zone.
Colleges.
Condominium projects as defined by Idaho Code, title 55, chapter 15, by special permit of the city council to be considered subsequent to recommendation
of the zoning commission, providing aesthetic and environmental qualities and other characteristics of said project substantially conforming to the
provisions of this title and providing notice is given to all property owners adjoining any such project and a public hearing is held after reasonable notice if
requested in writing by any adjoining property owner.
Elementary schools, public or private by special permit of the city council to be considered subsequent to recommendation of the zoning commission;
providing adequate off street parking is provided, and adequate playgrounds are provided.
Home occupations.
Libraries.
Parks and playgrounds.
Private garages or carports appurtenant to a residence or duplex as set forth herein.
Single-family dwelling units (dwelling, one-family) with a minimum floor space, excluding the basement. (Ord. 486, 1-2-2001)
10-5B-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Setback: In R-1 residence zone, every building hereafter erected shall have a setback of at least twenty feet (20') from the street property line on which
the building fronts, five feet (5') to an interior lot line, and ten feet (10') to the rear lot line. For purposes of these restrictions, eaves, steps and open
porches shall be considered as a part of the building in determining setback from interior and rear lot lines, but they shall not be considered part of the
building in determining the setback from the street property line, providing they are open on three (3) sides and do not project over four feet (4') from
the main structure.
When any building is structurally altered, the owner thereof may have the option of complying with the setback requirements of this title or he may
maintain the same setbacks existing before the alteration so long as he complies with the other provisions of this title.
B. Lot Area And Width: No dwelling shall be erected or placed on any lot having a width of less than fifty five feet (55') at the minimum building setback
line, nor shall any dwelling be erected or placed on any lot having an area of less than five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet.
C. Height Restriction: No building shall exceed two (2) stories in height. (Ord. 486, 1-2-2001)
ARTICLE C. R-2 RESIDENCE ZONE
10-5C-1: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
The objective in establishing the R-2 residence zone is to encourage the creation and maintenance of residential areas within the city which are
characterized by smaller dwellings, somewhat more compact and denser residential developments, and somewhat higher volumes of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic than are characteristic of the RP and R-1 zones.
The principal permitted uses in the R-2 residence zone shall be family dwellings, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, and certain other public facilities which
are necessary to promote and maintain stable residential areas.
In order to accomplish the objective and purposes of this title and to promote the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply
in the R-2 residence zone. (Ord. 2013-560, 5-7-2013)
10-5C-2: USE REQUIREMENTS:
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2 residence zone:
Any use permitted in the R-1 residence zone.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 139/201
Accessory buildings, including carports, private garages, storage facilities and children's playhouses.
Apartment houses, not exceeding four (4) family units.
Church, by special use permit; providing adequate off street parking is provided.
Colleges, by special use permit; providing adequate off street parking spaces are provided.
Community center, dance/theater studio, wedding/reception center, by special use permit; providing adequate off street parking spaces are provided.
Condominium, as defined by Idaho Code, title 55, chapter 15, by special use permit.
Home occupations.
Libraries, museums, armories, courthouse, fire station, public swimming pool or public tennis court, by special use permit; providing adequate off street
parking spaces are provided.
Lodging houses, boarding or rooming, by special use permit; providing adequate off street parking spaces are provided.
Nursing homes, residential care facilities, by special use permit; providing adequate off street parking spaces are provided.
Parks, playgrounds and other public recreational facilities.
Private garages or carports appurtenant to a residence or an apartment.
Schools, public or private, by special use permit of the city council to be considered subsequent to recommendation of the planning commission; providing
adequate off street parking and playgrounds are provided.
Two-, three- and four-family dwellings. (Ord. 2013-560, 5-7-2013)
10-5C-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The design standards are intended to ensure compatibility with the neighborhood, high quality design, and consistency of architectural style, softening of
the appearance of mass and bulk, variety and creativity in design solutions, and integration with the natural features of the landscape.
A. Lot Size And Width:
1. One-family dwelling: Minimum four thousand (4,000) square feet.
2. Two-family dwelling: Minimum five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet. Only one building/structure permitted per lot unless otherwise
approved by special use permit (SUP).
3. Multi-family dwelling: Minimum five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet for the first two (2) family units plus one thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet for each additional unit to a maximum of four (4) units per structure. Only one building/structure permitted per lot unless otherwise
approved by special use permit (SUP).
4. No dwelling shall be erected or placed on any lot having a width of less than fifty feet (50').
B. Setback: Multi-family dwellings shall be considered as one building for the purpose of determining front, side and rear yard requirements. For purpose
of this restriction, eaves, steps, and open porches shall be considered as part of the building in the determination. In R-2 residence zone every building
hereafter erected shall have a setback of at least:
1. Front: Twenty feet (20').
Side streets and private ingress/egress easements: Twenty feet (20').
Interior: Five feet (5').
Rear: Ten feet (10').
2. Multi-family structures shall have varied setbacks within the same structure and staggered and/or reversed unit plans to provide a more varied
outward appearance of the structures.
3. Multi-family structures adjacent to existing R-1 zoned districts shall not exceed single-story height along the exterior perimeter of the development,
unless setbacks are greater than fifty feet (50').
C. Height Restriction: No building shall exceed three (3) stories in height.
D. Vehicular Access, Internal Circulation And Parking Requirements: All internal and external streets shall be constructed in accordance with approved
public works department street standards, including sidewalks, road construction and at a minimum of sixty eight feet (68') road right of way width,
including forty eight feet (48') of driving surface, sidewalks in accordance with section 11-5-10 of this code and a three foot (3') buffer/landscape strip.
1. All driving aisles and parking areas for two-dwelling and multi-dwelling unit buildings shall be paved with concrete or asphalt in accordance with
standards approved by the public works department.
2. The site plan shall provide for safe access to and egress from roadways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 140/201
3. Off street parking areas shall be designed to preclude vehicles from backing out into a roadway. On street parking is prohibited.
4. Parking areas shall be located either to the side or behind the principal building(s) not within the front yard setback area. Minimum parking
requirements must meet subsection 10-6-4A of this title.
5. All internal roadways and drives shall be paved and chip sealed by owner in accordance with city standards.
a. All road rights of way shall be no less than sixty eight feet (68') width with a three foot (3') buffer/landscape strip between the street pavement and
the sidewalk to accommodate snow storage.
b. No entrance or exit shall be located closer than one hundred feet (100') to any intersection of a public street.
c. The minimum driveway aisle width of unobstructed pavement shall be:
(1) Two-way traffic: Twenty five feet (25').
(2) One-way traffic: Sixteen feet (16').
6. Clear vision areas shall be provided at all roadway and driveway intersections, as defined by subsection 10-9-2A of this title.
7. A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be required in accordance with section 10-6-4 of this title. A minimum of one parking space per dwelling
unit must be covered by a private garage or carport. Asphalt or concrete pad area located in front of a garage or carport or between the building
structure and sidewalk/ROW does not count toward the minimum parking requirements.
8. Visitor parking spaces shall be provided in addition to the minimum parking requirements in subsection 10-6-4A of this title at a minimum of:
a. One bedroom dwelling unit: 0.50 per dwelling unit.
b. Two (2) bedroom dwelling unit: 0.75 per dwelling unit.
c. Three (3) or more bedroom dwelling unit: One per dwelling unit.
Note: All parking space calculations shall be mathematically rounded up.
9. Parking areas shall be landscaped and maintained for aesthetic purposes. All landscaped areas shall be maintained according to subsection 10-5C-
3G of this article.
E. Trash Enclosures: Sight obscuring screening shall be provided for all garbage and trash collection areas, outdoor storage and parking lots abutting a
low density residential development.
1. Such screening shall be six feet (6') in height, and shall consist of a wall of brick, stone, or other substantial material, or a densely planted evergreen
hedge.
2. All fences, walls, hedges, or landscape materials must comply with fencing regulations in chapter 9 of this title.
F. Open Space: A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the total gross area shall be required for dedicated open space for all multi-family developments.
1. Area must be designed in a manner that residents can use as open area, such as lawn, patio, playground equipment, etc. Streets, access drives and
parking lots shall not be considered open space.
2. The design and orientation of common open spaces should take advantage of available sunlight and should be sheltered from the noise and traffic of
adjacent streets or other incompatible uses.
3. Children's play areas should be visible from as many dwelling units as possible.
4. Boundaries between common and private open space should be clearly defined by elements such as low walls, fences and/or landscaping.
G. Landscaping Buffering Requirements: Where the boundaries of a multi-family development abut any other residential zoning district, a landscape buffer
shall be provided to screen the view of the R-2 development from the abutting residential zone district or use. Such landscape buffer shall provide four
(4) season screening and shall consist of plant materials (such as grasses, shrubs, vines, trees and ground covers), fencing or a combination of plant
materials and fencing.
1. All trees shall be a minimum of four feet (4') in height at the time of planting with a spacing of no more than fifty feet (50').
2. Landscape plantings should consist of at least two (2) different varieties and types in order to create a more unified rather than fragmented
landscape.
3. Landscaping should be protected from vehicular and pedestrian encroachment by raised planting surfaces and the use of curbs. Concrete step
areas should be provided in landscape planters adjacent to parking spaces. Landscaping shall not cause any vision impairment to vehicular traffic.
4. Gravel, bark, astroturf, concrete, or similar materials are not allowed as a substitute for plant materials.
5. Landscaping shall emphasize water efficient plants. Trees shall be located at least five feet (5') from a utility pole, fire hydrant, driveway, crosswalk,
or utility easement and at least twenty feet (20') from an overhead streetlight.
6. Automatic sprinkler controllers shall be installed to ensure that landscaped areas will be watered properly. Backflow preventers and antisiphon
valves shall be provided in accordance with current codes. All irrigation systems should be designed to reduce vandalism by placing controls in
appropriate enclosures.
H. Pedestrian Circulation: Multi-family projects should incorporate pedestrian connections to adjoining residential or commercial areas and other
compatible land use facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 141/201
1. Pedestrian paths should be provided to link dwelling units with common open space areas, parking areas and the street. Curvilinear paths provide a
more inviting and interesting experience and are generally preferred over long, straight alignments, paths which traverse common open space areas
are encouraged.
2. Pedestrian paths should be safe, visually attractive, and well defined by landscaping and lights, use of decorative pavement is encouraged. At a
minimum, decorative paving should be used to delineate crossings at driving aisles, curbs, gutters and a minimum five foot (5') wide sidewalk and
shall meet ADA accessibility standards.
3. In areas where undeveloped lots are adjacent to already established lots, the sidewalks need to be constructed to conform to adjacent uses
regardless of width standards mentioned in this title.
Maintaining aesthetic compatibility will take precedence.
I. Mailboxes: Clustered mailboxes shall be provided, consistent with the location and additional criteria set forth by the postmaster and are uniform in style.
J. Water And Sewer: Each building shall have separate water and sewer connections. Connection fees will be charged at time of building permit request.
Fees set according to resolution by city council. Multi-family dwellings intended to be sold individually must have a separate water and sewer
connection for each dwelling unit and all connection fees must be paid according to the number of connections needed. If owner originally builds all
units to be serviced by one connection and then decides to separate the dwelling unit connections at a later date, the owner must pay at his expense
all new connection fees at the current rate approved by resolution, the expense of installing new meters, lines and all other infrastructure needed to
accomplish the new connections. (Ord. 2013-560, 5-7-2013)
ARTICLE D. C COMMERCIAL ZONE
10-5D-1: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
A. The objective in establishing the C Commercial Zone is to create and maintain a dominant shopping and financial center of the City and surrounding
territory. For this reason the Zone has been located in the central part of the City where the street pattern makes the business buildings readily
accessible to all parts of the City and surrounding region, and where business and shopping activities can be carried on with maximum convenience.
The CC-1 Central Commercial Zone is characterized by clean, well-lighted streets, ample pedestrianways and vehicular parking lots for the
convenience and safety of the public. Attractive, inviting, and well-maintained shops, stores, offices and other buildings are also characteristic of this
Zone.
1. In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this Title and to promote the characteristics of this Zone, the following uses shall be permitted
in the C Commercial Zone:
Automobile service stations.
Bakeries.
Banks.
Barbershops and beauty parlors.
Books or stationery stores.
Business, music, dance, or commercial schools.
Drugstores.
Dry-cleaning and dyeing establishments using carbon tetrachloride or other nonflammable cleaning agents, by special permit of the Zoning
Commission.
Electrical appliances and repair shops.
Florist shops and greenhouses for retail trade only.
Frozen food lockers by special permit of the Zoning Commission.
Grocery, fruit or vegetable stores.
Hardware stores.
Hotels.
Launderettes and laundromats.
Meatmarket or poultry stores, if no slaughter or stripping is involved.
Motels.
Offices.
Pet shops or animal hospitals when conducted wholly within an enclosed building; by special permit of the Zoning Commission.
Photographer's or artist's studios.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 142/201
Professional or service offices.
Radio and television sales and service.
Restaurants.
Retail stores and service, but express excluding those uses listed in I Industrial Zone.
Shoe repair shops.
Signs, outdoor advertising, but excluding billboards.
Tailor and dressmaking shops.
Telephone exchange buildings.
Temporary buildings incidental only to construction of permitted use.
Tourist homes.
Undertaking establishments.
Uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses and accessory buildings when located on the same lot.
2. Additional uses permitted:
Agricultural, implement sales and service.
Air-conditioning and heating sales and service.
Auction rooms.
Auditoriums.
Automobile sales and service shops.
Battery and tire service shops.
Beverage distributors, but not including bottling plants.
Billboards.
Billiard and poolrooms.
Bookbindery and print shops.
Catering establishments.
Dance halls.
Department, furniture and home appliance stores.
Employment agencies.
Express baggage and transfer delivery service.
Garages for public storage.
Laboratories.
Laundries by special permit of the Zoning Commission.
Light manufacturing or processing which is clearly incidental to retail use is permitted. Such manufacturing or processing is limited to that which
employs not more than ten (10) persons in the manufacturing or processing.
Light manufacturing, which is not dangerous or offensive on account of dust, gas, or excessive noise.
Mobile home courts, complying with requirements of RMH Zone.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Painting shops, decorating shops, and building supply centers.
Plumbing, heating and roofing supply and workshops by special permit of the Zoning Commission.
Printing, publishing and issuing of newspapers, periodicals, books and other reading matter.
Printing shops.
Radio broadcasting stations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 143/201
Recreation places.
Taverns or retail sale of alcoholic liquors, subject to the regulations of other provisions of this Title.
Taxi service stations.
Telegraph service stations.
Theaters, indoor.
Trailer sales.
Wholesale establishment, excluding a building the principal use of which is for a storage warehouse.
Woodworking and carpenter shops. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-5D-2: CONDITIONAL USES:
Automobile or trailer sales lots may be permitted whenever such use is specifically authorized by the special permit of the City Council, which may be
issued subsequent to recommendation of the Zoning Commission. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-5D-3: YARD AREAS:
No front or side yards shall be required except when a building or group of buildings abuts upon a residential zone a yard having a width of not less than
ten feet (10'). There shall be a yard with a depth of not less than fifteen feet (15') when abutting upon public thoroughfare and not less than twenty feet
(20') when no dedicated alley or public way exists at the rear of the lot. The rear yard may be used for off-street parking and loading as provided in this
Title. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
ARTICLE E. I INDUSTRIAL ZONE
10-5E-1: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
A. The I Industrial Zone has been established as a district in which the primary use of the land is for manufacturing, fabricating, processing and
warehousing establishments. This Zone is characterized by relatively flat land peculiarly suited for industrial use. While much of the land within this
Zone is currently devoted to agriculture and other open land uses, it is intended that manufacturing and industrial uses shall be directed into this Zone
as the needs arise.
B. Representative of the uses within this Zone are manufacturing and fabrication and processing, storage, warehousing and wholesale distribution and
railroad trackage, switchyards and terminal facilities. The objective in establishing the I and M-1 Zones are:
1. To provide space for manufacturing and industrial uses within the City in appropriate locations and to discourage uses which tend to thwart the use
of land for industrial purpose from locating within this Zone.
2. To encourage the expansion of industrial establishments already existing within the Zone.
3. To encourage new industry to locate within the Zone to the end that the economic well-being of the City and its inhabitants shall be enhanced
thereby.
4. To prevent the encroachment of industrial uses into nonindustrial zones.
5. To prevent the commingling of incompatible uses and the attending depreciation of property values and the unwholesome social conditions resulting
therefrom.
In order to accomplish the objective and purposes of this Title, and to encourage the most appropriate use of land within this Zone.
C. The following uses shall be permitted in the I Industrial Zone:
Automobile painting, upholstering, repairing, reconditioning and body and fender work. Auto wrecking establishments, not including burning; only by
special permit of the City Council.
Bakeries, wholesale.
Beverage bottling and distributing stations.
Blacksmith shops.
Building equipment, building materials, lumber, coal, sand and gravel yards, and yards for contracting equipment, maintenance or operating equipment
of public agencies or public utilities, or materials or equipment of similar nature.
Busline shops and garages.
Canvas goods fabrication.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 144/201
Carpet and rug cleaners.
Carting, express hauling or storage yards.
Cement block manufacture.
Chick hatcheries.
Cleaning and dyeing establishments.
Clothing and dress manufacturing.
Creameries.
Drapery and bedding manufacturing.
Electrical appliance and electronic instrument assembly.
Food processing and dehydrating for human consumption, but not including the processing of sauerkraut, fish products, gelatin, sausage casings from
animal products, starch, dextrine, glucose, sugar, vinegar, yeast and the rendering or refining of fats and oils.
Furniture manufacturing and upholstering.
Grain elevators and flour mills.
Greenhouses, wholesale growers.
Heating and sheet-metal fabrications.
Ice cream and ice manufacturing.
Laundries.
Machine shops and metal products manufacturing, when not equipped with heavy punch presses, drop forges, screw machines, riveting machines or
other equipment which may create vibrations or noise disturbing adjacent property occupants.
Manufacturing.
Plastic products manufacturing, but not including the processing of the raw materials.
Poultry and eggs processing plants.
Public utility electric substations and distribution centers, gas regulation centers and underground gas holder stations.
Stones, marble and granite grinding and cutting.
Storage and sale of automobiles, trailers, farm implement and equipment and other similar equipment on an open lot.
Storage and warehouses.
Storage of flammable liquids, fats or oils in tanks, each of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or less capacity, but only after the location and protective
measure have been approved by local governing officials.
Storage of household goods.
Tool and die shops.
Truck or bus storage yards or truck terminals.
Upholstering.
Window shade manufacturing.
The manufacturing establishments that can be operated without creating objectionable noise, odor, dust, smoke, gas, fumes or vapor and that has a
use compatible with the use and occupancy of adjoining properties.
No residences are permitted except a caretakers residence. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
ARTICLE F. RMH RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME ZONE
10-5F-1: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
The objective in establishing the RMH Residential Mobile Home Zone is to provide an environment within the City which is characterized by the somewhat
denser residential environment than is characteristic of the other residential zones. A mobile home subdivision, mobile home court, or travel trailer court
are special residential facilities specifically designed to accommodate mobile homes or other movable dwellings which do not conform to the requirements
for permanent location within the City, and to do so in a manner that will provide a living environment of sustained desirability for the occupants, and which
will protect the integrity and characteristics of the area surrounding the RMH Residential Mobile Home Zone. It is the intent of the travel trailer provisions to
provide safe, sanitary, and attractive facilities for the tourist to park a travel trailer or camper while visiting the City. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 145/201
10-5F-2: USE REQUIREMENTS:
A. The following uses shall be permitted in the RMH Residential Mobile Home Zone:
Any use permitted in the R-1 Residence Zone except residences as defined by this Title.
Mobile home courts when approved by the Planning Commission and Council as required by this Article.
Mobile home subdivisions when approved by the Planning Commission and Council as required by this Article.
Travel trailer courts when approved by the Planning Commission and Council as required by this Article.
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate or maintain a mobile home or travel trailer on any lot in the City and to use the same for human habitation,
except as follows:
1. A mobile home may be located in a mobile home court or in an approved mobile home subdivision.
2. A travel trailer may be located in a travel trailer court. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-5F-3: CONSTRUCTION:
Any portion of, or appendage, or any habitation, shelter, cabana, add-on or storage facility as permitted herein shall conform with the requirements of this
Title and the Uniform Building Code, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. No person shall construct a habitation, shelter, cabana, add-on or storage
facility without first obtaining a permit from the Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-5F-4: DIVISIONS OF ZONE:
10-5F-4-1: MOBILE HOME COURTS, APPROVAL OF PLANS AND DOCUMENTS:
Any person wishing to construct a mobile home court shall obtain from the Zoning Administrator, information pertaining to the City's plan of land use,
streets, public facilities, zoning and subdivision ordinances, and other requirements affecting the land within the development. Before any permit can be
issued for any construction connected with a mobile home court, the preliminary plans, required documents pertaining to the development, and the final
plan shall have been approved as hereinafter set forth.
A. Preliminary Plans And Documents: The preliminary plan and documents shall be prepared and submitted as follows:
1. Plan Requirements: Six (6) copies of the preliminary plan must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator at least two (2) weeks prior to the meeting
of the Planning Commission at which the plan will be considered. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals
one hundred feet (1" = 100'), or as recommended by the Zoning Administrator, and shall show the following information:
a. The topography represented by contours shown at no greater intervals than two feet (2') when required by the Zoning Administrator.
b. The proposed street and mobile home court layout.
c. Proposed reservations for parks, playgrounds and open spaces.
d. Size and character of recreation buildings and other structures associated with land and facilities to be used by the mobile home occupants.
e. Layout of typical trailer space.
f. Tabulations showing:
(1) Area of land within the mobile home court.
(2) Number of mobile homes permitted.
(3) Number of mobile home spaces provided for in the mobile home court.
(4) Percent of area to be devoted to parks and playgrounds.
(5) Number of off-street parking spaces.
g. Proposed location of off-street parking spaces.
h. Generalized landscape planting plan.
i. Location of existing and proposed utility lines and easements, water and sewer lines, fire hydrants, storm drains and facilities, curbs and other
improvements.
j. Draft of proposed documents including:
(1) Management policies, covenants and restrictions.
(2) Maintenance agreement.
k. Typical street cross sections.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 146/201
l. Any other data that the Planning Commission may require.
2. Standards And Requirements: The development of a mobile home court shall conform to the following standards and requirements:
a. The area shall be in one ownership and shall remain in one ownership and the same shall not be subdivided.
b. The final development plan must be prepared by an engineer or architect licensed to practice in the State of Idaho.
c. The initial site size for a mobile home court shall provide space for a minimum of five (5) mobile homes and such additional area as may be
necessary to meet the requirements of this Title.
d. The mobile homes may be clustered, provided that the gross density of mobile home units within the development does not exceed seven (7) units
per acre.
e. The land area not contained in individual lots, roads, or automobile parking spaces shall be set aside and developed as parks, playgrounds and
service areas for the common use and enjoyment of the occupants of the mobile home court within two (2) years from the date of approval of the
mobile home court.
f. No less than five hundred (500) square feet per mobile home in the mobile home court shall be set aside for parks and playgrounds. The land
covered by vehicular roadways, sidewalks, off-street parking and landscaped areas surrounding mobile home spaces which are pertinent to each
mobile home, and the area devoted to service facilities shall not qualify as part of the area required for parks and playgrounds. Designated open
space shall be located as near the central part of the development as good design will permit.
g. No mobile home or add-on shall be closer than ten feet (10') to a property or lot line. A rear yard of twenty five feet (25') will be required except
that a minimum rear yard of fifteen feet (15') will be accepted if one of the required side yards is a minimum of twenty five feet (25'). All mobile
homes and add-ons shall be set back at least fifteen feet (15') from all interior, private mobile home court roadways.
h. All off-street parking spaces and driveways shall be hard-surfaced within one year from date of approval of the mobile home court.
i. A strip of land at least twenty feet (20') wide surrounding the mobile home court shall be left unoccupied by mobile homes and shall be planted and
maintained in lawn, shrubs, and trees designed to afford privacy to the development.
(1) No mobile home shall be located closer than thirty feet (30') to a public street.
j. All storage and solid waste receptacles outside of the confines of a mobile home must be housed in a closed structure compatible in design and
construction to the mobile home and to any service buildings within the mobile home court. All patios, garages, carports, and other add-ons must
also be compatible in design and construction with the mobile home and with the service buildings as approved by the Zoning Administrator.
k. Occupancy shall be by written lease, which lease shall be made available to the officials of the City upon demand. The terms of said lease shall be
consistent with the declaration of management policies, covenants and restrictions, as required in subsection C of this Section.
l. Roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic as follows:
(1) For One-Way And Two-Way Parking: Fifty feet (50') in width.
(2) For Entrance Streets: Minimum of sixty feet (60') in width (48 feet curb-to-curb).
(3) All Streets: All streets shall be bordered by curb, gutter and sidewalk and shall be hard-surfaced, or constructed as specified by the
Engineering Department and Planning Commission.
m. There shall be no more than two (2) entrances from the mobile home court into any one street, which entrances shall be no closer than one
hundred feet (100') from each other, nor closer than seventy feet (70') to the corner of an intersection. All mobile home courts shall have at least
two (2) entrances and more may be required depending on the size of development.
n. Access shall be provided to each mobile home space by means of an accessway reserved for maneuvering mobile homes into position and shall
be kept free from trees and other immovable obstructions. Paving the accessway shall not be required. Use of planks, steel mats, or other means
during placement of a mobile home.
o. Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of two (2) parking spaces per mobile home space contained within the mobile home court. In no
case shall the parking space be located greater than one hundred feet (100') away from the mobile home space it is designed to serve.
p. In addition to meeting the above requirements and conforming to the other laws of the City, all mobile home courts shall also conform to
requirements of the State Health Department. In event of any conflict between said regulations or codes of this Chapter, the most restrictive
provision shall govern.
q. Mobile home courts containing not less than twenty five (25) mobile homes may include a launderette for convenience of the occupants of the
court, but not for the general public.
r. All mobile homes shall be located at least thirty feet (30') back from any public street and the resulting yards must be landscaped except for
driveways.
s. Yard lighting shall be a minimum of two-tenths (0.2) foot-candles of light shall be required for protective yard lighting the full length of all driveways
and walkways.
t. An aggregate area of at least one hundred (100) square feet for each mobile home space contained within the mobile home court shall be provided
for the storage of the renters' boats, trailers, campers and other items that cannot be stored in the mobile homes. Said storage space shall be
enclosed with a sight-obscuring fence of not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height.
u. The site of any mobile home court shall be graded and/or filled and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or wastewater of any
kind. A mobile home court shall not be permitted where there is inadequate drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided and maintained for all
patios, mobile home stands, buildings, sidewalks, streets and other improvements.
v. Signs as may be required by the Zoning Administrator shall be placed in all mobile home courts indicating the direction of travel and the areas
where no automobile parking will be permitted on the roadways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 147/201
w. All streets, water, sanitary sewer, and storm drain systems shall meet City standards and shall meet the approval of the City Engineer.
x. Any mobile home which has been legally established and which was in use at the time of the effective date of this Title shall be deemed to be a
nonconforming use and such nonconforming use may be continued notwithstanding the fact that it may not comply with the provisions of this Title,
provided that such nonconforming use does not constitute a hazard to health or a nuisance. Such nonconforming use shall not be extended,
changed or enlarged except in compliance with this Title.
(1) If any mobile home or mobile home court was illegally established at the effective date of this Title, the enactment of this Title shall not be
deemed to render such use legal unless such use is expressly authorized by the terms of this Title.
y. Only mobile homes shall be allowed to occupy a mobile home space in a mobile home court.
z. Documents shall also be submitted with the preliminary plan consisting of:
(1) A declaration of management policies, covenants, and restrictions setting forth the responsibilities and duties of the renters or occupants and
owner within the mobile home court.
(2) An agreement between the developers and the City stating among other things:
(A) That the developer will construct the project in accordance with approved plans.
(B) That in the event of failure or neglect on the part of the owners, successors, or assigns to maintain the common areas, landscaping and other
improvements in good condition, the City may perform the necessary work and for the purpose may enter in upon the land and do said work and
charge the cost thereof, including reasonable attorney fees, against the owners or their successors or assigns.
B. Review And Approvals: The Planning Commission shall review the plan and proposed documents to determine compliance with all portions of the City's
Land Use Plan and Zoning Ordinance. In considering said plan, the Planning Commission, among other things, shall make sure that such
developments shall constitute a residential environment of sustained desirability and stability and that it will not adversely affect amenities in the
surrounding area. The Planning Commission may require changes to be made in the plan or documents. They may also require additional yards or
buffers or other improvements to be installed along with greater amounts of landscaping or parking spaces. Said changes may be imposed as
conditions of approval that are necessary to ensure that the development will mix harmoniously with adjoining or nearby uses, and to ensure that the
stated quality of the maintenance will be carried out.
An application for approval of a mobile home court shall be granted or denied only after a public hearing by the Planning Commission. Notice of the
hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to said hearing.
If approved by the Planning Commission, the application, with the Planning Commission's recommendations shall be submitted to the City Council for
its approval. An application denied by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the Council. Said appeal must be made in writing within ten (10)
days after the denial is made by the Planning Commission. Approval of the preliminary plan shall be valid for a period of one year.
C. Final Site Plan: Upon approval of the preliminary plan and documents by the City Council, the developer shall submit to the Planning Commission a
final site plan of either the entire mobile home court or the first stage of such development that is to be constructed, and final copies of the required
documents. Such plan shall be drawn to scale and provide, in detail, the information required under subsection A of this Section. This shall include
detailed and complete plans of the alignment, location and grades of all streets and utilities.
Copies of the final approved documents shall also be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator. No building permit shall be issued for said mobile
home court until final plans have been approved by the Planning Commission and City Council and the required documents filed in the office of the
Zoning Administrator and until the guarantee of performance required under subsection E of this Section has been properly posted.
D. Stage Construction Permitted: Development may be carried out in progressive stages in which event each stage shall be so planned that the
requirements and intent of this Title shall be fully complied with at the completion of each stage. No final plan for the initial stage shall provide for less
than five (5) mobile home spaces and such additional area as may be necessary to meet the requirements of this Title.
E. Guarantee Of Performance:
1. Ability To Perform: Prior to issuing a building permit for the construction of the mobile home court, the developer must submit evidence satisfactory to
the Council that the developer has the financial means and the ability to complete the stage of construction for which he has applied for a building
permit. Such evidence shall consist of the contractor's bid or the engineer's or architect's estimate of the amount required to complete the
development, together with the resources of the developer committed to such expenditure of proof of the lean commitment sufficient to construct and
complete such development.
2. Possession And Occupancy: No possession or occupancy of the mobile home court shall be allowed until the improvements as planned for each
stage shall be fully constructed. However, if the developer desires to have any occupancy of a portion of the partially developed staged construction,
then the developer shall post bond as security for the completion of all improvements, including, but not limited to, landscaping, road improvements,
pedestrianways, curbs, gutters, road surfacing, water and sewer lines, and common facilities as shown on the final site plan. Upon the posting of
bond satisfactory in form and amount to the Council for the completion of such improvement, occupancy may be granted upon a partially constructed
and developed mobile home court.
3. Estimates: All estimates of completing and costs shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his approval.
4. Duration Of Bond: The duration of any bonds or other assurance of completing of improvements and development of mobile home courts shall be for
a minimum of two (2) years from the date of approval of the development by the Council. An extension of time may be granted by the Council upon
application of the developer, provided such application is submitted at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the bond and provided the issuer
of the bond is willing to extend the time of the assurance.
5. Default: In the event the developer defaults or fails or neglects to satisfactorily install the required improvements within the time limitation, the
Council may declare the bond or other assurance forfeited and the City may install or cause to be installed, the required improvements using the
proceeds from the bonds or other assurance to defray the expense thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 148/201
6. Release Of Security: The developer shall be responsible for the quality of all materials and workmanship. All street, utility, and park work shall be
continuously inspected by the City and the City Engineer shall make a final inspection of the improvements and shall submit a report to the Council. If
the improvements do not meet the standards and the plans the Engineer shall so report and the developer shall be obligated to correct the
improvements and complete the installation to meet all such plans and to be approved by the City Engineer. Upon the Engineer's approval of the
installation or improvements, the bond or other assurance shall be released and exonerated.
7. Continuing Obligation: Any failure on the part of the developer or his assigns to maintain the mobile home court or any portion thereof in accordance
with the approved management policies, covenants, conditions and restrictions and agreements shall be deemed a public nuisance endangering the
health, safety, and general welfare of the public and a detriment to the surrounding area.
a. All maintenance of private drives, including, but not limited to, utilities, drainage, streets and snow removal, shall be the responsibility of the owner.
b. In addition to any other remedy provided by law for the abatement or removal of such public nuisance, the City may remove or abate the nuisance
and charge the cost thereof, including reasonable attorney fees, to the owners.
F. Development Of Parks And Play Areas: The parks and play areas shall be protected against building development by conveying to the City an open
space easement over such open areas, restricting the area against any future building or use, except as is consistent with that of providing landscaped
open space for the aesthetic and recreational satisfaction of the residents. Buildings or uses for noncommercial, recreational, or cultural purposes,
compatible with the open space objectives, may be permitted only with the express approval of the Council, following approval of building, site, and
operational plans by the Planning Commission. The granting of such open space easement shall not absolve the developer from the responsibility of
developing and maintaining the parks and play areas. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-5F-4-2: TRAVEL TRAILER COURTS, APPROVAL OF PLANS AND DOCUMENTS:
Any person wishing to construct a travel trailer court shall obtain from the Zoning Administrator, information pertaining to the City's plan of land use,
streets, public facilities, and other requirements affecting the land within the development. Before a permit can be issued for any construction connected
with a travel trailer court, the preliminary plans, required documents pertaining to the development and the final plan shall have been approved as
hereinafter set forth.
A. Preliminary Plan And Documents: The preliminary plan and documents shall be prepared and submitted as follows:
1. Plan Requirements: Six (6) copies of the preliminary plan must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator at least two (2) weeks prior to the meeting
of the Planning Commission at which the plan will be considered. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals
one hundred feet (1" = 100') or as recommended by the Zoning Administrator and shall show the following information:
a. Proposed road and trailer space layout.
b. Proposed reservation for parks, playgrounds, and other open space.
c. Proposed location for service facilities.
d. A generalized landscape plan.
e. Location of existing and proposed utility lines and easements, water and sewer lines, fire hydrants, storm drains and facilities, curbs, and other
improvements.
f. Any other data that the Planning Commission may require.
2. Standards And Requirements:
a. Each travel trailer court shall be held in one ownership and shall contain at least two (2) acres of land.
b. All travel trailer courts shall abut upon a collector or arterial street, as set forth in the major street plan of Rigby.
c. All travel trailers shall be set back at least thirty feet (30') from any public street, and fifteen feet (15') from an interior private roadway.
d. The roadway system shall provide convenient circulation through the travel trailer court and provide access to each travel trailer space. No travel
trailer space will be permitted direct access to a public street, road, or highway other than by means of the travel trailer court roadway system. All
entrances and exits from the travel trailer courts shall be by forward motion only. No exit or entrance from a travel trailer court shall be through a
residential zone and no entrance or exit shall be located closer than seventy feet (70') to the intersection of two (2) streets.
e. All one-way and two-way roadways shall have a curb-to-curb width of at least thirty seven feet (37') and all roadways shall be hard-surfaced.
f. All areas within the court which are not hard-surfaced shall be landscaped and maintained with lawns, trees, and shrubs designed to provide
privacy and noise containment and shall be equipped with adequate sprinkling or watering devices as approved by the Zoning Administrator. A
land-space screen at least eight feet (8') in width shall be provided adjacent to the exterior boundaries of the court.
g. Each travel trailer space shall be at least twenty feet (20') in width and at least forty feet (40') in length.
h. No travel trailer space shall be rented for a period of more than thirty (30) days and no travel trailer which exceeds eight feet (8') in width shall be
placed in a travel trailer court.
i. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all travel trailer spaces shall be served by an approved water and sewage disposal system. In addition, each
travel trailer court shall have a sewage dump for self-contained trailer units.
j. In addition to meeting the above requirements, all travel trailer courts shall conform to the requirements of the State and City Health Regulations
relating to travel trailer courts.
k. The site of any travel trailer court shall be graded and/or filled and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or wastewater of any
kind. A travel trailer court shall not be permitted where there is inadequate drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided and maintained for all
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 149/201
patios, travel trailer stands, buildings, streets and other improvements.
l. Signs as may be required by the Zoning Administrator shall be placed in all travel trailer courts indicating the direction of travel and the area where
no automobile parking will be permitted on the roadways.
m. No permit to construct or enlarge a travel trailer court shall be issued until the plans for the proposed construction or enlargement have been
approved by the Zoning Administrator and City Engineer.
n. Both dependent and independent travel trailers shall be allowed to occupy travel trailer spaces in a travel trailer court.
o. All improvements, including utilities, streets, paved areas and landscaping, must be completed within two (2) years of date the plan is approved by
the City Council.
B. Review And Approvals: The Planning Commission shall review the plan to determine its compliance with any portion of the City's Land Use Plan and
Zoning Ordinance. In considering approval of the development, the Planning Commission shall, among other things, make sure that such development
will mesh harmoniously with the surrounding area, that it will not produce a volume of traffic beyond the capacity of the surrounding street system, that
requirements for utilities, off-street parking, traffic circulation and other standards and intent of this Section shall be adequately complied with.
The Planning Commission may require changes to be made in the plan. They may also require additional yards or buffers or other improvements to be
installed along with greater amounts of landscaping or parking spaces. Said changes may be imposed as conditions of approval where it is determined
by the Planning Commission that such changes are necessary to ensure that the development will mesh harmoniously with adjoining or nearby uses.
An application for approval of a travel trailer court shall be granted or denied only after a public hearing by the Planning Commission. Notice of the
hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to said hearing.
After consideration by the Planning Commission, the application, with the Planning Commission's recommendations shall be submitted to the Council
for its approval. An application denied by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the Council. Said appeal must be made in writing within ten
(10) days after the denial is made by the Planning Commission. Approval of the preliminary plan shall be valid for a period of one year.
C. Final Site Plan: Upon approval of the preliminary plan by the Council, the developer shall submit to the Planning Commission a final site plan of either
the entire travel trailer court or the first stage of such development that is to be constructed. Such plan shall be drawn to scale, and provide, in detail,
the information required under this Title.
Copies of the final approved documents shall also be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator. No building permit shall be issued for said travel
trailer court until final plans have been approved by the Planning Commission and City Council and the required documents filed in the office of the
Zoning Administrator and until the guarantee of performance required under subsection E of this Section has been properly posted.
D. Stage Construction Permitted: Development may be carried out in progressive stages in which event each stage shall be so planned that the
requirements and intent of this Title shall be fully complied with at the completion of each stage. No final plan for the initial stage shall cover less than
one acre.
E. Guarantee Of Performance:
1. Ability To Perform: Prior to issuing a building permit for the construction of the mobile home court, the developer must have evidence satisfactory to
the Council that the developer has the means and the ability to complete the stage of construction for which he has applied for a building permit.
Such evidence shall consist of the contractor's bid or the engineer's or architect's estimate of the amount required to complete the development,
together with the resources of the developer committed to such expenditure or the proof of the loan commitment sufficient to construct and complete
such development.
2. Possession And Occupancy: No possession or occupancy of the travel trailer court shall be allowed until the improvements as planned shall be fully
constructed. Provided, however, that if the developer desires to have any occupancy of a portion of the partially developed staged construction then
the developer shall post bond as security for the completion of all improvements, including, but not limited to, landscaping, road improvements,
pedestrianways, curbs, gutters, road surfacing, water, sanitary and storm drain lines and common facilities as shown in the final site plan. Upon the
posting of bond satisfactory in form and amount to the Council for the completion of such improvements, occupancy may be granted upon a partially
constructed and developed travel trailer court.
3. Estimates: All cost estimates for completing the development shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his approval.
4. Duration Of Bond: The duration of any bonds or other insurance of completing of improvements and development of travel trailer courts shall be for a
minimum of two (2) years from the date of approval of the development by the Council upon application of the developer, provided such application is
submitted at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the bond and provided the issuer of the bond is willing to extend the time of assurance.
5. Default: In the event the developer defaults or fails or neglects to satisfactorily install the required improvements within the time limitation, the
Council may declare the bond or other assurance forfeited and the City may install or cause to be installed, the required improvements using the
proceeds from the bonds or other assurance to defray the expense thereof.
6. Release Of Security: The developer shall be responsible for the quality of all materials and workmanship. All street and utility work shall be inspected
by the City and upon the completion of installation of all such improvements the City Engineer shall make a final inspection of the improvements and
shall submit a report to the Council. If the improvements do not meet the standards and the plans, the Engineer shall so report and the developer
shall be obligated to correct the improvements and complete the installation to meet all such plans and the approval of the City Engineer. Upon the
Engineer's approval of the installation of improvements, the bond or other assurance shall be released and exonerated.
7. Continuing Obligation: Any failure on the part of the developer or his assigns to maintain the travel trailer court in accordance with the approved
management policies, covenants, conditions, and restrictions and agreements shall be deemed a public nuisance endangering the health, safety,
and general welfare of the public and a detriment to the surrounding area.
a. All maintenance of private drives including, but not limited to, utilities, drainage, streets and snow removal, shall be the responsibility of the owner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 150/201
b. In addition to any other remedy provided by law for the abatement or removal of such public nuisance, the City may remove or abate the nuisance
and charge the cost thereof, including reasonable attorney fees to the owners. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-5F-4-3: MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS ZONE:
A. All mobile home subdivisions must be approved by the Planning Commission and by the City Council and shall be made to comply with the provisions
of the Subdivision Ordinance, with the following exceptions:
1. Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size of a mobile home subdivision shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Subdivision Size: The minimum size of a mobile home subdivision shall be five (5) acres.
3. Parking: Each mobile home shall be required to have off-street parking for a minimum of two (2) cars, and such parking shall be hard-surfaced.
4. Use Requirements: Any use permitted in the RP, and R-1 Residence Zones, except residences as defined in Chapter 2 of this Title.
5. Distance To Lot Line: No mobile home or add-on shall be closer than ten feet (10') to a side property or lot line.
6. Yard Setbacks: A rear yard of twenty five feet (25') will be required except that a minimum rear yard of fifteen feet (15') will be accepted if one of the
required side yards is a minimum of twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-5F-5: PERMIT FEES:
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Building Official shall collect the following fees:
A. Travel Trailer Courts: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per lot trailer permit.
B. Mobile Home Subdivision: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per mobile home permit.
C. Mobile Home Courts: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per mobile home permit. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
Chapter 6
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES
10-6-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. No building or structure shall be erected, substantially altered or its use changed unless permanently maintained off-street parking and loading spaces
have been provided in accordance with the provisions of this Title.
B. The provisions of this Chapter, except where there is a change of use, shall not apply to any existing building or structure. Where the new use involves
no additions or enlargements, there shall be provided as many such spaces as may be required by this Title.
C. Whenever a building or structure constructed after the effective date of this Title is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of
dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase in the number of existing parking spaces, additional parking spaces shall
be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or structure existing prior to the effective date of this Title is enlarged to
the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more in floor area, number of employees, number of housing units, seating capacity or otherwise, said building or
structure shall then and thereafter comply with the full parking requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-6-2: STANDARDS:
A. Location Of Parking Spaces: The following regulations shall govern the location of off-street parking spaces and areas:
1. Parking spaces for all detached residential uses shall be located on the same lot as the use which they are intended to serve;
2. Parking spaces for commercial, industrial or institutional uses shall be located not more than five hundred feet (500') from the principal use; and
3. Parking spaces for apartments, dormitories or similar residential uses shall be located not more than three hundred feet (300') from the principal use.
B. Loading Space Requirements And Dimensions: Off-street loading spaces for commercial uses shall be provided in accordance with the following table:
Gross Floor Area
(Square Feet) Quantity And Type
14,000 - 36,000 (1)B
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 151/201
36,001 - 60,000 (2)B
60,001 - 100,000 (2)B + (1)A
For each additional 75,000 or fraction thereof, an additional Type A space will be provided.
Type B spaces are 35 feet in length.
Type A spaces are 65 feet in length.
1. Loading Space Size: The size of an off-street loading space shall not be less than the following, exclusive of access platform and loading area:
Width: 12 feet
Length: 35 feet or 65 feet (see above)
Width: 15 feet
2. Access To Loading Spaces: Convenient access to loading spaces from streets or alleys shall be provided; they shall not be less than twelve feet
(12') in width.
3. Location Of Required Loading Facilities: The off-street loading facilities required for the uses mentioned shall not project into the public right of way
or setback area. In no case shall the required off-street loading berths be part of the area used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements.
4. Design And Location: Design and location of entrances and exits for required off-street loading areas shall be subject to review of the Administrator.
C. Maintenance: The owner of property used for parking and/or loading shall maintain such area in good condition without holes and free of all dust, trash
and other debris.
D. Paving: The required number of parking and loading spaces as set forth in this Section. Parking space requirements, together with driveways, aisles
and other circulation areas, shall be improved with such material to provide a durable and dust-free surface.
E. Drainage: All parking and loading areas shall provide for proper drainage of surface water to prevent the drainage of such water onto adjacent
properties or walkways.
F. Lighting: Any parking area which is intended to be used during nondaylight hours shall be properly illuminated to avoid accidents. Any lights used to
illuminate a parking lot shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining property.
G. Access: Any parking area shall be designed in such a manner that any vehicle leaving or entering the parking area from or onto a public or private
street shall be traveling in a forward motion. Access driveways for parking areas or loading spaces shall be located in such a way that any vehicle
entering or leaving such area shall be clearly visible by a pedestrian or motorist approaching the access or driveway from a public or private street.
H. Striping: All parking areas with a capacity over twelve (12) vehicles shall be striped with double lines (6 inches both sides of center) between stalls to
facilitate the movement into and out of the parking stalls.
I. Screening And/Or Landscaping: Whenever a parking area is located in or adjacent to a residential district, it shall be effectively screened on all sides
which adjoin or face any property used for residential purposes by an acceptably designed wall, fence or planting screen. Such fence, wall or planting
screen shall be not less than four feet (4') nor more than six feet (6') in height and shall be maintained in good condition. The space between such
fence, wall or planting screen and the lot line of the adjoining premises in any residential district shall be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs or
evergreen ground cover, and maintained in good condition. In the event that terrain or other natural features are such that the erection of such fence,
wall or planting screen will not serve the intended purpose, then no such fence, wall or planting screen and landscaping shall be required.
J. Wheel Blocks: Whenever a parking lot extends to a property line, wheel blocks or other suitable devices shall be installed to prevent any part of a
parked vehicle from extending beyond the property line.
K. Minimum Distance And Setbacks: No part of any parking area for more than ten (10) vehicles shall be closer than twenty feet (20') to any dwelling unit,
school, hospital or other institution for human care located on an adjoining lot, unless, separated by an acceptably designed screen. If on the same lot
with a one-family residence, the parking area shall not be located within the front yard required for such building. In no case shall any part of a parking
area be closer than four feet (4') to any established street or alley right of way.
L. Disabled Vehicles: The parking of a disabled vehicle within a residential or commercial district for a period of more than two (2) weeks shall be
prohibited, unless, such vehicle is stored in an enclosed garage or other accessory building.
M. Joint Use: Two (2) or more nonresidential uses may jointly provide and use parking spaces when their hours of operation do not normally overlap,
provided that, a written agreement approved by the Administrator shall be filed with the application for a zoning permit. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-6-3: PARKING DESIGN AND DIMENSIONAL TABLES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 152/201
45° 69° 90° Parallel
A. Width of parking space 13' 10' 9' 9'
B. Length of parking space 15' 18' 19' 23'
C. Width of driveway aisle 13' 17' 25' 12'
(Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-6-4: PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following parking space requirements shall apply: (Ord. 2013-560, 5-7-2013)
Type Of Use Parking Spaces Required
A.
Residential:
Apartments or multi-family dwelling 2 for each unit with at least 1 parking space covered by a private garage or carport. In
addition, visitor parking spaces shall be provided as determined by subsection 10-5C-3D8 of
this title
Boarding houses, rooming houses, dormitories
and fraternity houses which have sleeping
rooms
1 for each sleeping room or 1 for each permanent occupant
Mobile home park 1 for each unit plus 1 space for each 5 units
Single-family or two-family dwelling 2 for each unit
B.
Commercial:
Automobile service garages which also provide 1 for each 2 gasoline pumps and 2 for each service bay
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 153/201
repair
Funeral parlors, mortuaries and similar type
uses
1 for each 100 square feet of floor area in slumber rooms, parlors or service rooms
Hotels, motels 1 per each sleeping room plus 1 space for each 2 employees
C.
Recreational or entertainment:
Auditoriums, sports arenas, theaters and similar
uses
1 for each 4 seats
Banks, financial institutions and similar uses 1 for each 200 square feet of floor area
Bowling alleys 4 for each alley or lane plus 1 additional space for each 100 square feet of the area used for
restaurant, cocktail lounge or similar use
Dance floors, skating rinks 1 for each 100 square feet of floor area used for the activity
Dining rooms, restaurants, taverns, nightclubs,
etc.
1 for each 200 square feet of floor area
Offices, public or professional administration or
service buildings
1 for each 400 square feet of floor area
Outdoor swimming pools, public or community
or club
1 for each 5 persons capacity plus 1 for each 4 seats or 1 for each 30 square feet floor area
used for seating purposes whichever is greater
Retail stores 1 for each 250 square feet floor area
All other types of business or commercial uses
permitted in any business district
1 for each 300 square feet of floor area
D.
Institutional:
Churches and other places of religious
assembly
1 for each 5 seats
Hospitals 1 for each bed
Libraries, museums and art galleries 1 for each 400 square feet floor area
Medical and dental clinics 1 for every 200 square feet floor area of examination, treating room, office and waiting room
Sanatoriums, homes for the aged, nursing
homes, children's homes, asylums and similar
uses
1 for each 2 beds
E.
Schools; public, or parochial:
Business, technical and trade schools 1 for each 2 students
Colleges, universities 1 for each 4 students
Elementary and junior high schools 2 for each classroom and 1 for every 8 seats in auditoriums or assembly halls
High schools 1 for every 10 students and 1 for each teacher and employee
Kindergartens, childcare centers, nursery
schools and similar uses
2 for each classroom but not less than 6 for the building
F.
Manufacturing:
All types of manufacturing, storage and
wholesale uses permitted in any manufacturing
district
1 for every 2 employees (on the largest shift for which the building is designed) plus 1 for
each motor vehicle used in the business
Express, parcel delivery and freight terminal 1 for every 2 employees (on the largest shift for which the building is designed) and 1 for
each motor vehicle maintained on the premises
(Ord. 402, 5-5-1987; amd. Ord. 2013-560, 5-7-2013)
10-6-5: GENERAL INTERPRETATIONS:
In the interpretation of this chapter, the following shall govern:
A. Parking spaces for other permitted or conditional uses not listed in this chapter shall be determined by the administrator;
B. Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next whole number; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 154/201
C. Where there is an adequate public transit system or where for any reason parking demand is unusually low, then the parking space provisions cited
above may be reduced proportionately by the commission. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
Chapter 7
NONCONFORMING USES
10-7-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of this Title to permit nonconforming uses to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this
Title that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited
elsewhere in the same district. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-7-2: INCOMPATIBILITY:
Nonconforming uses are declared by this Title to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts in which such use is located. A nonconforming use
shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Title by attachment on a building or premises or additional signs intended to be seen from off the
premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be generally prohibited in the district in which such use is located. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-7-3: AVOIDANCE OF UNDUE HARDSHIP:
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Title shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which
actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Title and upon which actual building construction has
been carried on diligently. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-7-4: SINGLE NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot
of record (see definition of lot of record) at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Title, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other
provisions of this Title. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership (see Section 10-7-5 of
this Chapter). This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the
district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for
the district in which such lot is located. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-7-5: LOTS OF RECORD IN COMBINATION:
If two (2) or more lots or a combination of lots or portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or
amendment of this Title and if all or part of the lots with no building do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved
shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this Title and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which
diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this Title, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with
a width or area below the requirements stated in this Title. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-7-6: USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND LAND IN COMBINATION:
If a lawful use involving individual structures, or of a structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Title
that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this Title, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
A. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Title in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located;
B. No nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy any additional land area;
C. If no structural alterations are made any nonconforming use of a structure or structure and land may, upon the issuance of a special use permit by the
Commission, be changed to another nonconforming use, provided that, the Commission shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more
appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Commission may require appropriate conditions and
safeguards in accord with other provisions of this Title;
D. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed;
E. When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for more than two (2) years (except when
government action impeded access to the premises), the structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 155/201
F. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-7-7: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
On any nonconforming structure, or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs or on repair or
replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, provided that, the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be
increased. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to
be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety upon order of such official. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-7-8: USES UNDER SPECIAL USE PROVISIONS:
Any use which is permitted as a special use in a district under the terms of this Title shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but shall,
without further action, be considered a conforming use. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
Chapter 8
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
10-8-1: PARKING STANDS:
A. Stands for the sale of merchandise or produce shall not be permitted on the parking stands in Zones R-1, R-2 or RMH except for temporary charity,
public, or church fundraising projects.
B. No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used for any
purpose other than is permitted in the district in which the building or land is located. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-8-2: WRECKING YARD REQUIREMENTS:
No wrecking yard or wrecking house shall be established in the City unless it complies with all the other requirements of this Title, and in addition thereto
shall be completely surrounded by a solid plank board, concrete fence or other enclosures of not less than eight feet (8') in height from the level of the
ground and completely obscuring from the outside view the wreckage of the ground and completely obscuring from the outside view the wreckage and
parts therein contained and such wrecking yard and wrecking house shall not be established within the City, except that a petition shall be signed by the
owners of seventy five percent (75%) both in number and in area, of all the property owners within the radius of three hundred feet (300') of any part of the
premises of which said wrecking yard or wrecking house is to be established and filed with the City Clerk, together with an application for a special permit
for the establishment of said wrecking yard and wrecking house and a hearing had before the City Council in the same manner and with the same fee as
other hearings before the City Council for special permits. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-8-3: EASEMENTS AND AGREEMENTS:
It is not intended by this Chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; however, where
this Chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the height of buildings or larger lots or yard than are imposed or required by existing regulations or by
permits, easements, covenants or agreements this Chapter shall control. This Chapter shall be construed liberally to secure the beneficial interest and
purposes thereof. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-8-4: PUBLIC GARAGES, FILLING AND OILING STATIONS:
Public garages and filling and oiling stations must be located not less than fifty feet (50') from the front lines and not less than thirty feet (30') from any
other street line on which property faces, unless, before a permit is issued by the Zoning Commission, there shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk,
the written consent of the owners of seventy five percent (75%) of the area of all the property within a radius of three hundred feet (300') of any part of the
premises whereupon such filling and oiling station or public garage is to be established or maintained and not separated therefrom by more than one street
or one alley; provided, further, that a filling and oiling station or a public garage shall have no entrance or exit for motor vehicles within three hundred feet
(300') of an entrance or exit to a school, playground, public library, church, hospital, children's or old people's home, or other similar public or private
institution. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-8-5: PURPOSE; INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of health, safety,
moral, comfort, convenience, or the general welfare. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-8-6: ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS:
A. Fencing; Screening: No fence, wall, hedge, or planting of any kind designed to serve as a division between properties extending between the front of
the main structure to the back property line shall be more than six feet (6') in height in the R-1, R-2, and RMH Residence Zones and the C Commercial
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 156/201
Zone of the City unless a special use permit or variance is approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. All of the above fences, walls, hedges,
or planting extending from the front of the main structure to the street or right of way shall be no more than three feet (3') in height. The division may be
up to four feet (4') in height, but shall be entirely composed of material that shall not obstruct vision. An example of approved fencing extending up to
four feet (4') in height is chainlink fencing without wood slats. (Ord. 475, 7-20-1999)
1. A "structure" is defined as anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having a
fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences, and billboards.
A "yard" is defined as a required open space, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portions of a structure from three
feet (3') above the general ground level of the graded lot upward, provided accessories, greenbelt plantings, ornaments and furniture may be
permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations and requirements limiting and obstructing visibility.
2. No wall, fence, or shrubbery shall unreasonably obstruct or interfere with traffic visibility.
3. Easements for public services and facilities will not be obstructed and access for firefighting will not be obstructed.
B. Setbacks: Applications for structures will follow regular procedures and may be allowed, but not ahead of front side of side of house to front lot line, and
will provide appropriate setbacks on sides and rear as required.
Houses fronting and siding on two (2) streets shall not extend a structure beyond the general setback of house fronts existing along the street of the
side. A structure may not be extended as a side allowance beyond the frontage existing of the other houses. Ornamental divisions or shrubbery not
over three feet (3') may be used as a side division between properties from front side of houses.
C. Garages: Garages accessory to single-family uses may have a capacity of no more than three (3) cars. Garages accessory to multi-dwelling
apartments, dwelling units, or rooming units uses may have a capacity of no more than two (2) cars per dwelling unit, apartment unit and/or rooming
unit located on the premises.
D. Measurement Of Minimum Floor Area: Single-family and multi-dwelling residences shall be measured from the outside of walls to the outside of walls,
excluding all public and group used spaces. Apartment and rooming units shall be measured from the center line of walls to the center line of walls,
excluding all public and group used spaces.
E. Homes Or Buildings Moved Into A Zone: Structures must conform to the minimum requirements of the zone into which the house is to be moved and
must conform in structure and appearance to the surrounding structures, so as not to detract from them. A building permit must be secured before a
building is moved in.
F. Lot Extends Into Two Different Zones: Where a lot is located so that it extends into two (2) separate zones, the lot shall conform to the requirements of
the most restrictive of the two (2) lots.
G. Loading Space: A reasonable loading space which does not interfere with or obstruct public streets, sidewalks, parking areas or alleyways, shall be
required for all retail, wholesale, warehousing, processing, manufacturing establishments, or other businesses, clinics, professional offices, apartments,
or other establishments requiring frequent transfer of goods or supplies.
H. Landscape Areas: All yards or portions thereof shall be landscaped or cultivated and shall contain a reasonable number of trees and shrubs. All
required landscape areas must be continually maintained in an attractive and clean condition and landscaping must be completed within one year of
completion of the building.
I. Lots Recorded Prior To Adoption Of This Title: Any separate lot, the title of which was of record at the time of the adoption of this Title, that does not
meet the requirements of this Title for yards, courts or other area of open space, may be utilized for single-residence purposes; provided, the
requirements for such a yard or court or net area, width, depth, or open space is within sixty percent (60%) of that required by this Title, if this variance
is approved by the City Council. The purpose of this provision is to permit utilization of recorded lots which lack adequate width or depth as long as
reasonable living standards can be provided.
If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or
amendment of this Title, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area, as established by this Title, the lands involved
shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this Title, and no portion of said parcel shall be used which does not meet lot width
and area requirements established by this Title, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below
the requirements stated in this Title.
J. Lot On Public Street: No building shall be constructed upon a lot or parcel of land which does not abut upon a public street unless a variance of this
provision be granted by action of the City Council.
K. Accessory Structures: No residential structure shall be erected upon the rear of a lot with another dwelling, except that there may be constructed a
guesthouse (without kitchen) or rooms for guests within an accessory building; provided such facilities are used for the occasional housing of guests of
the occupants of the main structure and not for permanent occupancy by others.
L. Parks, Schools And Open Space: An area indicated on the "Official Zone Map" or other records as a public park, or recreation area, public utility area,
cemetery, public school site or semipublic open space, shall not be used for any other purpose and when the use of the area is discontinued, it shall
automatically be zoned "Residence" (R-1) until otherwise zoned; regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of area, width, and
yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Planning Commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 157/201
M. Utility Transmission: Nothing in this Title shall be construed to prohibit construction or installation of a public utility use or structures necessary for
transmission of commodities or services of a utility company, including mains or distribution lines, substations or exchanges in any zone district.
Storage, maintenance facilities and business offices shall be restricted to their appropriate zone district. Location of power transmission lines with a
capacity of one hundred (100) KV or over shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
N. Utility Easements: No structure shall be built or used that will encroach upon any utility, street, alley, or drainage easements or right of way or existing
utility line. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
Chapter 9
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
10-9-1: GENERAL:
The purposes of performance standards is to set specific conditions for various uses, classification of uses or areas where problems are frequently
encountered. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-9-2: SUPPLEMENTAL YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
In addition to all yard regulations specified in the official schedule of district regulations and in other sections of this title, the following provisions shall be
adhered to: (Ord. 2013-560, 5-7-2013)
A. Visibility At Intersections: On a corner lot in any district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially
impede vision between a height of two and one-half (21/2) and ten feet (10') above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded
by the right of way lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street right of way lines twenty five feet (25') from the point of
intersection;
B. Fence And Wall Restrictions In Front Yards: In any required front yard, no fence or wall shall be permitted which materially impedes vision across such
yard between the height of two and one-half feet (21/2') and ten feet (10'); (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
C. Yard Requirements For Multi-Family Dwellings: Multi-family dwellings shall be considered as one building for the purpose of determining front, side and
rear yard requirements; (Ord. 2013-560, 5-7-2013)
D. Side And Rear Yard Requirements For Nonresidential Uses Abutting Residential Districts: Nonresidential buildings or uses shall not be located nor
conducted closer than forty feet (40') to any lot line of a residential district, except that the minimum yard requirements may be reduced to fifty percent
(50%) of the requirement if acceptable landscaping or screening approved by the commission is provided. Such screening shall be a masonry or solid
fence between four (4) and eight feet (8') in height maintained in good condition and free of all advertising or other signs. Landscaping provided in lieu
of such wall or fence shall consist of a strip of land not less than twenty feet (20') in width planted with an evergreen hedge or dense planting of
evergreen shrubs not less than four feet (4') in height at the time of planting;
E. Architectural Projections: Open structures such as porches, canopies, balconies, platforms, carports, covered patios and similar architectural
projections shall be considered parts of the building to which attached and shall not project into the required minimum front, side or rear yard; and
F. Exceptions To Height Regulations: The height limitations contained in the official schedule of district regulations do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas,
antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human
occupancy except where the height of such structures will constitute a hazard to the safe landing and takeoff of aircraft at an established airport. (Ord.
402, 5-5-1987)
10-9-3: SUPPLEMENTAL GENERAL PROVISIONS:
In addition to all other regulations as specified in this title, the following provisions shall be adhered to:
A. Conversion Of Dwellings To More Units: A residence may not be converted to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units unless:
1. The yard dimensions still meet the yard dimensions required by the zoning regulations for new structures in that district;
2. The lot area per family equals the lot area requirements for new structures in that district;
3. The floor area per dwelling unit is not reduced to less than that which is required for new construction in that district; and
4. The conversion is in compliance with all other relevant codes and ordinances.
B. Temporary Buildings: Temporary buildings, construction trailers, equipment and materials used in conjunction with construction work only may be
permitted in any district during the period construction work is in progress, but such temporary facilities shall be removed upon completion of the
construction work. Storage of such facilities or equipment beyond the completion date of the project shall require a zoning permit authorized by the
Administrator;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 158/201
C. Parking And Storage Of Certain Vehicles: Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked or stored
on any residentially zoned property other than in completely enclosed building or carport. However, one boat and one travel trailer may be stored in the
side or rear yard;
D. Required Trash Areas: All trash and/or garbage collection areas for commercial, industrial and multi-family residential uses shall be enclosed on at least
three (3) sides by a solid wall of fence of at least four feet (4') in height or within an enclosed building or structure. Adequate vehicular access to and
from such area or areas for collection of trash and/or garbage as determined by the Administrator shall be provided; and
E. Development Close To An Airport: The location, building height and lighting of residential and commercial development shall be restricted within airport
approach areas as required by the State Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics and Public Transportation and Federal Aviation
Administration. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-9-4: PROVISIONS FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES:
No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner creating dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable conditions
which could adversely affect the surrounding areas or adjoining premises, except that any use permitted by this Title may be undertaken and maintained if
acceptable measures and safeguards to reduce dangerous and objectionable conditions to acceptable limits as established by the following performance
requirements:
A. Fire Hazards: Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive materials shall be protected by adequate firefighting and fireprevention
equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used in the handling of any such material. Such hazards shall be kept removed from
adjacent activities to a distance which is compatible with the potential danger involved as specified in the Uniform Fire Code and the National Safety
Foundation publications;
B. Radioactivity Or Electrical Disturbance: No activity shall emit harmful radioactivity at any point, or electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation
of any equipment at any point other than that of the creator of such disturbance;
C. Noise: Objectionable noise as determined by the Administrator which is due to volume, frequency or beat shall be muffled or otherwise controlled. Airraid
sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes are exempt from this requirement;
D. Vibration: No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments on any adjoining lot or property;
E. Air Pollution: Air pollution shall be subject to the requirements and regulations established by the Health Authority;
F. Glare: No direct or reflected glare shall be permitted which is visible from any property outside a manufacturing district or from any street;
G. Erosion: No erosion, by man, wind or water, shall be permitted which will carry objectionable substances onto neighboring properties;
H. Water Pollution: Water pollution shall be subject to the requirements and regulations established by the Health Authority;
I. Enforcement Provisions: The Administrator, prior to the issuance of a zoning permit, may require the submission of statements and plans indicating the
manner in which dangerous and objectionable elements involved in processing and in equipment operations are to be eliminated or reduced to
acceptable limits and tolerances; and
J. Measurement Procedures: Methods and procedures for the determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall conform
to applicable standard measurement procedures published by the American Standards Institute, New York, the Manufacturing Chemists' Association,
Inc., Washington, D.C., the United States Bureau of Mines, and the Health Authority. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-9-5: PROVISIONS FOR UNIQUE LAND USES:
Certain unique land uses pose special problems that may have detrimental influences on surrounding land uses. The following performance standards for
such unique land uses shall be adhered to in addition to all other provisions of this Title:
A. Accessory Building:
1. Will not be located in any required front yard area; and
2. Will not be located closer than five feet (5') from any side or rear property line.
B. Agriculture (Buffer Area):
1. Will be maintained as an untilled filler strip or natural vegetation provided for between tilled ground and the normal high-water elevation of any
surface water areas. The width of this strip shall vary according to the average slope of the land as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 159/201
Average Slope Of Land
Between Tilled Land And
Normal High-Water Elevation
Width Of Strip Between
Tilled Land And Normal
High-Water Elevation
(Percent) (Feet Along Surface Of Ground)
0 - 4 20
5 - 9 50
10 - 14 90
15 and over 110
2. Will be maintained to minimize soil erosion, sedimentation, contamination and nutrient enrichment of ground and surface water.
C. Animal Clinic, Animal Hospital, Veterinary Office And Kennel:
1. Will be located at least three hundred feet (300') from any residence including motels and hotels, except for an owner's residence. The Administrator
may modify these requirements if the animals are completely housed in soundproof structures that completely screen them from view of the abutting
residential property; and
2. Will comply with all State and local regulations relative to such an operation, and maintain adequate housekeeping practices designed to prevent the
creation of a nuisance and to reduce to a minimum the factors of noise and odor.
D. Animal Commercial Feed Lots, Meatpacking, Processing Plant And Slaughterhouse Facilities:
1. Will be located, when housing animals, feedlot or holding pens, not less than six hundred feet (600') from any residence, except for an owner's
residence. Such facilities shall have a minimum setback of thirty feet (30') from any property line;
2. Will be designed and located with full consideration to their proximity to adjacent uses, their effect upon adjacent and surrounding properties, and to
the reduction of such nuisance factors as odor; and
3. Will be adequately maintained with housekeeping practices to prevent the creation of a nuisance, and shall also be subject to the Health Authority
requirements as to the elimination of waste materials and the maintenance of water quality control.
E. Boathouse:
1. Will be located within a shore lot;
2. Will be set back a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from the normal high-water elevation of a lake, pond, river or stream, or ten feet (10') from the
mean high-tide mark;
3. Will not be more than one boathouse on the premises for each shore lot;
4. Will not exceed a height of fifteen feet (15');
5. Will not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in horizontal area covered; and
6. Will not be located any closer than ten feet (10') to any property line.
F. Bulk Storage Of Flammable Liquids And Gases, Aboveground And For Resale:
1. Will be located at least three hundred feet (300') from a residential zone, a residence, motel, hotel, except for an owner's residence;
2. Will be erected subject to the approval of the Fire Chief; and
3. Will have suitable loading and unloading spaces and off-street parking facilities subject to the approval of the Fire Chief.
G. Chemicals, Pesticide And Fertilizer Storage And Manufacturing:
1. Will have adequate fire protection, storage area, handling and disposal as approved by the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal.
H. Contractors Yard:
1. Will be located a minimum distance of three hundred feet (300') from any residence except for an owner's residence;
2. Will have a screening fence around areas utilized for storage of equipment; and
3. Will be limited to storage, maintenance and processing incidental to contracting work. There shall be no general industrial or commercial uses.
I. Drive-In Restaurant:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 160/201
1. Will be enclosed on the property line with landscaping and fencing, except for ingress and egress, to prevent trash from moving onto other
properties;
2. Will have a six foot (6') high sight-obscuring fence along the property lines that adjoin a residence;
3. Will provide for adequate trash receptacles; and
4. Will avoid the direction of night-lighting toward any residence.
J. Filling, Grading, Lagooning, Dredging, Or Other Earth-Moving Activity:
1. Will result in the smallest amount of bare ground exposed for the shortest time feasible;
2. Will provide temporary ground cover, such as mulch;
3. Will use diversions, silting, basins, terraces and other methods to trap sediment;
4. Will provide lagooning in such a manner as to avoid creation of fish trap conditions;
5. Will not restrict a floodway, channel or natural drainageway;
6. Will construct and stabilize sides and bottom of cuts, fills, channels and artificial watercourses to prevent erosion or soil failure;
7. Will not have below-grade excavation except for drainageways within fifty feet (50') of any lot line or public right of way; and
8. Will restore topsoil or loam to a depth of not less than four inches (4").
K. Gravel Pits, Rock Quarries, Sand And Clay Pits And Other Natural Resources Of Commercial Value:
1. The extent and method of rehabilitation shall be determined in advance of issuing a zoning certificate with due consideration given to what is suitable
and compatible with the surrounding area;
2. Upon depletion of the area, all temporary buildings and structures, except property line fences and structures for the loading, measuring or weighing
of salable material in storage, shall be entirely removed from the property; and
3. Safety fencing shall be erected around all pits that create a safety hazard.
L. Home Occupation:
1. No more than one person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation;
2. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants,
and not more than twenty five percent (25%) of floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation;
3. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation
other than one sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, nonilluminated and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building;
4. No significant traffic shall be generated by such home occupation and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall
meet the off-street parking requirements as specified in this Title, and shall not be located in a required front yard; and
5. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in
other than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible
interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
M. Mobile Home Park:
1. Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the essential character of the same area;
2. Will not be hazardous or detrimental to existing or future neighboring uses;
3. Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage, refuse disposal
and schools; or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed park shall be able to provide adequately any such
services;
4. Will be consistent with the intent and purpose of this Title and the Comprehensive Plan;
5. Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public streets
or roads;
6. Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of natural, scenic or historic features of major importance;
7. Will meet the minimum health standards as set forth by the Idaho State Department of Health and Welfare; and
8. Will have a minimum total area for the mobile home park of five (5) acres.
N. Outdoor Storage Of Commercial And Industrial Materials:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 161/201
1. Will be screened from view from any existing adjoining residence or residentially zoned area, whether or not such property is separated by an
alleyway or street; and
2. Will not be located in any front yard setback area.
O. Riding Stables And Schools:
1. Will locate all stables or loafing sheds not nearer than one hundred feet (100') from any residence, except for an owner's residence. All facilities shall
be set back a distance of thirty feet (30') from any property line;
2. Will be designed and located with full consideration being given to their proximity to adjacent uses and their effect upon adjacent and surrounding
properties, as to the storage of horse trailers, and the factors of noise and odor; and
3. Will require that the owner or operator of such use shall have a continuous obligation to maintain adequate housekeeping practices to prevent the
creation of a nuisance.
P. Rifle And Pistol Range:
1. Will be designed with a backstop;
2. Will be designed to avoid a line of fire that is directed towards any residence or business within one mile;
3. Will incorporate landscaping that is compatible with the surrounding landscaping; and
4. Will provide supervision and security measures during periods of use.
Q. Sanitary Landfill:
1. Will conform to time limits for daily operation as defined by the Board/Council;
2. Will provide a bond, for privately owned sites, to ensure compliance with the provisions of the zoning certificate;
3. Will provide for a paved street to the facility; and
4. Will be supervised during the hours of operation.
R. Wrecking Yard:
1. Will be completely enclosed by a solid six foot (6') high site-obscuring fence;
2. Will not result in the storage of automobile, junk or salvage material that is visible from any public right of way;
3. Will not result in the storage of automobiles that exceed the height of the fence; and
4. Will have such landscaping that is appropriate with the surrounding area. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
Chapter 10
SPECIAL USE
10-10-1: GENERAL:
It is recognized that an increasing number of new kinds of uses are appearing daily, and that many of these and some other more conventional uses
possess characteristics of such unique and special nature relative to location, design, size, method of operation, circulation and public facilities that each
specific use must be considered individually.
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on each special use permit application as specified in the Official Schedule of District Regulations. The
Commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny a special use permit under the conditions as herein specified and considering such additional
safeguards as will uphold the intent of this Title. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-10-2: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
A written application in substantially the following form must be submitted prior to any action by the Commission:
A. Name, address and phone number of applicant;
B. Proposed amending ordinance, approved as to form by the Board/Council;
C. Present land use;
D. Present zoning district;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 162/201
E. Proposed use;
F. Proposed zoning district;
G. A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Administrator showing property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning and such other items as
the Administrator may require;
H. A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land considered;
I. A statement on how the proposed change relates to the Comprehensive Plan, availability of public facilities and compatibility with the surrounding area.
(Ord. 478, 12-7-1999, eff. 1-1-2000)
10-10-3: GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL SPECIAL USES:
The Commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed special use in terms of the following standards and shall find
adequate evidence showing that such use at the proposed location:
A. Will, in fact, constitute a special use as established on the Official Schedule of District Regulations for the zoning district involved;
B. Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objectives or with any specific objective of the Comprehensive Plan and/or the Zoning
Ordinance;
C. Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the
general vicinity and that such use will not change the essential character of the same area;
D. Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses;
E. Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse
disposal, water and sewer and schools; or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide
adequately any such services;
F. Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services and will be detrimental to the economic welfare of the
community;
G. Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or the
general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors;
H. Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
thoroughfares; and
I. Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural, scenic or historic feature of major importance. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-10-4: PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
Public sites and open spaces shall conform to the following:
A. Public Uses: Where it is determined that a proposed park, playground, school or other public use as shown on the future acquisition map, as authorized
in section 67-6517, Idaho Code, is located in whole or in part within a proposed development the Commission shall notify the appropriate public agency
concerning the land proposed to be acquired. Within thirty (30) days of the date of notice, the public agency may request the governing body to
suspend consideration on the permit for sixty (60) days from the date of the request; however, if an agreement is not reached within sixty (60) days the
Commission shall resume consideration of the special use application;
B. Natural Features: Existing natural features which add value to residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such as trees,
watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets) shall be preserved in the design of the development; and
C. Special Developments: In the case of planned unit developments and large-scale developments the Commission may require sufficient park or open
space facilities of acceptable size, location and site characteristics that may be suitable for the proposed development. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-10-5: SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS:
In granting any special use, the Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions, bonds and safeguards in conformity with this Title. Violations of such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 163/201
conditions, bonds or safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the special use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Title. (Ord.
402, 5-5-1987)
10-10-6: PROCEDURE FOR HEARING, NOTICE:
Prior to granting a special use permit, at least one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard shall be held. At least
fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place and a summary of the proposal shall be published in the official newspaper or paper of
general circulation within the jurisdiction. Notice may also be made available to other newspapers, radio and television stations serving the jurisdiction for
use as a public service announcement. Notice shall also be provided to property owners and residents within the land being considered, three hundred
feet (300') beyond the external boundaries of the land being considered, and any additional area that may be substantially impacted by the proposed
special use as determined by the Commission. When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners or residents, in lieu of the mailing
notification, three (3) notices in the newspaper or paper of general circulation is sufficient; provided, the third notice appears ten (10) days prior to the
public hearing. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-10-7: ACTION BY THE COMMISSION:
A. Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing, the Commission shall either approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application as presented. If
the application is approved or approved with modification the Commission shall direct the Administrator to issue a special use permit listing the specific
conditions specified by the Commission for approval.
Upon granting of a special use permit, conditions may be attached to a special use permit including, but not limited to, those:
1. Minimizing adverse impact on other development;
2. Controlling the sequence and timing of development;
3. Controlling the duration of development;
4. Assuring that development is maintained properly;
5. Designating the exact location and nature of development;
6. Requiring the provision for on-site or off-site public facilities or services; and
7. Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required in an ordinance.
B. Prior to granting a special use permit, the Commission may request studies from the planning staff or public agencies concerning social, economic,
fiscal and environmental effects of the proposed special use. A special use permit shall not be considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant
other special use permits. A special use permit is not transferrable from one parcel of land to another.
Upon granting or denying an application the Commission shall specify:
1. The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
2. The reasons for approval or denial; and
3. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a permit.
The applicant or any person who appeared in person or in writing before the Commission may appeal the decision of the Commission to the
Board/Council, provided the appeal is submitted to the Board/Council within fifteen (15) days from the Commission's action. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-10-8: NOTIFICATION TO APPLICANT:
Within ten (10) days after a decision has been rendered the Administrator shall provide the applicant with written notice of the action on the request. (Ord.
402, 5-5-1987)
10-10-9: APPEAL TO BOARD/COUNCIL:
Upon receipt of an appeal from the action of the Commission, the Board/Council shall set a hearing date to consider all information, testimony and
Commission's minutes of the public hearing to reach a decision to uphold, conditionally uphold or overrule the decision of the Commission. The
Board/Council shall only overrule the Commission by a favorable vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the full Board/Council. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
Chapter 11
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
10-11-1: PURPOSE:
It shall be the policy to guide a major development of land and construction by encouraging planned unit developments (PUD) to achieve the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 164/201
A. A maximum choice of living environments by allowing a variety of housing and building types and permitting an increased density per acre and a
reduction in lot dimensions, yards, building setbacks and area requirements;
B. A more useful pattern of open space and recreation areas and, if permitted as part of the project, more convenience in the location of accessory
commercial uses, industrial uses and services;
C. A development pattern which preserves and utilizes natural topography and geologic features, scenic vistas, trees and other vegetation and prevents
the disruption of natural drainage patterns;
D. A more efficient use of land than is generally achieved through conventional development resulting in substantial savings through shorter utilities and
streets; and
E. A development pattern in harmony with land use density, transportation and community facilities objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 402, 5-5-
1987)
10-11-2: PROVISIONS GOVERNING PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
Whenever there is a conflict or difference between the provisions of this Chapter and those of the other Chapters of this Title, the provisions of this Chapter
shall prevail. Subjects not covered by this Chapter shall be governed by the respective provisions found elsewhere in this Title. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-11-3: MINIMUM AREA:
A PUD for the following principal uses shall contain an area of not less than:
A. Three (3) acres for residential development;
B. Five (5) acres for residential use with subordinate commercial or industrial uses;
C. Ten (10) acres for commercial use; and
D. Ten (10) acres for industrial use. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-11-4: USES PERMITTED:
All uses that may be allowed within the land use district are permitted within a PUD. Also, up to ten percent (10%) of the gross land area may be directed
to other commercial, industrial, public and quasi-public uses that are not allowed within the land use district; provided, there is a favorable finding by the
Commission:
A. That the uses are appropriate with the residential uses;
B. That the uses are intended to serve principally the residents of the PUD;
C. That the uses are planned as an integral part of the PUD;
D. That the uses be located and so designed as to provide direct access to a collector or an arterial street without creating congestion or traffic hazards;
and
E. That a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the residential development occur prior to the development of the related commercial or industrial land uses.
(Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-11-5: OWNERSHIP REQUIREMENTS:
An application for approval of a PUD may be filed by a property owner or a person having an existing interest in the property to be included in the PUD.
The PUD application shall be filed in the name or names of the recorded owner or owners of property included in the development. However, the
application may be filed by the holder(s) of an equitable interest in such property.
Before approval is granted to the final development plan, the entire project shall be under single ownership or control and legal title must be presented with
the final development plan. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-11-6: COMMON OPEN SPACE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 165/201
A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross land area developed in any residential PUD project shall be reserved for common open space and
recreational facilities for the residents or users of the area being developed.
The required amount of common open space land reserved under a PUD shall either be held in corporate ownership by owners of the project area for the
use of each owner who buys property within the development or be dedicated to the public and retained as common open space for parks, recreation and
related uses. Public utility and similar easements and rights of way for watercourses and other similar channels are not acceptable for common open
space dedication unless such land or right of way is usable as a trail or other similar purpose and approved by the Commission.
The responsibility for the maintenance of all open spaces shall be specified by the developer before approval of the final development plan.
Every property developed under the PUD approach should be designed to abut upon common open space or similar areas. A clustering of dwellings is
encouraged. In areas where townhouses are used, there shall be no more than eight (8) townhouse units in any contiguous group. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-11-7: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
Underground utilities, including telephone and electrical systems, are required within the limits of all PUDs. Appurtenances to these systems which can be
effectively screened be excepted from this requirement if the Commission finds that such exemption will not violate the intent or character of the proposed
PUD. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-11-8: INCREASED RESIDENTIAL DENSITY:
To provide for an incentive for quality PUD, the Commission may authorize an increased residential density of up to fifteen percent (15%) of the allowable
number of dwelling units. Character, identity and architectural and siting variation incorporated in a development shall be considered cause for density
increases, provided these make a substantial contribution to the objectives of the PUD, which are as follows:
A. Landscaping (a maximum increase of 5 percent), streetscape, open spaces and plazas, use of existing landscaping, pedestrianway treatment and
recreational areas;
B. Siting (a maximum increase of 5 percent), visual focal points, use of existing physical features such as topography, view, sun and wind orientation,
circulation pattern, physical environment, variation in building setbacks and building grouping (such as clustering); and
C. Design features (a maximum increase of 5 percent), street sections, architectural styles, harmonious use of materials, parking areas broken by
landscaping features and varied use of housing types. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-11-9: ARRANGEMENT OF COMMERCIAL USES:
When PUDs include commercial uses, commercial buildings and establishments shall be planned as groups having common parking areas and common
ingress and egress points in order to reduce the number of potential accident locations at intersections. Planning screens or fences shall be provided on
the perimeter of the commercial areas abutting residential areas.
The plan of the project shall provide for the integrated and harmonious design of buildings, and for adequate and properly arranged facilities for internal
traffic circulation, landscaping and such other features and facilities as may be necessary to make the project attractive and efficient from the standpoint of
the adjoining and surrounding noncommercial areas.
All areas designed for future expansion or not intended for immediate improvement or development shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained in a neat
and orderly manner. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-11-10: ARRANGEMENT OF INDUSTRIAL USES:
PUDs may include industrial uses if it can be shown that the development results in a more efficient and desirable use of land.
Industrial uses and parcels shall be developed in park-like surroundings utilizing landscaping and existing woodlands as buffers to screen lighting, parking
areas, loading areas or docks and/or outdoor storage of raw materials or products. A planned industrial area shall provide for the harmony of buildings and
a compact grouping in order to economize in the provision of such utility services as are required. Thoroughfares shall be kept to a minimum throughout a
planned industrial area in order to reduce through traffic.
Project side yards of forty feet (40') and a rear yard of fifty feet (50') shall be required if the project is located adjacent to any residential uses. All
intervening spaces between the right-of-way line and areas shall be landscaped with trees and plantings and properly maintained at all times. (Ord. 402, 5-
5-1987)
10-11-11: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL:
When the PUD also qualifies as a subdivision, the processing of the special use permit and subdivision application shall occur at the same time. The
granting of a special use permit for a PUD shall require a preapplication, the submission of a preliminary development plan and approval by the
Board/Council of a final development plan as specified within this Title. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-11-12: PREAPPLICATION MEETING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 166/201
The developer shall meet with the Administrator prior to the submission of the preliminary development plan. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss
early and informally the purpose and effect of this Title and the criteria and standards contained herein, and to familiarize the developer with the
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance and such other plans and ordinances as deemed appropriate. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-11-13: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL:
An application for preliminary PUD shall be filed with the Administrator by a property owner or person having existing interest in the property for which the
PUD is proposed. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information filed in triplicate:
A. Name, address and phone number of applicant;
B. Name, address and phone number of registered surveyor, registered engineer and/or urban planner assisting in the preparation of the preliminary
development plan;
C. Legal description of property;
D. Description of existing use;
E. Zoning districts;
F. A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Commission, showing property lines, streets, existing and proposed zoning and such other items as the
Commission may require to show the relationship of the PUD to the Comprehensive Plan and to existing schools and other community facilities and
services;
G. A preliminary development plan at a scale approved by the Commission showing topography at two foot (2') intervals; location and type of residential,
commercial and industrial land uses; layout, dimensions and names of existing and proposed streets; rights of way; utility easements; parks and
community spaces; layout and dimensions of lots and building setback lines; preliminary improvement drawings showing water, sewer, drainage,
electricity, telephone and natural gas and such other characteristics as the Commission deems necessary;
H. Proposed schedule for the development of the site; and
I. Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the land in question to initiate the proposed development plan within two (2) years.
The application for preliminary PUD shall be accompanied by a written statement by the developer setting forth the reasons why, in his opinion, the
PUD would be in the public interest. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-11-14: PROCEDURE FOR PUBLIC NOTICE:
The same provision for public hearing and legal notification as required for special use permits shall be followed1. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-11-15: APPROVAL IN PRINCIPLE BY COMMISSION:
Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing the Commission shall review the preliminary development plan to determine if it is consistent with the intent
and purpose of this Title; whether the proposed development advances the general welfare of the community and neighborhood and whether the benefits,
combination of various land uses and the interrelationship with the land uses in the surrounding area justify the deviation from standard district regulations.
The Commission's approval in principle of the preliminary development plan shall be necessary before an applicant may submit a final development plan.
Approval in principle shall not be construed to endorse a precise location of uses, configuration of parcels or engineering feasibility.
The Commission shall consider the general standards applicable to special use permits and criteria for special uses before approving in principle a
preliminary development plan2. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-11-16: APPROVAL OF FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
Upon approval in principle of a preliminary development plan, an application for approval of the final development plan may be filed with the Administrator
by at least one property owner or person having a presently existing interest in the property for which the PUD is proposed. Each application shall be
signed by the owner or lessee, attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application for final development plan. Each
application shall clearly state that the approval shall expire and may be revoked if construction on the project has not begun within two (2) years from the
date of issuance of the approval. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
A. A survey of the proposed development site, showing the dimensions and bearings of the property lines, area in acres, topography, existing features of
the development site; including major wooded areas, structures, streets, easements, utility lines and land uses;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 167/201
B. All the information required on the preliminary development plan; the location and sizes of lots, location and proposed density of dwelling units,
nonresidential building intensity and land use considered suitable for adjacent properties;
C. A schedule for the development of units to be constructed in progression and a description of the design principles for buildings and streetscapes;
tabulation of the number of acres in the proposed project for various uses; the number of housing units proposed by type; estimated residential
population by type of housing; estimated nonresidential population; anticipated timing for each unit and standards for height, open space, building
density, parking areas, population density and public improvements proposed for each unit of the development whenever the applicant proposes an
exception from standard zoning districts or other ordinances governing development;
D. Engineering feasibility studies and plans showing, as necessary, water, sewer, drainage, electricity, telephone and natural gas installations; waste
disposal facilities; street improvements and nature and extent of earth work required for site preparation and development;
E. Site plan, showing building(s), various functional use areas, circulation and their relationship;
F. Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and exterior elevations;
G. Landscaping plans; and
H. Deed restrictions, protective covenants and other legal statements or devices to be used to control the use, development and maintenance of the land,
and the improvements thereon, including those areas which are to be commonly owned and maintained. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-11-17: RECOMMENDATION BY COMMISSION:
Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the final development plan, the Commission shall recommend to the Board/Council that the final development plan be
approved as presented, approved with supplementary conditions or disapproved. The Commission shall then transmit all papers constituting the record
and the recommendations to the Board/Council.
The Commission shall find that the facts submitted with the application and presented to them establish that:
A. The proposed development can be initiated within two (2) years of the date of approval;
B. Each individual unit of the development, as well as the total development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an environment of
sustained desirability and stability or that adequate assurance will be provided that such objective will be attained; the uses proposed will not be
detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a beneficial effect which would not be achieved under standard district regulations;
C. The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate to carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities will not generate traffic in such
amounts as to overload the street network outside the PUD;
D. Any proposed commercial development can be justified at the locations proposed;
E. Any exception from standard district requirements is warranted by the design and other amenities incorporated in the final development plan, in
accordance with the PUD and the adopted policy of the Board/Council;
F. The area surrounding said development can be planned and zoned in coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development;
G. The PUD is in general conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; and
H. The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the population densities and nonresidential uses proposed. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-11-18: ACTION BY THE BOARD/COUNCIL:
Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the final recommendation of the Commission, the Board/Council shall either approve, approve with supplementary
conditions or disapprove the application as presented. Upon granting or denying the application the Board/Council shall specify:
A. The ordinance and standards used in evaluation of the application;
B. The reasons for approval or denial; and
C. The actions if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a permit.
If the application is either approved or approved with conditions, the Board/Council shall direct the Administrator to issue zoning permits only in
accordance with the approved final development plan and the supplementary conditions attached thereto. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 168/201
10-11-19: EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION OF APPROVAL PERIOD:
The approval of a final development plan for a PUD shall be for a period not to exceed two (2) years to allow for preparation and recording of the required
subdivision plat and the development of the project. If no construction has begun within two (2) years after approval is granted, the approved final
development plan shall be void. An extension of the time limit or modification of the approved final development plan may be approved if the Commission
finds that such extension or modification is not in conflict with the public interest. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
Chapter 12
SIGNS
10-12-1: INTENT:
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote and protect the public health, welfare and safety by regulation existing and proposed outdoor advertising,
outdoor advertising signs and outdoor signs of all types. It is intended to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business climate,
enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community and preserve the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas. It is further intended to
reduce sign or advertising distractions and obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging
or projecting over public right of way, provide more open space, curb the deterioration of the natural environment and enhance community development.
(Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-12-2: PUBLIC SIGNS EXCLUDED:
For the purpose of this Chapter "sign" does not include signs erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental function, or
required by any law, ordinance, or governmental regulation. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-12-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SIGNS AND DISTRICTS:
The regulations contained in this Section shall apply to all signs and all use districts.
A. Any illuminated sign or lighting device shall emit a light of constant intensity, and no sign shall be illuminated by or contain flashing, intermittent, rotating,
or moving light or lights. In no event shall an illuminated sign or lighting device be placed or directed to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to
be directed or beamed upon a public thoroughfare, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic
hazard or nuisance;
B. No sign shall employ any parts or elements which revolve, rotate, whirl, spin or otherwise make use of motion to attract attention. Subsection A of this
Section and this subsection shall not apply to any sign performing a public service function indicating time, temperature, stock market quotations or
similar services;
C. All writing, fittings and materials used in the construction, connection and operation of electrically illuminated signs shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the local electrical code in effect, if any;
D. No projecting sign shall be erected or maintained from the front or face of a building a distance of more than two feet (2'), including those projecting
from the face of any theater, hotel or motel marquee. In general, projecting signs are not encouraged;
E. No sign shall be placed on the roof of any building, except those signs whose supporting structure is screened so the sign appears to be a continuation
of the face of the building;
F. No portable or temporary sign shall be placed on the front or face of a building or on any premises, except as herein provided;
G. No sign or part thereof shall contain or consist of banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners or other similar moving devices. Such
devices, as well as strings of lights, shall not be used for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention when not part of a sign;
H. No sign erected or maintained in the window of a building, visible from any public or private street or highway, shall occupy more than twenty percent
(20%) of the window surface;
I. No sign of any classification shall be installed, erected or attached in any form, shape or manner to a fire escape or any door or window giving access to
any fire escape;
J. All signs hung and erected shall be plainly marked with the name of a person, firm or corporation responsible for maintaining the sign;
K. Should any sign be or become unsafe or be in danger of falling, the owner thereof or the person maintaining the same shall, upon receipt of written
notice from the Administrator, proceed at once to put such sign in a safe and secure condition or remove the sign;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 169/201
L. No sign shall be placed in any public right of way except publicly owned signs, i.e., traffic-control signs and directional signs. Signs directing and guiding
traffic and parking on private property but bearing no advertising matter shall be permitted on any property; and
M. Signs along interstate and primary highways shall conform to the Idaho State Transportation Department regulations. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-12-4: MEASUREMENT OF SIGN AREA:
The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area within a regular, geometric form or combinations of regular, geometric forms
comprising all of the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the matter displayed. Frames and structural members not being
advertising matter shall not be included in computation of surface area. (Ord. 476, 5-18-1999)
10-12-5: PERMITTED SIGNS:
The following signs may be permitted upon the issuance of a zoning certificate by the Administrator:
A. Signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of the premises upon which the sign is located shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area, except in all
residential districts where the area of the sign shall not be more than six (6) square feet;
B. Professional nameplates not to exceed four (4) square feet in area;
C. Signs denoting the name and address of the occupants of the premises, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area;
D. Temporary signs not exceeding fifty (50) square feet in area announcing special public or institutional events, the erection of a building, the architect,
the builders or contractors may be erected for a period of sixty (60) days plus the construction period;
E. On-premises wall signs pertaining to a nonconforming use shall be permitted on the same premises of such use, provided that, the area of such sign
does not exceed twelve (12) square feet; and
F. Political signs, provided that, such signs shall not be posted in any place or in any manner that is destructive to public property upon posting or removal.
No political sign shall be posted in a public right of way nor shall any such sign be posted on a utility pole. No political sign shall be posted more than
sixty (60) days before an election. All candidates for public office, their campaign committees or other persons responsible for the posting on public
property of campaign material shall remove such material within two (2) weeks following election day. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-12-6: SPECIAL PERMITTED SIGNS:
Signs exceeding the following requirements will not be allowed without specific approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission via variance or other
administrative action: (Ord. 476, 5-18-1999)
A. Signs or bulletin boards customarily incidental to places of worship, libraries, museums, social clubs or societies, which signs or bulletin boards shall not
exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area and which shall be located on the premises of such institution;
B. Any sign advertising a commercial enterprise, including real estate developers or subdividers, in a district zoned residential shall not exceed twelve (12)
square feet in area and shall advertise only the names of the owners, trade names, products sold and/or the business or activity conducted on the
premises where such sign is located;
C. In a commercial or manufacturing district, each business shall be permitted one flat or wall on-premises sign. Projection of wall signs shall not exceed
two feet (2') measured from the face of the main building. The area of all permanent on-premises signs for any single business enterprise may have an
area equivalent to one and one-half (11/2) square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of building width, or part of a building, occupied by such
enterprise but shall not exceed a maximum area of one hundred (100) square feet;
D. In a commercial or manufacturing district, two (2) off-premises signs with a total area not exceeding six hundred (600) square feet may be permitted at
a single location. No single off-premises sign shall exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, nor shall off-premises signs visible to
approaching traffic have a minimum spacing of less than two hundred feet (200'). Off-premises signs shall conform to all applicable yard and height
regulations for the appropriate zoning district, except that such signs intended to be viewed from an elevated highway shall be not more than twenty
feet (20') above the level of the roadway at its nearest point. Off-premises wall signs shall have all structural and supporting members concealed from
view; and
E. Freestanding on-premises signs not over thirty feet (30') in height, having a maximum total sign area of one hundred (100) square feet per display area
and located not closer than ten feet (10') to any street right-of-way line and not closer than thirty feet (30') to any adjoining lot line may be erected to
serve a group of business establishments. There shall be only one freestanding sign for each building, regardless of the number of businesses
conducted in said building. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-12-7: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 170/201
Off-premises signs shall not be erected in front of the required setback line for the appropriate zoning district, except for the following:
A. For every square foot by which any on-premises sign exceeds fifty (50) square feet, the setback shall be increased by one-half foot (1/2') but need not
exceed one hundred feet (100');
B. Real estate signs and bulletin boards for a church, school or any other public, religious or educational institution within residential zoning districts may
be erected not less than ten feet (10') from the established right-of-way line of any street or highway provided such sign or bulletin board does not
obstruct traffic visibility at street or highway intersections; and
C. On-premises signs where permitted shall be erected or placed in conformity with the side and rear yard requirements of the district in which located,
except that in any residential district, on-premises signs shall not be erected or placed within ten feet (10') of a side or rear lot line. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-12-8: VIOLATIONS:
In case any sign shall be installed, erected, constructed or maintained in violation of any of the terms of this Chapter, the Administrator shall notify in
writing the owner or lessee thereof to alter such sign to comply with this Chapter. Political signs posted in violation of this Chapter are subject to removal
by the Administrator five (5) days after written notice of violation. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-12-9: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS:
In all residential districts, a sign identifying residential use of a lot may be located on the lot, such signs shall be limited to one per principal use and shall
not exceed one square foot in area for each dwelling unit up to a maximum of eight (8) square feet. A sign identifying an accessory commercial use in a
residential district shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area, and shall be limited to one sign per accessory use. In any commercial or industrial
district, signs identifying the use of the premises may be located on the lot. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent location of a temporary
sign in any district advertising sale or lease of the premises, provided such sign does not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
Chapter 13
APPEAL, VARIANCE AND ACTION
10-13-1: GENERAL:
The Commission shall consider administrative appeals where it is alleged that an error has been made by the Administrator, variances from the terms of
this Title and requests for hearings from affected persons. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-13-2: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
Appeals to the Commission concerning interpretation or administration of this Title may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of
the legislative authority affected by any decision of the Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within twenty (20) days after the decision of the
Administrator by filing with the Administrator and with the Commission a notice of appeal specifying the grounds upon which the appeal is being taken. The
Administrator shall transmit to the Commission all the papers constituting the record upon which the appeal is based. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-13-3: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS:
Any appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action taken unless the Administrator certifies to the Commission after the notice of appeal is filed
with him that by reason of facts stated in the application, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Commission or by a court based upon an application, with notice to the
Administrator showing due cause. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-13-4: VARIANCE:
The Commission may authorize in specific cases such variance from the terms of this Title as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Title would result in unnecessary hardship. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands,
structures or buildings in the same district and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered
grounds for issuance of a variance. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience or profit, but only where strict application of the
provisions of this Title would result in unnecessary hardship. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-13-5: APPLICATION AND STANDARDS FOR VARIANCES:
A variance from the terms of this Title shall not be granted by the Commission unless and until a written application for a variance is submitted to the
Administrator and the Commission containing:
A. Name, address and phone number of applicant(s);
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 171/201
B. Legal description of property;
C. Description of nature of variance requested; and
D. A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance conforms to the following standards:
1. That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other
lands, structures or buildings in the same district;
2. That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this Title would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same
district under the terms of this Title;
3. That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; and
4. That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Title to other lands, structures or
buildings in the same district.
A variance shall not be granted unless the Commission makes specific findings of fact based directly on the particular evidence presented to it which
support conclusions that the above mentioned standards and conditions have been met by the applicant. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-13-6: SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS:
Under no circumstances shall the Commission grant an appeal or variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Title in the district
involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Title in said district. In granting any appeal or variance, the Commission may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Title. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the appeal or variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Title. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-13-7: PUBLIC HEARING:
Upon receipt of the application for an appeal or a variance, the Commission shall hold a public hearing, publish notice in a newspaper and give written
notice to all parties as required for special use permits1. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-13-8: ACTION BY COMMISSION:
Within thirty (30) days of the public hearing the Commission shall either approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the request for appeal or variance.
Upon granting or denying an application the Commission shall specify:
A. The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
B. The reasons for approval or denial; and
C. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a permit.
The applicant or any affected person who appeared in person or in writing before the Commission may appeal the decision of the Commission to the
Board/Council within fifteen (15) days from the Commission's action. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-13-9: NOTIFICATION TO APPLICANT:
Within ten (10) days after a decision has been rendered, the Administrator shall provide the applicant with written notice of the action on the request. (Ord.
402, 5-5-1987)
10-13-10: APPEAL TO BOARD/COUNCIL:
Upon receipt of an appeal from the action of the Commission, the Board/Council shall set a hearing date to consider all information, testimony and
Commission's minutes of the public hearing to reach a decision to uphold, conditionally uphold or overrule the decision. The Board/Council shall only
overrule the Commission by a favorable vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the full Board/Council. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-13-11: REQUEST FOR HEARING:
A. Any affected person shall mean one having an interest in real property which may be adversely affected by the issuance or denial of a permit
authorizing the development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 172/201
B. Any affected person may at any time prior to final action on rezone, special use, or variance permit, if no hearing has been held on the application,
petition the Commission or Board/Council in writing to hold a hearing as required in Chapter 10 of this Title provided; however, that if twenty (20)
affected persons petition for a hearing, the hearing shall be held.
After a hearing, the Commission or Board/Council may:
1. Grant or deny a permit; or
2. Delay such a decision for a definite period of time for further study or hearing.
C. An affected person aggrieved by a decision may within sixty (60) days after all remedies have been exhausted under local ordinances seek judicial
review under the review provisions provided by the Administrative Procedure Act, Idaho Code. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
Chapter 14
ENFORCEMENT
10-14-1: ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED:
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered, nor shall any building, structure or land be established or changed
in use without a permit therefor issued by the Administrator. Zoning permits shall be issued only in conformity with the provisions of this Title. (Ord. 402, 5-
5-1987)
10-14-2: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
The application for zoning permit shall be signed by the owner or applicant attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the
application. Each application shall clearly state that the permit shall expire and may be revoked if work has not begun or is substantially completed within
one year. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
A. Name, address and phone number of applicant;
B. Legal description of property;
C. Existing use;
D. Proposed use;
E. Zoning district;
F. Plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and the shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact size and location of existing buildings on the lot,
if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building(s) or alteration;
G. Building heights;
H. Number of off-street parking spaces or loading berths;
I. Number of dwelling units;
J. Proposed sewer and water facilities; and
K. Such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for, the enforcement of this Title. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-14-3: APPROVAL OF ZONING PERMIT:
Within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application, the Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the application in conformance with the
provisions of this Title. All zoning permits shall, however, be conditional upon the commencement of work within one year. One copy of the plans shall be
returned to the applicant by the Administrator after the Administrator shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same
by his signature on such copy. One copy of plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the Administrator. The Administrator shall issue a placard, to be
posted in a conspicuous place on the property in question, attesting to the fact that the use or alteration is in conformance with the provisions of this Title.
(Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-14-4: EXPIRATION OF ZONING PERMIT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 173/201
If the work described in any zoning permit has not begun within one year from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire; it shall be revoked by
the Administrator and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-14-5: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof thereafter created, erected,
changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy shall have been therefor by the
Administrator stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this Title and with all conditional provisions that may
have been imposed. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-14-6: TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Administrator for a period not exceeding six (6) months during alterations or partial occupancy
of a building pending its completion. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-14-7: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
The Administrator shall maintain a record of all zoning permits and certificates of occupancy and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person.
(Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-14-8: FAILURE TO OBTAIN A ZONING PERMIT OR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
Failure to obtain a zoning permit or certificate of occupancy shall be violation of this Title. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-14-9: CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATIONS, PLANS, PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES:
Zoning permits or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Administrator authorize only the use, and
arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement
or construction contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Title. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-14-10: COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS:
Whenever a violation of this Title occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes
and basis thereof shall be filed with the Administrator. The Administrator shall properly record such complaint, immediately investigate and take action
thereon as provided by this Title. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-14-11: PENALTIES:
The Prosecuting Attorney/City Attorney shall, in addition to taking whatever criminal action deemed necessary, take steps to civilly enjoin any violation of
this Title. Penalties for failure to comply with or violations of the provisions of this Title shall be as follows:
Violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day such
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official or any other person who commits,
participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may be found guilty of a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Board/Council
or any other public official or private citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this Ordinance or of the
Idaho Code.
(Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
10-14-12: SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES:
The Board/Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for zoning permits, amendments, appeals,
variances, special use permits, plan approvals and other matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this Title requiring investigations,
inspections, legal advertising, postage and other expenses. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Administrator, and may be altered and
amended only by the Board/Council. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or
appeal. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
Chapter 15
SAVING CLAUSE
10-15-1: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES AND SAVING CLAUSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 174/201
All other ordinances, regulations, or local statutes or parts of regulations, ordinances, or local statutes in conflict herewith are hereby repealed, that if any
section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision of this Title shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subsection,
clause or provision so held invalid and the remainder of this Title shall be and remain in full force and effect.
Whenever the regulations made under authority of this Title require a greater width or size of yards or courts, or require a lower height of building or less
number of stories or require a greater percentage of each lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required in any other statute
or local ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the regulations made under authority of this Title shall govern. Wherever the provisions of any other
status or local ordinance or regulation requires a greater width or size of wards or courts, or requires a greater percentage of each lot to be left
unoccupied, or imposes other higher standards than are required by the regulations under the authority of this Title then the provisions of such statute or
local ordinance or regulation shall govern. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
Chapter 16
EFFECTIVE DATE
10-16-1: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon publication following passage and approval. Regularly passed and approved by the City Council on
May 5, 1987. (Ord. 402, 5-5-1987)
Title 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
JURISDICTION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known as the SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF RIGBY, IDAHO. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
A. Intent And Policy Of City:
1. It is the intent of the City in enacting this Title that the owners and/or developers of any property that is being developed, both in and around the City,
shall dedicate to the public their share of all such developing lands as may be needed for the creation of streets, alleys, parks, open spaces, etc.;
and all utility, pedestrian, drainage way, and other such easements as all the above may be needed for the public health, safety, and general welfare
and improvement of the City and its inhabitants. It is further intended that all owners or developers of such developing property shall pay for their full
share of all street improvements such as sidewalks, curbs and gutters, paving, etc., culinary water system improvements, sanitary sewer system
improvements, storm drain system improvements, etc., and any questions or interpretations that may arise regarding the meaning or intent of this or
any other ordinance of the City shall be resolved in such manner as best reflects the above stated intent.
2. The development and subdivision of land is a privilege conferred upon the developer by the laws of the State and through this Subdivision Title. A
developer seeking to acquire the advantages of development and lot subdivision has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions laid down by
the City for the design, dedication, improvement and restrictive use of the land so as to conform to the physical and economical development of the
City, its surrounding area, and to the safety and general welfare of the future lot owners in the subdivision and of the community at large.
3. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to consider the development and/or subdivision of land as subject to the control of the City pursuant
to a Comprehensive Plan for the orderly, planned, efficient, physical and economic development of the City. Land to be developed and/or subdivided
shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health, or peril from fire, flood or other menace, and land
shall not be developed and/or subdivided until adequate provisions have been made for public facilities and improvements as required elsewhere in
this Title, in the Zoning Ordinance and in all other applicable ordinances and regulations.
4. The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the proposals shown in any Comprehensive Plan and
the Public Facilities Map. It is intended that this Title shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in the
Building and Housing Codes, the Zoning Ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan, the Public Facilities Map, the Land Use Plan, the City's Standard
Construction Specifications and standard drawings, and other such related ordinances, codes, plans, maps, specifications and standards.
B. Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to provide for:
1. The harmonious development of the area.
2. The coordination of streets and roads within the subdivision with other existing or planned streets and roads within and without the City.
3. Adequate open space for travel, light, air and recreation.
4. Adequate transportation system, water drainage and sewage collection and treatment facilities, water supply and distribution system, parks, school
sites, and other public uses and facilities.
5. The avoidance of scattered subdivision of land that would result in either of the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 175/201
a. The lack of water supply, sewer service, drainage, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, transportation or other public services and improvements.
b. The unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services or improvements.
6. The requirements as to the extent and the manner in which:
a. Roads shall be created and improved.
b. Water and sewer and other utility mains, piping connections, or other facilities shall be installed.
c. Sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be installed.
7. The manner and form of making and filing of any plat.
8. The establishment of reasonable standards governing the design of and the procedures of the subdivision and resubdivision of land.
9. The orderly layout and use of land and to ensure proper legal descriptions and the proper monumenting of subdivided land.
10. The administration of these regulations by defining the powers and duties of approval authorities. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-1-3: JURISDICTION:
A. Plat Required: No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located wholly or in part in the City, or within one mile of the corporate limits of the
City or such additional distance as may mutually be agreed upon by both the City and County of Jefferson pursuant to Idaho Code sections 50-1306
and 67-6526, unless he shall first have or cause to have made a plat thereof as set forth within this Title.
B. Approval Of Plats: It shall be unlawful to receive or record plats or replats under the jurisdiction of this Title until the Mayor and Council shall have
approved such plats and they shall bear thereon the approved endorsement of the Public Works Director and the City Clerk. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987;
amd. 1999 Code)
11-1-4: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
All "subdivisions", as defined in Section 11-2-1 of this Title, shall be submitted for approval by the City Council and shall comply with the provisions of this
Title. This Title shall supplement all other ordinances and regulations, and where at variance with other laws, regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the
more restrictive requirements shall apply. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-1-5: ADMINISTRATION:
The City Council may appoint an Administrator to carry out the provisions as herein specified and to serve at the pleasure of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The Administrator shall receive and process all subdivision applications. In absence of such an appointment, the City Clerk shall carry out
this function. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
11-1-6: SEVERABILITY:
Where any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or other part of these regulations are held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
judgment shall affect only that part so held invalid. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
11-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Title, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number.
ADMINISTRATOR: An official having knowledge of the principles and practices of subdividing, appointed by the City to administer this Title.
ALLEY: A public way designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of lots having principal access on some other street.
ANNEXATION AGREEMENT: An agreement or contract between the subdivision developer and the City setting forth the rights, duties, obligations and
conditions of development that may apply to the parties regarding each specific subdivision or development.
BLOCK: A group of lots, tracts or parcels within well defined boundaries, usually streets.
BOARD: Board Of County Commissioners, Jefferson County.
BUILDING: Any structure designed or used for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: An imaginary line established by ordinance that requires all buildings to be set back a certain distance from lot lines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 176/201
BUILDING SITE: An area proposed or provided and improved by grading, filling, excavation or other means for the erection of a building.
CEMETERY: A lot or tract of land that has been platted for the selling of sites for the burial of animal or human remains.
CITY: The word "City" shall mean the City of Rigby, Idaho.
COMMISSION: The City Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Rigby.
COMMITTEE: The Technical Committee, appointed by the Council upon recommendation from the Commission, to assist with the technical evaluation of
subdivisions, and to make recommendations to the Commission. The membership of the Committee shall include, but not be limited to, persons that are
engaged in either private or public work with specific knowledge in the following areas:
A. Road design and construction;
B. Sewer and water facility design and construction;
C. Health requirements for water and sewer facilities;
D. Environmental planning criteria such as: geology, water systems, vegetation and noise;
E. Solid waste; and
F. Recreational and open space.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A document also known as a Comprehensive Development Plan, showing the general location and extent of present and
proposed development, including housing, industrial and commercial uses, streets, parks, schools and other community facilities.
CONDOMINIUM: An estate consisting of an undivided interest in common in real property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination
thereof; together with a separate interest in real property, in an interest or interests in real property or in any combination thereof.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Rigby, Idaho.
COUNTY RECORDER: The office of the County Recorder of Jefferson County, Idaho.
CROSSWALK: A public right of way for pedestrian traffic.
CULVERT: A drain that channels water under a bridge, street, road or driveway.
DEDICATION: The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any general and public use, reserving to himself no other rights, being compatible with
the full exercise and enjoyment of the public use to which the property has been devoted. Dedicated land becomes public land only upon the acceptance
of the same by the City and/or County.
DEVELOPER: Authorized agents of a subdivider or the subdivider himself.
DWELLING UNIT: Any building or other structure proposed or built for occupancy by people.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner to specific persons or to the public to use land for specific purposes. Also, a right acquired by prescription.
ENGINEER: Any person who is licensed in the State to practice professional engineering.
FLOOD PLAIN: The relatively flat area or low land adjoining the channel of a river, stream, lake or other body of water which has been or may be covered
by water of a flood of 100-year frequency. The flood plain includes the channel, floodway and floodway fringe, as established per the engineering practices
as specified by the Army Corps of Engineers, as follows:
Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically
flowing water;
Flood: The temporary inundation of land adjacent to and inundated by overflow from a river, stream, lake or other body of water.
Flood Of 100-Year Frequency: A flood magnitude which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceed in any given year.
Floodway: The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the flood plain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the flood water of any watercourse; and
Floodway Fringe: That part of the flood plain which is beyond the floodway. Such areas will include those portions of the flood plain which will be
inundated by a flood of 100-year frequency.
FRONTAGE: That side of a lot abutting on a street and ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot.
FRONTAGE STREET: Any street along which development on both sides is proposed.
GOVERNING BODY: The City Council of the City of Rigby, Idaho.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 177/201
GRADE: The slope of a road or street expressed in percentage (%) terms.
HIGHWAY: A street designated as a highway by an appropriate State or Federal agency.
HIGHWAY OR STREET, LIMITED ACCESS: An expressway highway, or arterial street providing a route for through traffic, in respect to which adjacent
property owners or occupants and others have no legal right to access to or from, except as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction
over such route.
IMPROVEMENT: Any alteration to the land or other physical constructions associated with subdivision and building site developments.
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT: A subdivision, the size of which consists of fifty (50) or more lots or dwelling units.
LOT: A parcel, plot, tract, or portion of a subdivision, or other land area of suitable size as required in these regulations and the existing Zoning Ordinance
having frontage on a dedicated street.
LOT AREA: The area of any lot shall be determined exclusive of street, highway, alley, road or other rights of way.
LOT TYPES: As used in these regulations, lot types are as follows:
Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on only one street.
Through Lot: A lot with frontage on more than one street other than a corner lot.
MASTER PLAN: See definition of Comprehensive Plan.
MAY: The word "may" shall mean permissive at the option of the person, or agency referred to in the sentence where used.
MOBILE HOME: A detached single-family dwelling unit with all of the following characteristics:
A. Designed for long-term occupancy and contained sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub, or shower bath and kitchen facilities with plumbing
and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems;
B. Designed to be transported after fabrication on its wheels, or on flatbed or other trailers, or detached wheels; and
C. Designed to be taken to the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete, including major appliances and furniture, and ready for
occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation supports, connection to utilities and the like.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed and intended for exclusive mobile home residential use.
MONUMENT: Any permanent marker either of concrete, galvanized iron pipe, or iron or steel rods, used to identify any tract, parcel, lot or street lines, as
specified in Idaho Code section 50-1303.
OPEN SPACE: An area open to the sky for outdoor recreation activity, exclusive of streets, buildings or other covered structures.
ORIGINAL PARCEL OF LAND: A lot or tract as recorded on any plat of record on file in the office of the County Recorder, or any unplatted contiguous
parcel of land held in one ownership and of record at the effective date hereof.
OWNER: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land
sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this title.
PERFORMANCE BOND: An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by the subdivider or his surety to the city clerk, which guarantees that the
subdivider will perform all actions required by the governing body regarding an approved plat and the related subdivision improvement plans, and provides
that if the subdivider defaults and fails to comply with the provisions of an approved plat, the subdivider or his surety will pay damages up to the limit of the
bond, or the surety will itself complete the requirements of the approved plat and the related subdivision improvement plans.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed as a combination of residential, commercial and industrial uses planned for a
tract of land to be developed as a unit under single ownership or control, which is developed for the purpose of selling individual lots or estates, whether
fronting on private or dedicated streets, which may include two (2) or more principal buildings.
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION: The Rigby planning and zoning commission.
PLAT: The drawing, mapping or planning of a subdivision, cemetery, townsite or other tract of land or a replatting of such including certifications,
descriptions and approvals:
Final Plat: The final and formal presentation by drawings of a subdivision development, for approval by the city, and which, if approved, the original
and one copy of which is filed with the county clerk and recorder.
Preliminary Plat: The first formal presentation by drawings of a proposed subdivision.
PRINT: Any copy of an original which reproduces exactly the original drawing from which it is made.
RESERVE STRIP: A strip of land between a partial street and adjacent property which is reserved or held in public ownership for future street extension or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 178/201
widening.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated or reserved for use as a public way, which normally includes streets, sidewalks and other public utilities or
service areas.
ROLL BACK: A curb which shall channel water to a drain or pond or holding area and yet shall not have an abrupt shoulder such that a vehicle could drive
over the curb consistent with general engineering principles. The standards for construction are as set forth in the "Idaho Standards For Public Works
Construction" (2000 revision and as amended) and as set forth in the regulations established by the city of Idaho Falls engineering department. In the
event of a conflict, then a manner as approved by the public works director.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL: A septic tank seepage type sewage disposal system, or any other approved individual sewage treatment
device.
SHALL: The word "shall" shall always mean mandatory and not merely directory.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS: The specifications and drawings governing the construction and/or installation of streets, concrete
walks, water lines, sewer lines, as specified in this title or as officially adopted by the city.
STREET: A right of way which provides access to adjacent properties, the dedication of which has been officially accepted. The term "street" also includes
the terms "highway", "thoroughfare", "parkway", "road", "avenue", "boulevard", "lane", "place" and other such terms.
Arterial: A street designed for the purpose of carrying fast and/or heavy traffic.
Collector: A street which has the primary purpose of carrying traffic from minor streets to other collector streets and/or arterial streets.
Cul-De-Sac: A street connected to another street at one end only and provided with a turnaround space as its terminus.
Dead End: A street or portion thereof with only one outlet.
Frontage: Minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street to provide access to abutting properties.
Loop: A minor street with both terminal points on the same street of origin.
Minor: A street which has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting properties.
Partial: A dedicated right of way providing only a portion of the required street width, usually along the edge of a subdivision or tract of land.
Private: A street that is not accepted for public use or maintenance which provides vehicular and pedestrian access.
SUBDIVIDER: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, syndicate, corporation, trust or other legal entity commencing proceedings under this title to
effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a developed or undeveloped tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more parts for the purpose, whether immediate or future,
of sale or of building development; provided, that if any one person within one calendar year divides any tract into two (2) or more parts, or if a new street
is involved in any subdivision of a parcel of land, such land shall be deemed a subdivision within the meaning of this title; provided, however, that this
definition of a "subdivision" shall not include a bona fide division or partition of agricultural land in parcels of more than five (5) acres for agricultural
purposes, nor shall it include the division of property which is within a duly zoned commercial or industrial district for commercial or industrial development
where no new streets are required or are to be dedicated for public use; nor shall it include or apply to the allocation of land in the settlement of an estate,
or a court decree for the distribution of property; nor shall it apply to the sale or conveyance of any parcel of land which may be shown as a portion of a
platted lot having two (2) acres or less, the lot being in a subdivision of which a plat heretofore has been recorded in the land records of Jefferson County,
Idaho.
SURVEYOR: Any person who is licensed in the state as a public land surveyor to do professional surveying.
UTILITIES: Installations for conducting water, sewage, gas, electricity, television, storm water and similar facilities providing service to and used by the
public.
VARIANCE: A modification of the strict terms of the relevant regulations where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where,
owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this title would result in unnecessary
and undue hardship.
VICINITY MAP: A small scale map showing the location of a tract of land in relation to a larger area. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 508, 4-
6-2004)
Chapter 3
PLATTING
11-3-1: PLATTING REQUIRED:
A. Filing Of Plat Required: Every owner of any piece, parcel, or tract of land who proposes, and in fact, does divide said tract of land into two (2) or more
lots, parcels or sites for the purpose of sale, building development, or other similar, related, or associated nonagricultural uses, whether immediate or
future, shall, before the sale of the second division of said land is completed, prepare and file a plat thereof in conformance with the requirements of
this Title.
B. Exceptions: These requirements for platting shall not apply to any of the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 179/201
1. The bona fide sale, division, or partition of agricultural land for continued agricultural purposes. A bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for
agricultural purposes shall mean the division of land into parcels or tracts all of which are twenty (20) acres or larger in area and which are
maintained as strictly agricultural lands.
2. An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate of a decedent or a court decree for the distribution of property.
3. The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnation as defined and allowed in the Idaho Code.
4. Widening of existing streets to conform to the Comprehensive Plan.
5. The acquisition of street rights of way by a public agency in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan.
6. The exchange of land for the sole purpose of straightening property boundaries which does not result in the change of the present land usage. (Ord.
403, 7-21-1987)
11-3-2: DEVELOPMENT WITHOUT PLATTING:
A. It is the overall intent of this Title that all land shall be platted whenever and wherever such is required by Section 11-3-1 of this Chapter. However, when
individual, isolated parcels of property are encountered in and around the City where the requirements for platting do not appear applicable or are not
required under Section 11-3-1 of this Chapter, then it is the intent of this Title that as such properties are developed (i.e., land use changed from one
use to a more intensive use, such as "agricultural" to "residential"; or "residential" to "commercial", etc.) and built upon, that the owners and/or
developers thereof shall dedicate to the public their equitable share of said developing lands as such is required for the creation of streets, alleys,
parks, open spaces, etc.; and utility, pedestrian, drainage way or other similar easements as the above may be needed for the public health, safety,
and general welfare and improvement of the City and its inhabitants.
B. It is further intended that the owners or developers of such developing property or property being built upon shall pay for their full share of all street
improvements (sidewalk, curb and gutter, paving, etc.), culinary water system improvements, sanitary sewer system improvements, storm drain system
improvements, etc., in a manner equitable with that required of the owners and/or developers of platted and subdivided ground. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
Chapter 4
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCEDURE
11-4-1: APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLAT REQUIRED:
No plat shall be recorded or offered for recording with the County Recorder until the plat has been reviewed by the Commission, and approved by the
Mayor and Council. No lots shall be sold until the plat has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-4-2: PREAPPLICATION (SKETCH PLAN):
A. Application: The subdivider may submit a preapplication and sketch plan to enable the City Clerk to review and comment on the proposed subdivision.
The preapplication submittal shall include as many copies of the sketch plan as is deemed necessary by the City Clerk. The sketch plan shall include
the entire developmental scheme of the proposed subdivision, drawn approximately to scale, including the following:
1. The general layout and approximate dimensions of the streets, blocks and lots in sketch form;
2. The existing conditions and characteristics of the land on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision site; and
3. The areas to be set aside for schools, parks and other public facilities.
B. Fees: All fees and costs associated with the preapplication shall be as set forth in the current subdivision fee schedule adopted by the City.
C. City Clerk Action: The City Clerk shall notify the subdivider within fifteen (15) days from the date of receiving an acceptable preapplication as to the
general conformance or nonconformance of the proposal with this Title and other applicable ordinances or regulations of the City, and shall provide the
subdivider with the necessary forms and checklists required for the submission of the subsequent preliminary and/or final plat. At this time, the City
Clerk shall indicate: (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
1. If the proposed development complies with the existing City, County or State policies, goals, objectives and the City Comprehensive Plan;
2. If additional special permits are needed or if ordinance conflicts, such as rezoning requirements, special development permits, or variances are
required and the manner of handling such requirements;
3. If there are any unique environmental features or hazardous concerns that may be directly or indirectly associated with the subject property, i.e.,
areas that have been designated by the State as areas of critical environmental concern, unique plant or animal life, areas within a flood plain, airport
flight pattern, or the like; and
4. If there are other City, County, or State agencies or departments that the subdivider should contact before preparing a preliminary plat or final plat.
(Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-4-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 180/201
A. Application: The subdivider shall file with the City Clerk a complete preliminary plat application form, preliminary plat, and other such related data as
may be required by this Title or the City Clerk. The required number of copies of the application form, preliminary plat, etc., shall be established by the
City Clerk. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Combining Preliminary And Final Plats:
1. The subdivider may request that the subdivision application be processed as both a preliminary and final plat if all the following exists:
a. The proposed subdivision does not exceed ten (10) lots:
b. No new street dedications or street widenings are involved;
c. No major zoning problems are expected;
d. No major special development considerations are involved, such as development in a flood plain, airport clear zone, hillside development or the
like; and
e. All required information for both the preliminary and final plats is complete and in an acceptable form.
2. A request to combine both the preliminary plat and final plat into one application shall be acted upon by the Commission upon a favorable
recommendation for the approval of same by the Technical Review Committee.
C. Contents Of Preliminary Plat Submittal: The contents of the preliminary plat submittal and related information shall be in such form as may be required
by the Commission; however, any additional maps or data deemed necessary by the Administrator shall also be provided. The subdivider shall submit
to the Administrator at least the following:
1. A preliminary plat application form requesting approval of the preliminary plat.
2. The appropriate number of copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, drawn in accordance with the requirements hereinafter stated.
3. The appropriate number of copies of the proposed preliminary plat showing by color or symbol the type of zoning that the subdivider desires for the
area contained within the preliminary plat.
4. The appropriate number of copies of the preliminary engineering plans (not meant to include any detailed designs) showing all streets, water lines,
sanitary sewers, storm drainage directional flow arrows and storm drain facilities, and other such required public improvements. (The preliminary plat
and engineering plans may be combined on one composite drawing if the amount of detail, etc., associated with the combining of said drawings does
not make the composite drawing too cluttered and unreadable.)
5. Appropriate information that sufficiently details the proposed development within any special development areas, such as hillside, planned unit
development, flood plain, airport clear zone, mobile home, large scale development, hazardous and unique areas of development, etc.
6. The name and address of all adjoining and adjacent owners of property within three hundred feet (300') of the property being considered (whether or
not bisected by a public right of way) as shown on record in the County Assessor's office. Also when specifically requested, the names and
addresses of all other persons to whom the Commission deems it appropriate that any notice of public hearing that may be held by the Commission
should be sent if it is determined that a public hearing is desirable.
D. Requirement For Preliminary Plat And Preliminary Engineering Drawings: The preliminary plat and preliminary engineering drawings shall be drawn on
good quality paper, linen, or mylar having dimensions of not less than twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"). The following shall be shown
on the preliminary plat, preliminary engineering drawings, or shall be submitted separately:
1. The name of the proposed subdivision;
2. The legal description of the subdivision;
3. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the subdivider or subdividers and the engineer and surveyor who prepared the plat and
engineering drawings;
4. The north point, scale, and date. The preliminary plat and preliminary engineering drawing shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals
one hundred feet (1" = 100');
5. A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to the surrounding area within a one-half (1/2) mile minimum radius (scale optional);
6. The entire area scheduled for development where the proposed subdivision is only a portion of a larger tract of land intended for subsequent and
eventual development;
7. The boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided shall be accurate in scale and bearing;
8. Both the existing and proposed land use and zoning of the proposed subdivision and the adjacent land, (i.e., single-family residential, multi-family,
etc., commercial, industrial, recreational, agricultural, etc.);
9. Contour lines, shown at five foot (5') intervals where land slope is greater than ten percent (10%) and at two foot (2') intervals where land slope is ten
percent (10%) or less, referenced to an established benchmark, including location and elevation;
10. Any sites proposed for parks, playgrounds, schools, churches or other public uses;
11. Any proposed or existing utilities, both within the tract and the areas adjacent thereto, including, but not limited to water mains, fire hydrants, storm
and sanitary sewers, and their respective sizes, directions of flow, etc.;
12. The location and, when applicable, the depth, width and/or sizes of all other important features such as railroad lines, watercourses, canals,
irrigation ditches, irrigation laterals, drainage ditches, bridges, culverts, exceptional topography, etc., within and contiguous to the tract to be
subdivided;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 181/201
13. The location, widths, and other required dimensions of all proposed streets, alleys, easements, etc. The proposed names of all the streets whether
existing, new or continuous. The new street names shall not be the same or similar to any other street names used in the City. Street name continuity
shall be maintained to the maximum extent possible from one subdivision to another wherever the street alignment is, in fact, continuous;
14. Any special dedications to the public and/or special easements, together with a statement of location, dimensions and purpose of such;
15. Lot lines and blocks showing the typical dimensions and numbers of each; (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
16. A site report as required by the District Health Department where individual wells or septic tanks are proposed;
17. All additional required information for special developments as required by this Title; and
18. A statement as to whether or not a variance, as specified in Chapter 7 of this Title, will be requested with respect to any provision of this Title
describing the particular provision, the variance requested, and the reasons therefor.
E. Fees: All fees and costs associated with the City's review of the preliminary plat, etc., shall be as set forth in the current subdivision fee schedule
adopted by the City.
F. Administration Review:
1. Certification: Upon receipt of the preliminary plat and all other required data as provided for herein, the Administrator shall certify the preliminary plat
application as complete and shall sign and date same. He shall, thereafter, place the preliminary plat on the agenda of the Technical Review
Committee for consideration at its next regular meeting which will normally be held no less than five (5) days after said date of certification nor more
than twenty (20) days thereafter.
2. Review By Other Agencies: The Administrator shall refer the preliminary plat and other applicable information to as many City departments and/or
other agencies as deemed necessary. Such departments and agencies may include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. City departments (Police, Fire, Street, Water, Sewer, Parks, Sanitation, etc.);
b. Other governing bodies having joint jurisdiction;
c. The appropriate utility companies, irrigation companies, drainage districts; etc.;
d. The superintendent of the school district; and
e. Other agencies having an interest in the proposed subdivision.
Upon expiration of the time allowed for department and agency review, the Administrator shall collect all recommendations, etc., from same and
shall prepare it for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
G. Technical Review Committee Recommendations:
1. The Technical Review Committee shall review the preliminary plat from the viewpoint of the various technical disciplines represented on the
Committee.
2. The Technical Review Committee shall make a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission on each preliminary plat, on each special
request that is made by the subdivider and on any other items or features that the Committee feels are significant and appropriate. The Committee's
recommendation shall include how deficiencies or shortcomings of the preliminary plat might be overcome. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
3. The preliminary plat shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular Commission meeting after the Committee meeting.
H. Public Notification: Whenever the Commission feels that a proposed subdivision or development may generate considerable public interest or
controversy or is of significant public concern, it may direct the Administrator to notify all adjoining property owners whose names and addresses have
been provided by the subdivider that the Commission will hold a public meeting concerning the preliminary plat of said subdivision. This notification
shall include the subject matter and the time, date and place of said meeting. Such written notification shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the
Commission meeting. The Administrator's failure to provide each adjacent individual with such notification shall not invalidate the Commission's action,
provided the spirit of the procedure has been observed and followed.
I. Commission Action:
1. Hearing By Commission: Within a reasonable time following receipt of the Committee's recommendation, the Commission shall review the
preliminary plat, the report from the Committee, comments from concerned persons and agencies and the report from the Administrator to arrive at a
decision on the preliminary plat.
2. Commission's Findings: In determining the acceptance of a proposed subdivision, the Commission shall consider at least the following:
a. The conformance of the subdivision with the Comprehensive Development Plan;
b. The conformance of the subdivision with the requirements of this Title;
c. The availability of public services to accommodate the proposed development; and
d. Such other health, safety or environmental problems as may be brought to the Commission's attention.
3. Action On Preliminary Plat: The Commission may approve, approve conditionally, disapprove, or table the preliminary plat for additional information.
Such action shall occur within thirty (30) days of the date of the regular meeting at which the plat is first considered by the Commission. The action,
and the reasons for such action, shall be stated in writing by the Administrator, and forwarded to the subdivider. The Administrator shall also forward
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 182/201
a statement of the action taken and the reasons for such action, together with a copy of the preliminary plat to the City Council for their information
and record. Upon granting or denying a preliminary plat, the Commission shall specify:
a. The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
b. The reasons for approval or denial; and
c. The recommended actions, if any, that the applicant could subsequently take to obtain approval of the preliminary plat.
J. Action On Combined Preliminary And Final Plat: If the Commission agrees to the subdivider's request for the subdivision to be considered as both a
preliminary plat and a final plat, then the Commission's review and hearing procedures shall be the same as those hereinafter specified for a final plat.
K. Appeals:
1. Any person or aggrieved party who appeared in person or who submitted written testimony before the Commission, or the subdivider himself, may
appeal, in writing, the decision of the Commission relative to the final action taken by said Commission. Such appeal must be submitted to the City
Council within ten (10) days from the date of said Commission action.
2. Upon receipt of an appeal regarding the action of the Commission, the City Council shall thereupon establish a hearing date to consider all
information, testimony and the Commission's minutes of the Commission's meeting to reach a decision to uphold, conditionally uphold or overrule the
decision of said Commission. The City Council can only overrule the Commission by a favorable vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the full City
Council. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
L. Preliminary Plat Approval Period:
1. The failure of the subdivider to secure approval of a final plat application within a two (2) year time period after the date of the Commission's
approval of the preliminary plat shall cause all approvals of said preliminary plat to become null and void, unless an extension of time is applied for
by the subdivider and granted by the Commission.
2. In the event that the development of the subdivision (as represented by the preliminary plat) is made in successive contiguous segments
(represented by final plats) in an orderly and reasonable manner, and said successive final plats conform substantially to the approved preliminary
plat, then said final plats, if submitted within successive intervals of two (2) years or less may be considered for final approval without resubmission
of the preliminary plat for reapproval; however, in no case shall a preliminary plat be considered as "approved" for more than a ten (10) year period.
At the end of such a ten (10) year approval period, the Commission may request a re-review of said preliminary plat. The subdivider will not be
required to pay any preliminary plat fees when the Commission requests a re-review of a preliminary plat at the end of such a ten (10) year approval
period; however he must abide by the Commission's request for a re-review and must proceed through the various procedural and approval steps
heretofore outlined for acquiring the Commission's approval of said preliminary plat. (Ord., 8-13-1991)
3. The subdivider may request the Commission to review a new or modified preliminary plat of a subdivision (even though he may have Commission
approval of an existing preliminary plat for said subdivision) at any time he wishes by proceeding through the various preliminary platting steps
heretofore outlined in this Section, including the paying of the required fees.
M. City Council Approval: If no appeal is brought before the City Council as set forth in subsection K of this Section and if the Council takes no action to
disapprove or remand the preliminary plat back to the Commission within thirty (30) days after the preliminary plat and Commission action is presented
to it by the Administrator, the subdivider may proceed to prepare a final plat in accordance with this Title. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-4-4: FINAL PLAT:
A. Application:
1. After the approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may cause the total parcel, or any part thereof, to be surveyed and a
final plat prepared in accordance with the approved preliminary plat. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
2. Prior to the approval of any final plat that represents only a portion of the originally approved preliminary plat, the Commission and/or the Public
Works Director may impose such conditions upon the final platting of said portions, phases, or divisions, as it or he deems necessary to assure the
orderly development of said separately platted areas.
3. The subdivider shall file with the City Clerk a complete final plat application form, final plat, and other such related data as may be required by this
Title or the City Clerk. The required number of copies of the application form, final plat, etc., shall be as established by the Administrator. (Ord. 403,
7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Content Of Final Plat Submittal: The contents of the final plat submittal and related information shall be in such form as may be required by the
Commission; however, any additional maps, data, or information deemed necessary by the Administrator shall also be provided. The subdivider shall
submit to the Administrator at least the following:
1. A final plat application form requesting approval of the final plat.
2. The appropriate number of copies of the final plat of the proposed subdivision, drawn in accordance with the requirements hereinafter stated in
subsection C of this Section.
3. The appropriate number of copies of the proposed final plat shelving by color or symbol, the types of zoning that the subdivider desires for the area
contained within the final plat.
4. Proof of current ownership of the real property included in the proposed final plat and such other information as the Administrator or Commission
may deem necessary to establish whether or not all proper parties have signed and/or approved said final plat. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 183/201
5. Subdivision street and utility improvement drawings prepared in accordance with the requirements hereinafter stated in subsection C of this Section
and as may be required by the Public Works Director.
6. The annexation agreement or development agreement setting forth the contractual obligations and agreements between the City and the subdivider.
7. The names and addresses of all property owners within three hundred feet (300') of that property being considered as a final plat as such are found
on record in the County Assessor's office. Also, the names and addresses of all other persons to whom the Commission deems it appropriate that a
notice of public hearing should be sent.
C. Final Plat Requirements: The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of Idaho Code section 50-1304. It shall be prepared in
black opaque image upon stable base drafting film with a minimum base thickness of 0.003 inches, by either a photographic process using a silver
image emulsion or by use of a black opaque drafting film ink, applied by mechanical or handwritten means. The drafting film and image thereon shall
be waterproof, tear-resistant, flexible, and capable of withstanding repeated handling, as well as providing archival permanence. If ink is used on
drafting film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. The drafting film must be of a type which can be
reproduced by either a photographic or diazo process. Plats shall be eighteen inches by twenty seven inches (18" x 27") in size, with a three and onehalf
inch (31/2") margin at the left end for binding and a one-half inch (1/2") margin on all other edges. No part of the drawing or certificates shall
encroach upon the margins. Signatures may be in reproducible black ink. The sheet or sheets which contain the drawing or diagram representing the
survey of the subdivision shall be drawn at a scale suitable to ensure the clarity of all lines, bearings, and dimensions. In the event that any subdivision
is of such magnitude that the drawing or diagram cannot be placed on a single sheet, serially numbered sheets shall be prepared and match lines shall
be indicated on the drawing or diagram with appropriate references to other sheets. The required dedications, acknowledgements and certifications
shall appear on one of the serially numbered sheets. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
The plat shall be so drawn that the top of the sheet either faces north or west, preferably north, whichever accommodates the drawing best.
The plat shall be drawn on a scale not smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and shall clearly show all details. The workmanship
on the finished drawing shall be neat, clearcut, and easily readable.
The following information shall be contained upon the final plat in the completeness, form, and accuracy limits set forth herein:
1. The name of the subdivision shall be set forth in bold letters at the top of the sheet. The title shall also include the name of the City, County, and
State, and the designation of the section, township, and range in which the subdivision is located. The name of the subdivision must not bear the
name of any other similar town or addition in the County, nor can the same word or words similar or pronounced the same, be used in making a
name for said addition, except the words city, place, court, addition or similar words, unless the same is contiguous and laid out and platted by the
same party or parties platting the addition bearing the same name, or a party files and records the written consent of the party or parties who platted
the addition bearing the same name. All plats of the same name must continue the block numbers of the plat previously filed.
2. The north point and scale of the plat and date.
3. The boundaries of the subdivision must be accurately drawn and the proper bearings and dimensions of all boundary lines shall be clearly shown
thereon. These lines should be slightly heavier than the street or lot lines.
4. The subdivision shall be tied to at least two (2) governmental survey corners, or in lieu of government survey corners, to monuments recognized by
the City surveyor.
5. The location, width, and names of all existing or dedicated streets, alleys, or other public ways within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
6. The names and boundaries of all subdivisions which have been previously recorded and which are adjacent thereto, must be shown upon the plat.
These adjacent subdivisions, subdivision streets, etc., shall be indicated by dotted lines to show their relationship to the plat offered for record. If
adjoining land is unplatted, it should be indicated as such.
7. The location, dimension, and purpose of all easements.
8. The blocks shall be numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block. Areas to
be excluded from platting shall be marked "Reserved" or "Not a Part" or "Exclusion".
9. Any property, other than streets or alleys, which is offered for dedication for public use shall be fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, with the
area marked, "Public" and showing the proposed use.
10. All tract or subdivision boundary lines, property lines, lot lines, street rights of way and center lines, alley lines, and other rights-of-way and
easement lines; also the boundaries, bearings and dimensions of all tracts of land within the subdivision which are intended to be dedicated for the
use of the public, shall all be delimited with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals thereof, and bearings in degrees, minutes, and seconds all to
the accuracy limits set forth below:
a. All linear dimensions shall be calculated to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot (0.01'); and
b. All bearings shall be calculated to one second of arc. The radii, arcs, central angles, tangents, and chord lengths shall be shown for all curves.
11. The location of all monuments shall be shown. Monuments are required and shall be shown at all street center line point of curve and point of
tangent locations, at the point of intersection of the center lines of intersecting streets, at all points along the exterior boundary of the subdivision
where said boundary line changes direction, and at all lot corners. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
12. All bearings shown on the final plat shall conform to City datum. All points requiring monuments as set forth above shall, if directed by the Public
Works Director have the coordinates for said point calculated based on the State Plane Coordinate System, Rigby datum, and shown on said plat.
13. Certification by the registered land surveyor preparing the plat certifying to the accuracy of said survey and plat.
14. Certification by the owner, covering the dedication of all street and alley rights of way and sites for public use, and the granting of any easements
shown on the plat. This shall include a notary public's acknowledgement of same.
15. Certification and signature of the City surveyor verifying that the accuracy of the survey and plat complies with the requirements of the laws of the
State and the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 184/201
16. Certification and signature of the Mayor and City Clerk, verifying that the subdivision has been approved by the Council.
17. Signature of the Public Works Director approving the subdivision.
18. Sanitary restriction by District Health Department.
D. Number Of Copies Of Final Plat:
1. An original and at least three (3) drafting film copies of the final plat shall be prepared. These shall be distributed as follows:
County Recorder - original plus one copy
Public Works Director - one copy
Subdivider's engineer - one copy
2. All copies shall meet the basic requirements set forth in subsection C of this Section.
E. City Surveyor Designated: The City shall choose and require a surveyor, legally qualified to perform land surveying in Idaho, to sufficiently check the
plat and all computations thereon to determine that the requirements herein are met, and said surveyor shall certify such compliance on the plat. For
performing such service, the City shall collect from the subdivider a fee as set forth in the current subdivision fee schedule adopted by the City.
F. Coordinate Computations Required: When the final plat is submitted to the City surveyor, a computation select showing the calculated coordinates on all
points based on the State Plane Coordinate System, Rigby datum, shall accompany said plat.
G. Dedications Required; Hearing:
1. All streets, alleys, general street or utility easements and pedestrian walkway easements within the subdivision must be dedicated for public use.
2. Dedication of all other public parks or open space within the subdivision will be required in accordance with the Master Plan of the City. When this
Plan calls for a larger amount of space than the subdivider can be reasonably expected to dedicate, the land needed beyond the subdivider's fair
contribution is to be reserved for acquisition by the City, provided such acquisition is made within five (5) years from the date of approval.
3. The action of the Mayor and Council in exercising this power to compel dedication of public open space shall take place only after a public hearing
has been held on the matter. Anyone aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor and Council may have the decision reviewed by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
H. Monuments Required: The type and location of all monuments shall be as follows:
1. Monuments of concrete with a brass cap conforming to City standards, and installed to City standards shall be set at all street center line point of
curve and point of tangent locations, and at the point of intersection of the center lines of intersecting streets.
2. All points on the exterior boundary of the subdivision where said boundary line changes direction shall be marked with monuments either of concrete
(with a brass cap conforming to City standards), galvanized iron pipe not less than one inch (1") in diameter and thirty inches (30") long with a brass
cap thereon, or iron or steel rods not less than five-eighths inch (5/8") in least dimension and thirty inches (30") long, or as otherwise approved by the
Public Works Director.
3. Points shall be plainly and permanently marked upon all of the above-referenced monuments so that measurements taken therefrom may be
acquired to an accuracy of one-hundredth of a foot (1/100'). These monuments and the points thereon shall be existing at the time of the City's final
acceptance of the subdivision improvements.
4. All lot corners shall be marked with monuments of either galvanized iron pipe or iron or steel rods (at least 1/2 inch in diameter), and being at least
two feet (2') long. These lot markers shall all be existing at the time of the City's final acceptance of the subdivision improvements.
I. Accuracy Requirements: All dimensions, both linear and angular, shall be staked in the field by an accurate control survey which must balance and close
within a limit of one in fifty thousand (50,000).
J. Amended Plats: Amended plats must be filed as per an original final plat. In the event a final plat of a subdivision has been recorded and any changes
thereto are contemplated which will change the subdivision materially, the subdivision upon which such changes are contemplated must be vacated
and an amended plat filed in accordance with the regulations set forth in this Title. Any proposed changes in street or alley locations will require an
amended plat. Any contemplated or actual selling of partial lots which have (or could have) the effect of increasing the number of building sites in
excess of the number of platted lots shall require an amended plat. The Public Works Director shall determine when an amended plat is required.
K. Fees: All fees and costs associated with the City's review of the final plat, etc., shall be as set forth in the current subdivision fee schedule adopted by
the City.
L. Administrator Action:
1. Resubmittal Of Final Plat: The Administrator shall review the final plat for compliance with the approved (or conditionally approved) preliminary plat.
If the Administrator determines that there is a substantial difference in the final plat from that which was approved as a preliminary plat (or conditions
which have not been met), the Administrator shall require that the final plat be resubmitted to the Technical Review Committee and Commission in
the same manner as required in the preliminary plat process.
2. Acceptance Of Final Plat Application: If upon receipt of the final plat, the Administrator finds that all requirements provided for herein have been
complied with, he shall approve the final plat application as being complete and shall sign and date same.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 185/201
3. Submission To Commission: Upon his determination that the final plat is in compliance with the preliminary plat and that all conditional requirements
have been met, the Administrator shall place the final plat on the Commission agenda within forty five (45) days from the date on which said
acceptable final plat application was acknowledged by the Administrator.
M. Technical Committee And Agency Review: The Administrator shall transmit one copy of the final plat and other related documents submitted therewith,
to such other departments and agencies as he deems necessary for their review and recommendations to ensure compliance with the preliminary plat
approval and/or conditions of the preliminary plat approval. Such agencies may include the following:
1. City Departments (Police, Fire, Street, Water, Sewer, Parks, Sanitation, etc.);
2. Other governing bodies having joint jurisdiction;
3. The appropriate utility companies, irrigation companies or districts and drainage districts;
4. The superintendent of the school district; and
5. Other agencies having an interest in the proposed subdivision.
N. Technical Review Committee Recommendation:
1. If submitted to the Technical Review Committee by the Administrator, the Committee shall review the final plat from the viewpoint of the technical
disciplines represented on the Committee.
2. The Technical Review Committee shall make a recommendation to the Commission on each final plat, on each special request that is made by the
subdivider, and on any other items or features that the Committee feels are significant and appropriate. The Committee's recommendation shall
include how deficiencies or shortcomings of the final plat might be overcome.
3. After review by the Technical Committee, the final plat shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular Commission meeting which is held not less
than fourteen (14) days after said Technical Committee meeting.
O. Public Hearing Notice Required:
1. If the Planning and Zoning Commission is considering a final plat (or an unplatted area) and said areas are being proposed for initial zoning, or a
zone change, or annexation, the Commission shall hold one or more public hearings as required under Idaho Code sections 67-6509, 67-6511 and
67-6525 regarding the zoning and annexation of said area. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
2. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the required public hearing, a notice of the time, date, and place, a summary of the subject matter to be discussed,
and where appropriate, a property description or map delimiting the area being considered, shall be published in the official newspaper of the City.
The Commission shall also make available a "notice" to other newspapers, radio, and television stations serving the City for their use as a public
service announcement. Following the Commission hearing, if the Commission makes or requires a material change from that published or presented,
a further notice and hearing shall be provided before the Commission forwards its recommendation to the City Council.
P. Property Owner Notification:
1. If the area under consideration by the Commission is being considered for initial zoning (upon annexation to the City) or for a zoning change, the
Commission shall, in addition to the public hearing notice set forth above, provide written notification (by mail) to all property owners and residents
having property or residing within the area being so considered and also to all property owners and residents within three hundred feet (300') of the
external boundaries of the land being so considered; also, any additional area that may be impacted by the proposed change as such area may be
determined by the Commission. When such notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners or residents, alternate forms of
notification (in lieu of mailed notice) which will still provide adequate notice to said property owners or residents may be specified and utilized by the
Commission.
2. This notification shall include a brief summary of the subject matter to be discussed, a map showing the area being considered if such is deemed
necessary by the Commission, and the time, date, and place of said meeting. This notification shall be mailed, or otherwise brought to the abovereferenced
property owners' and residents' attention, at least ten (10) days prior to the Commission meeting. The Administrator's failure to provide
each individual property owner or resident with such individual notification shall not invalidate the Commission's action, provided the spirit of the
procedure has been observed and followed.
Q. Commission Action:
1. Hearing By Commission: Within a reasonable time following the receipt of the Technical Committee's recommendation and within the time frame
required for the required public hearing and property owner notification as set forth above, the Commission shall review the final plat, the report from
the Technical Committee, comments from concerned persons and agencies, and the report from the Administrator to arrive at a decision on the final
plat.
2. Commission's Findings: In determining the acceptance of the final plat of a proposed subdivision, the Commission shall consider at least the
following:
a. The conformance of the subdivision with the Comprehensive Development Plan;
b. The conformance of the subdivision with the requirements of this Subdivision Title;
c. The availability of public services to accommodate the proposed development; and
d. Any other health, safety or environmental problems that may be brought to the Commission's attention.
3. Action On Final Plat: The Commission may approve, approve conditionally, disapprove, or table the final plat for additional information. Such action
shall occur within thirty (30) days of the date of the regular meeting at which the plat is first considered by the Commission. The action, and the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 186/201
reasons for such action, shall be stated in writing, by the Administrator, and forwarded to the subdivider. Upon reaching a final decision to approve or
disapprove a final plat, the Commission shall specify:
a. The ordinances, standards, and criteria used in evaluating the application;
b. The reasons for approval or disapproval; and
c. The recommended actions, if any, that the subdivider could subsequently take to obtain approval of the final plat.
The above action and information shall be stated in writing, by the Administrator, and forwarded to the subdivider. The Administrator shall also
forward a statement of the action taken and the reasons for such action, together with a copy of the final plat to the Mayor and City Council for their
information and action if such is required.
R. Appeals:
1. Any person or aggrieved party who appeared in person or who submitted written testimony before the Commission, or the subdivider himself, may
appeal, in writing, the decision of the Commission relative to the final action taken by said Commission. Such appeal must be submitted to the City
Council (via the Administrator) within twenty (20) days from the date of said Commission's final action. Upon receipt of an appeal regarding the
action of the Commission, the City Council shall thereupon establish a hearing date to consider all information, testimony and the minutes of the
Commission's meeting to reach a decision to uphold, conditionally uphold, or override the decision of said Commission. The City Council can only
overrule the Commission's action by a favorable vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the full City Council.
2. If the subject property (subject of the appeal) is scheduled to come before the City Council for final plat approval, annexation to the City, etc., then
the above-referenced appeal and all related information shall be heard and presented to the City Council at said regularly scheduled hearing or
meeting. Provided, however, that Council action on an appeal must take place within ninety (90) days from the date on which the Administrator, on
behalf of the Mayor and/or Council, received said appeal. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
S. Approval Period: The Commission's approval of the final plat shall be valid for only a period of two (2) years from the date of said Commission's
approval, unless an extension of time is applied for by the subdivider and granted by the Commission. (Ord., 8-13-1991)
T. City Council Action:
1. Public Hearing Notice And Property Owner Notification: The requirements governing the need for a notice of public hearing and property owner
notification as such are set forth in subsections O and P of this Section for the Commission (and Idaho Code sections 50-901, 67-6509, 67-6511, 67-
6525) shall apply to all comparable Council meetings, hearings, and actions.
2. Appeals; Disapproval: If an appeal is brought before the City Council as set forth above and, after hearing all evidence and testimony associated
therewith, the Council does not agree with the action taken by the Commission on said final plat, or if it, of its own volition, does not agree with the
action taken by the Commission on the final plat, or if it does not agree with certain aspects or the entirety of said final plat, then the City Council
may, by a favorable vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the full City Council, remand said final plat back to the Commission for further consideration or it
may disapprove and reject said final plat.
3. City Approval:
a. The final plat will be brought before the City Council for its final review and approval only upon a finding by the Administrator that all of the
following are complete, available, and/or have been complied with:
(1) Final plat complete and approved by the Commission (or by the Council, if the Commission has overruled a disapproval of the Commission),
the City surveyor, and the Public Works Director.
(2) The subdivision improvement drawings complete and approved by the Public Works Director.
(3) Annexation agreement or development agreement complete and approved by Public Works Director and City Attorney.
(4) Performance bond (including cost estimate of all improvements) complete and approved by the Public Works Director and City Attorney.
(5) Notice of public hearing advertised and property owner notifications written or otherwise properly taken care of as required by this Title and
Idaho Code sections 67-6509, 67-6511, and 67-6525.
b. At a duly called regular or special meeting following receipt of the above-listed information and items from the Administrator, and after hearing the
Commission's report, reports from any concerned City personnel, the subdivider's comments, and comments or information from any other
concerned persons or agencies, the Council may approve, approve conditionally, disapprove, or table any action on the final plat and other related
documents for further information, study, and consideration; however, final Council action on said final plat and related documents shall take place
within forty (40) days of the date of that meeting at which the final plat was first considered. Upon approving or disapproving the final plat, the
Council shall specify:
(1) The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
(2) The reasons for approval or disapproval; and
(3) The actions, if any, that the subdivider could take to obtain approval of said plat.
U. Filing Of Final Plat And Related Documents: Upon approval of the final plat and related documents by the Council, the City surveyor or Public Works
Director shall see that the same are all properly signed by the Mayor and City Clerk, and the District Health Department and shall, thereupon, take
same to the County Recorder for recording. The original and all copies of the final plat shall receive the County Recorder's attestation of recording and
shall be redistributed as set forth in subsection D of this Section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 187/201
V. Annexation And Zoning Ordinances: Concurrently with or immediately following the approval of the final plat and the adoption of an ordinance of
annexation, the Council shall amend the Zoning Ordinance as such action may be required. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
Chapter 5
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
11-5-1: MINIMUM DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS REQUIRED:
All final plats and subdivision improvement drawings submitted pursuant to the provisions of this Title, and all subdivision improvements and facilities
done, constructed or made in accordance with said plat, subdivision improvement drawings and these provisions shall comply with the minimum design
standards set forth hereinafter in this Title and in the water, sanitary sewer, storm drain, and other related City ordinances and shall be in accordance with
the City standard specifications and standard drawings governing the construction of all street, water line, sanitary sewer, and storm drain facilities.
Provided, however, that where there is any conflict between these standards and requirements and any higher standards required by the County, Idaho
Division of Highways, Idaho Department of Health and Welfare, District Health Department, or other such governmental agency, then said higher standard
requirements shall prevail over those set forth herein. It is further recognized that the standards and requirements set forth herein are only very general in
nature and that further, more specific and more detailed standards, requirements, procedures, and policies may be adopted by the Council and/or
established by the Public Works Director and that such subsequent standards, requirements, procedures, and policies shall be followed and complied with;
provided, that they reflect the general intent of this Title and do not allow items, facilities, or features of a lessor quality or standard than those established
and set forth herein. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
11-5-2: GENERAL STREET LOCATION, ARRANGEMENT AND MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS:
General street location and arrangement shall conform to the following:
A. Official Street Plan: All arterial and collector streets shall conform to the Official Street Plan or Comprehensive Development Plan.
B. Minor Streets: Minor streets shall be so arranged as to discourage their use by through traffic. The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern need not be
adhered to, and the use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs, or U-shaped streets is encouraged where such use will result in a more desirable layout.
C. Stub Streets: Where adjoining areas are not yet subdivided, the arrangement of streets in any new subdivisions shall be such that certain streets are
extended to the boundary line of said subdivision to make provisions for the future extension of said streets into adjacent future subdivisions. A reserve
strip may be required and held in public ownership. If the "stub street" is more than two hundred feet (200'), long then a temporary cul-de-sac or
turnaround area may be required on the end thereof. The temporary turnaround may be either "T" shaped or a normal cul-de-sac shape. The normal
street right of way shall be extended to the boundary line of the subdivision with a note on the plat that the right of way or easement area required for
the temporary turnaround shall revert to the adjacent property owners whenever the street is ultimately extended. The subdivider shall be financially
responsible for both the temporary turnaround and the permanent street improvements to the subdivision boundary.
D. Relation To Topography: Streets shall be arranged in proper relation to topography so as to result in usable lots, safe streets and acceptable street and
driveway grades.
E. Alleys: Alleys shall be provided in multiple dwelling or commercial subdivisions unless other provisions are made for service access and off-street
loading and parking and garbage collection. Dead-end alleys shall be prohibited in all cases.
F. Access To Major Arterials: Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed major County line road or other designated arterial,
access thereto shall, wherever possible, be limited by one of the following means:
1. The subdivision shall be platted so the lots back onto the arterial and front onto a local street; no access shall be provided from the arterial and
screening shall be provided along the rear property line of such lots.
2. A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear
lines of their terminal lots backing onto the major arterial. No access shall be provided from or to the arterial and screening shall be provided along
the rear property line of such lots.
3. A marginal access or service road (separated from the arterial by a grass strip and having access thereto at designated suitable points).
4. Whenever individual property access is provided or allowed to any major arterial street, section line road, or other designated arterial street, the
minimum building setback line for any building being constructed adjacent thereto shall be sixty five feet (65') from the proposed street right-of-way
line. The driveway(s) to and from said building and the off-street parking facilities associated therewith shall be so arranged and located that all
vehicles shall both enter from and exit onto said arterial street in a forward direction. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
G. Cul-De-Sac Streets: Cul-de-sac streets shall not be more than four hundred feet (400') in length and shall terminate with an adequate turnaround
having a minimum curb diameter of eighty eight feet (88') back-of-curb to back-of-curb and a street property line diameter of at least one hundred feet
(100'). Other special turnaround layouts or arrangements may be allowed with the approval of the Public Works Director and City Council, provided
said other layouts or arrangements provide for turnaround capabilities at least equal to that of the referenced one hundred foot (100') diameter cul-desac.
(Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
H. Half Or Partial Streets: Half or partial streets shall be prohibited except where unusual circumstances make such partial streets necessary for the
reasonable development of a tract in conformance with this Title and where satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 188/201
provided. Whenever a tract to be subdivided borders on an existing half or partial street, the other part of the street shall be dedicated with the
subdivision and development of said tract.
I. Private Streets: Private streets and roads shall be prohibited except within planned unit developments and other similar type developments where
continued street maintenance, snow plowing, etc., can be assured by said private development organization. Private streets shall be designed and
constructed to basically the same standards and requirements as those established for public streets.
J. Arrangement: Street and alley arrangements must be such as to cause no undue hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their land and
seek to provide for convenient access thereto. The street and alley arrangement must also provide for the continuation of a reasonable number of utility
lines. All streets shall be laid out and aligned so they are properly related to traffic generators; to population densities; and to the existing and planned
land use patterns. All streets shall be integrated with the existing and proposed transportation network. The alignment and width of previously platted
and developed streets shall be continued except where physical conditions or new requirements make a modification advisable.
K. Streets In Industrial And Commercial Areas: In commercial and industrial developments, the streets and other access ways shall be planned in
connection with the grouping of buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas, walks and parking
areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian.
L. Traffic Control: The subdivider shall provide traffic signals, channelization and lane additions when the traffic generation from his development is
sufficient to warrant said improvements within a five (5) year period, all in accordance with the standards of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways.
M. Prohibition Of Signs: Only authorized and official signs shall be permitted to be placed, displayed or maintained within the right of way of any public
street or alley.
N. Position Of Mailboxes: Mailboxes shall be grouped or clustered at convenient intervals and locations outside of the public street or alley rights of way.
Mailbox clusters shall be located far enough from street intersections so that the traffic to and from said mailbox clusters does not create a traffic
hazard at adjacent intersections. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-5-3: STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTHS:
A. Minimum Widths:
1. Street right-of-way widths shall conform to the adopted Major Street Plan or Comprehensive Development Plan, the rules of the Idaho Division of
Highways, the following minimum right-of-way standards, and the approved right-of-way widths shown on the subdivision improvement drawings.
Highway And Street Types Widths
Major arterial 114 or more feet
Section line roads or other arterials 90 feet
Existing arterial in existing built-up area 80 feet
Industrial or commercial street 70 feet
Collector or secondary streets 60 feet
Minor streets and cul-de-sacs 50 feet
2. The above stated widths may be increased as required at intersections to provide the additional lane widths and lengths needed at said
intersections.
B. Requirements And Specifications: A street with a fifty foot (50') right-of-way width is permissible only in single-family residential zones where no more
than twenty (20) lots are to be served on a cul-de-sac street or where no more than forty (40) lots are to be served on a loop street. A street with a sixty
foot (60') right-of-way width is required for all other residential or other type zones; for all streets adjacent to institutional uses (churches, schools, public
and quasi-public buildings) in any zone; and for all streets where the criteria outlined above for fifty foot (50') streets is not met. Streets serving any
commercial or industrial zoned area where large volumes of vehicular traffic and/or large numbers of trucks are to be expected shall have a seventy
foot (70') right-of-way width. Collector streets having at least a sixty foot (60') or seventy foot (70') right-of-way width as set forth above and a
reasonably straight alignment shall be provided approximately every one-fourth (1/4) mile. The alignment of these collector streets and the adjacent
streets feeding into them shall be such that the collector street(s) collect the traffic from the adjacent local streets and carry it expeditiously to the
adjacent arterials.
C. Collector Streets: Collector streets may function with two (2) lanes of vehicular traffic and "on-street" vehicle parking or with four (4) lanes of traffic and
no "on-street" vehicle parking, depending upon the size of the area served and the amount of traffic generated within the area being served by the
collector. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-5-4: STREET CURBED OR PAVED WIDTHS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 189/201
Minimum width of streets measured from back-of-curb to back-of-curb or edge-of-oil shall be as shown on the approved typical section sheets on file in the
Public Works Director's office and/or as shown on the approved subdivision improvement drawings. In general, these widths are as follows:
Highway And Street Types Widths
Major arterial 90 feet or more
Section line road and other arterial streets 70 feet
Existing arterial in existing built-up area 67 feet
Collector or secondary streets 48 feet
Minor streets or cul-de-sacs 38 feet
Uncurbed streets (collector or secondary) 48 feet pavement
Uncurbed streets (minor or cul-de-sac) 38 feet pavement
The above stated widths may be increased at intersections to provide the additional lane widths and lengths necessary. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999
Code)
11-5-5: STREET GRADES:
A. Streets shall be constructed with a minimum street grade of at least forty hundredths percent (0.40%) on straight or gently curved sections of street.
B. On sharp curves (R = 100 feet or less) and around intersection corners the minimum allowable street grade shall be sixty one-hundredths percent
(0.60%).
C. Street cross-drains (valley gutters) shall have a minimum grade of at least one percent (1.0%).
D. Maximum street grades shall not exceed ten percent (10%) for local or minor streets, six percent (6%) for collector or secondary streets, and four
percent (4%) for arterial streets.
E. Where existing facilities, rock excavations, or other truly unusual features or circumstances are encountered, grades flatter or steeper than those listed
above may be used if the Public Works Director finds that the use of such flatter or steeper grades is the best way of resolving the problems associated
with said unusual and unique circumstances or conditions. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
11-5-6: STREET ALIGNMENT AND CURVATURE:
A. Horizontal Alignment: When street center lines deflect from each other by more than five degrees (5°) in alignment, the center lines shall be connected
by a curve having a minimum radius as follows:
2,865 feet for a major arterial
1,145 feet for any arterial street
475 feet for collector or secondary streets
80 feet for local or minor streets
Between reverse curves on collector and arterial streets, there shall be a minimum tangent distance of at least two hundred feet (200').
B. Vertical Alignment: Minimum stopping sight distances shall be two hundred feet (200') for minor streets and designed in accordance with a design
speed of thirty five (35) miles per hour for collector streets and fifty (50) miles per hour for arterial streets. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-5-7: STREET BALLAST DEPTHS:
A. Depths Established: Street ballast depths (i.e., compacted depths of plant mix pavement and crushed gravel) for normal subgrade conditions and soils
shall be as follows:
Low traffic volume residential streets 2 inch plant mix and
6 inch crushed gravel
High volume residential collector streets 3 inch plant mix and
6 inch crushed gravel
Low volume commercial or industrial streets 3 inch plant mix and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 190/201
6 inch crushed gravel
High volume commercial or industrial streets 31/2 inch plant mix and
8 inch crushed gravel
Arterial streets 4 inch plant mix and
10 inch crushed gravel
B. Change Approved By City: Where unusually good or poor subgrade soils are encountered or where exceptionally high or low traffic volumes are
anticipated or projected, the above-listed ballast depths may be changed as approved or required by the Public Works Director. Any such ballast depth
changes shall be based upon documented test results showing the actual strength ("R" value and other required test data) of the on-site subgrade soils
and/or the calculated traffic volumes for the street.
C. Final Depths Shown On Plans: The final approved ballast depths shall be those shown on the subdivision improvement plans. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987;
amd. 1999 Code)
11-5-8: STREET NAMES:
The naming of streets shall conform to the following:
A. Duplication Of Existing Names Prohibited: Street names shall not duplicate any existing street name within the County except where a new street is a
continuation of an existing street. Street names that may be spelled differently but sound the same as existing streets shall not be used.
B. Rules For Naming: All new streets shall be named as follows: streets having predominantly north-south direction shall be named "Avenue" or "Road";
streets having a predominantly east-west direction shall be named "Street" or "Way"; meandering streets shall be named "Drive", "Lane", "Path" or
"Trail", and cul-de-sacs shall be named "Circle", "Court", and "Place".
C. Street Signs: Street name signs shall be furnished and installed by the subdivider in accordance with City specifications. The subdivider may name
streets subject to approval of the City Council.
D. Other Signs And Barricades: All other types of signs and barricades required in the subdivision shall also be furnished and installed by the subdivider in
accordance with City specifications and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-5-9: INTERSECTIONS:
Intersections shall conform to the following:
A. Angle Of Intersection: Streets shall intersect at ninety degrees (90°) or closely thereto as possible, and in no case shall streets intersect at less than
seventy five degrees (75°) unless said lesser angle of intersection has been approved by the Public Works Director as being the best way to handle or
solve a unique situation or set of circumstances.
B. Sight Triangles: Minimum clear sight distance at all minor street intersections shall permit vehicles to be visible to the carrier of another vehicle when
each is one hundred feet (100') from the center of the intersection.
C. Number Of Streets: No more than two (2) streets shall cross at any one intersection.
D. T Intersections: T intersections may be used whenever such design will not restrict the free movement of traffic.
E. Street Center Line Offsets: Street center lines shall be offset by a distance of at least the following:
Street To Offsets Along Minimum Desirable
Minor street 125 feet 160 feet
Collector street 300 feet 400 feet
Arterial street 400 feet 600 feet
Major arterial street Approximately 1,320 feet but requires Public Works Director's approval.
F. Vertical Alignment Of Intersection: A relatively flat grade is desirable within intersections and approximately one hundred feet (100') each way from the
intersection. A maximum intersection approach grade of two percent (2%) is allowable in rolling terrain, and four percent (4%) in hilly terrain.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 191/201
G. Curbs At Street Intersections; Handicap Accessible: Curbs at street intersections shall be rounded with curves having a minimum radius of twenty five
feet (25') or such larger radius as is shown on the subdivision improvement drawings. The curb and sidewalk shall be depressed at all intersection
corners to accommodate the handicapped. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
11-5-10: SIDEWALKS:
A. Minimum Requirements: Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in width and may be required to be of a greater width in areas near shopping
centers, schools, or where pedestrian traffic may otherwise warrant a greater width. Sidewalk cross slope, thickness and the construction thereof shall
be as required in the City standard specifications and standard drawings.
B. Easements And Cul-De-Sacs: Concrete sidewalks for pedestrian walkways through easements at mid-block, cul-de-sacs or other approved or required
locations shall be not less than six feet (6') in width, and shall be required where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping areas, transportation, or any other community facility. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-5-11: DRIVEWAY APPROACHES:
A. Driveway Widths:
1. Residential driveways shall have a minimum width of sixteen feet (16') and a maximum width of forty feet (40'). All other driveways (multi-family,
commercial, etc.) shall have a minimum width of twenty five feet (25') and a maximum width of forty feet (40').
2. No more than one-half (1/2) of the property frontage along any street can be utilized for driveway purposes along that street. The above stated
driveway widths indicate the "fully depressed" portion of the driveway. That is, the tapered or transition sections (from full height curb to depressed
curb) on both sides of the driveway widths.
3. Where individual private driveways are permitted along arterial streets, said driveway approaches shall be limited to the fewest number possible to
provide access to the adjacent property.
B. Concrete Thickness: Driveways to single-family residences shall have a concrete thickness of not less than four inches (4") and need not be reinforced
with reinforcing steel. Driveways to all buildings or establishments other than single-family residences shall have a concrete thickness of not less than
six inches (6") and shall be reinforced with reinforcing steel. Driveway layout, concrete depths, amount of reinforcing steel, etc., shall be in accordance
with the standard drawings. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
C. Concrete Driveway Slab Required: All driveway approaches shall have a concrete driveway slab at least five feet (5') wide (perpendicular to the curb
line) for the full length of and immediately adjacent to the depressed driveway curb and gutter (even when concrete sidewalk is not required in an area)
to protect said depressed curb and gutter from tilting, damage, and distortion due to vehicular traffic using the driveway. Asphalt paving, gravel, dirt, or
other such driveway material is not permitted immediately adjacent to the concrete curb and gutter. Effective May 1, 2004, in areas zoned R-1, with the
approval of the Rigby planning and zoning administrator, the city may allow roll back curbing. Such curbing shall void the need for the depressed
driveway curb and gutter. (Ord. 508, 4-6-2004)
D. Prohibited Locations: Driveways shall not be located on a corner or so near thereto as to constitute a traffic hazard. Where any street corner right of
way lines have not been rounded off by a connection radius line, the edge of any proposed driveway shall be kept at least twenty five feet (25') back
from the apex of the corner formed by said right of way lines so that the driveway will not be located within the corner area when said corner is rounded
off. The edge of any driveway shall be kept at least five feet (5') from any property line. Private driveways shall be prohibited on all controlled access
streets as such are designated by the council and shall be kept to an absolute minimum on all arterial streets.
E. Utility Or Landscaping Strips: Where utility or landscaping (trees, plantings, lawn, etc.) strips are located between the curb and gutter and the adjacent
sidewalk, the concrete driveway slab shall be constructed across same at each driveway location. Where the utility or landscaping strip is six feet (6') or
more in width, the driveway shall be uniformly sloped from back of curb to front edge of sidewalk. Where the utility or landscaping strip is less than six
feet (6') in width, the driveway (and sidewalk) shall be uniformly sloped from the back of curb to the back of sidewalk. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
F. Standard Specifications And Drawings: All driveway construction shall be done in accordance with the city standard specifications and standard
drawings. All driveways must be approved by the public works director before any work is started on same.
G. Breaking Off Curb Prohibited: Breaking off the top of the curb down to the gutter flow line to construct the depressed driveway section is not permitted.
If the curb was not depressed for the driveway during the original construction of the curb and gutter, then the entire curb and gutter section(s) shall be
completely removed and then replaced with new concrete curb and gutter having the appropriate and required depressed section and transition or
tapered sections.
H. Variances: Where, due to unusual or unique circumstances, any of the above requirements impose an undue hardship upon any particular property, the
owner of same may request the public works director to review the circumstances and situation associated with said hardship, and the public works
director is herewith granted authority to allow such variances to the above listed driveway requirements as he feels is equitable. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987;
amd. 1999 Code)
11-5-12: VEHICLE PARKING:
A. Compliance With Requirements: All vehicle parking requirements shall be totally met or satisfied by the provision of off street parking spaces (i.e.,
parking spaces provided on the private property whereon any new, or existing residence, building, etc., is constructed or situated). On street vehicle
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 192/201
parking, where such is allowed, shall be utilized only for temporary, transient, or other such short time parking needs.
B. Entry And Exit In Forward Direction: All driveways and the off street parking facilities associated therewith shall be arranged in such manner that all
vehicles shall both enter from and exit onto the adjacent street in a forward direction.
C. Backing Into Street: The only exception to the above is that single-family residences located along minor streets or low-volume collector streets may
have driveways and off-street parking spaces that are so located and arranged that they safely provide for but still allow backing out into the street from
said driveways and parking spaces. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-5-13: ALLEYS:
A. Location: Alleys may be required along the rear lot lines of multi-family and commercial property, and along the rear of all lots fronting on arterial streets.
B. Width: The minimum width of any dedicated alley shall be sixteen feet (16') with a twenty foot (20') wide alley required in any commercial areas.
C. Alignment Changes: Alley intersections and sharp changes of alley alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off or
rounded sufficiently to permit safe convenient vehicular movement.
D. Radius Of Curvature: The minimum radius of curvature on the inside edge of the alley right of way shall be fifty feet (50').
E. Construction: All alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the typical cross section and ballast depths shown on the subdivision improvement
drawings or the City standard drawings. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-5-14: EASEMENTS:
A. Widths:
1. Where easements are deemed necessary for poles, wires, conduits, storm or sanitary sewer lines, gas lines, water lines, fill or cut slopes, etc., the
following minimum easement widths shall be required along each of the so-indicated lot lines.
Rear lot lines 10 feet
Side lot lines 8 feet
Front lot lines 10 feet
2. Easements of greater width may be required along such lot lines, right-of-way lines, etc., as are deemed necessary by the Public Works Director for
such items as surface drainage ditches or facilities, major trunk line (water, sanitary sewer, etc.) facilities, high fill or cut slopes, etc. (Ord. 403, 7-21-
1987; amd. 1999 Code)
B. Access To Facilities: Easements providing access to facilities may also be required even though the facilities themselves may not actually be located in
said access easements.
C. Adjoining Waterways: When a subdivision is traversed by a waterway, intermittent stream, or drainage right of way conforming substantially with the
lines of same, and such easement shall include an additional area at least fifteen feet (15') in width adjoining one edge of any waterway, drainage way,
or intermittent stream that measures twenty feet (20') or less from bank to bank. Where the distance from bank to bank is more than twenty feet (20'),
such easement shall include an additional area at least fifteen feet (15') in width adjoining both edges of the waterway or intermittent stream. Where
ditch drainage is used in lieu of storm sewers, as such may be permitted herein, the easement shall be of sufficient width to allow future construction of
a storm sewer main adequate to carry the ultimate runoff of the watershed. Such easement shall be not less than twenty feet (20') in width. The fifteen
foot (15') working area adjoining a stream shall be continuous through the subdivision and adjoin existing easements. The area of any public way
immediately adjacent to the waterway or intermittent stream may be taken into consideration in providing said fifteen foot (15') working area.
D. Removal Of Features Or Facilities: All easements shall be kept unobstructed by any permanent features or facilities (houses, sheds, trees, fireplaces,
etc.). Temporary features or facilities (fences, bushes, flower beds, gardens, etc.) shall be removed by their owner when the City or utility company
(who has facilities within an easement or needs access through an access easement) requires that said temporary features or facilities be removed. If
the owner does not remove said features or facilities, or if an emergency situation arises whereby it is necessary that the City or utility company gain
immediate access to or through said easement, then the City or utility company needing access to or through said easement may remove all temporary
(or permanent) features and facilities encountered therein as it deems such removal to be necessary to accommodate its entry for any maintenance,
surveillance, construction or other such activities as may be required. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-5-15: BLOCKS:
A. Specifications: The length, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such that they provide:
1. Lot sizes and dimensions meeting the applicable zoning requirements;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 193/201
2. Adequate building sites for the type of use contemplated;
3. Convenient access, circulation, control and safety for vehicular and pedestrian traffic; and
4. Adequate consideration of both the limitations and opportunities of the site topography, oils, and drainage.
B. Length: Block lengths shall generally not be longer than one thousand one hundred feet (1,100') nor shorter than four hundred feet (400'). Exceptions to
the above may be allowed or required when topography, property shape, access control along arterial streets or other unique circumstances indicate
that shorter or longer block lengths will provide a better overall subdivision layout.
C. Pedestrian Walkways: Where blocks are nine hundred feet (900') or more in length, mid-block pedestrian walkways connecting adjoining streets shall
be provided. Pedestrian walkways connecting adjoining streets shall be provided. Pedestrian walkways may also be required in shorter blocks or at
other than mid-block locations (such as pedestrian walkways connecting cul-de-sacs to adjacent streets) whenever and wherever such are deemed
essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, churches, shopping areas, transportation facilities, or any other community facilities.
(Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-5-16: LOTS:
A. Conformance With Zoning Regulations: All lots shown on the subdivision plat must conform to the minimum requirements of the appropriate zoning
regulations.
B. Side Lots: Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles or radial to the street right-of-way lines unless a variation therefrom will give a better
street and lot arrangement.
C. Corner Lots: All corner lots shall have a minimum radius of twenty feet (20') on the property lines comprising the adjacent street right-of-way lines.
D. Lot Remnants: All remnants of lots below minimum size that are left over after the subdivision of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots rather
than be allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
E. Sewage Disposal System: Where individual septic tanks have been authorized, sufficient area shall be provided for a replacement sewage disposal
system.
F. Frontage:
1. All lots shall front on a usable street and shall be provided with access from said street.
2. Lot frontage shall be large enough to provide for the anticipated building width plus the side yard setback requirements. It shall also provide enough
street frontage so that no more than one-half (1/2) the lot frontage is utilized for driveway approach purposes.
G. Off-Street Parking And Loading: The depth and width of lots utilized for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall adequately provide for the
off-street parking and the loading and unloading facilities and space required for the type of use or development contemplated and/or as required by
the Zoning Ordinance.
H. Double Frontage Or Reverse Frontage: Double frontage or reverse frontage lots shall be utilized only when required to overcome disadvantages of
shape, topography, orientation, and/or street access control. Residential lots adjoining an expressway, major arterial, railroad, sewage treatment
facilities, sanitary landfill, or land zoned for business or industrial use, shall have a lot depth great enough to provide at least a ten foot (10') wide
landscaping or planting screen or strip adjacent to such developments or features. Such landscaping or planting strips shall be owned and maintained
by the property owner.
I. Lots Abutting Pedestrian Walkways: A minimum side yard setback restriction of ten feet (10') shall be required for all residential lots abutting mid-block or
other such pedestrian walkways.
J. Lots Affected By Surface Waters: If any portion of a lot falls within the boundaries of a flood plain, or if a lot is traversed by an intermittent stream or
other such waterway, then that portion of said lot being utilized as a flood channel plain, stream, canal, etc., shall be excluded from the buildable area
of said lot. When this situation results in the separation of the buildable area of a lot from the road by which it has access, provisions shall be made for
the installation of a culvert or other structure of a design approved by the entity having jurisdiction of or control over said waterway. (Ord. 403, 7-21-
1987)
11-5-17: RESERVE STRIPS:
Privately held reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited. Public reserve strips having a width of one foot (1') or more may be required
along partial width streets within a subdivision to control future access to said partial street. When such reserve strips are required, they shall be deeded to
the City in fee simple for future street widening purposes. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-5-18: DELIVERY OF IRRIGATION WATER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 194/201
A. Requirement To Provide: When a subdivision is proposed and all or any part of said subdivision is located within the boundaries of an existing irrigation
district or other canal company, ditch association, or like irrigation water delivery entity, hereinafter called "irrigation entity" for the purposes of this
Section, no subdivision plat will be accepted, approved, and recorded unless:
1. Transfer Of Water Rights: The water rights appurtenant to the lands in said subdivision which are within the irrigation entity will be transferred from
said lands by the owner thereof; or
2. System Provided By Subdivider: The subdivider has provided for an underground pipe system or a combination underground piping and open ditch
system to permit the delivery of water to those landowners within the subdivision who are also within the irrigation entity, with the following
appropriate approvals: (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
a. For proposed subdivisions within the incorporated limits of a city, the irrigation system must be approved by the City Planning and Zoning
Commission, Public Works Director, and the City Council with the advice of the irrigation entity charged with the delivery of water to said lands.
(Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
b. For proposed subdivisions located outside incorporated cities but within one mile outside the incorporated limits of any city, both city and county
zoning authorities, city and county engineers, and city council and county commissioners must approve such irrigation system in accordance with
Idaho Code section 50-1306. In addition, the irrigation entity charged with the delivery of water to said lands must be advised regarding the
irrigation system.
B. Provide Information To Purchaser: In the event that the provisions of either subsection A1 or A2 of this Section have not been complied with, the
assessments of the irrigation entity for operation, maintenance, construction, and other valid charges permitted by statute shall in no way be affected.
However, any person offering such lots for sale, or selling such lots shall, prior to the sale, advise the purchaser in writing as follows:
1. That water deliveries have not been provided; and
2. That the purchaser of the lot must remain subject to all assessments levied by the irrigation entity; and
3. That the individual purchaser shall be responsible to pay such legal assessments; and
4. That the assessments are a lien on the land within the irrigation entity; and
5. That the purchaser may at a future date petition the appropriate irrigation entity for exclusion from the irrigation district.
C. Disclosure Statement: A disclosure statement executed by the purchaser, and duly acknowledged, containing the representations required in
subsection B of this Section shall be obtained by the seller at the time of receipt of the earnest money from the purchaser, and affixed to the proposed
sales contract and a copy thereof shall be forwarded to the appropriate irrigation entity1.
D. Verification Of Compliance: The subdivider, or his engineer, shall be responsible for seeing that all of the above-listed actions, approvals, requirements,
etc., are taken, secured, and fulfilled, and shall provide written verification of same. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-5-19: IRRIGATION FACILITIES:
A. Location: All irrigation ditches, turnout gates and control facilities, etc., shall be located or relocated outside of the rights of way of any public streets,
alleys, pedestrian ways, etc. All existing or new irrigation pipe that is located within any public rights of way shall be constructed or reconstructed in
such manner and with such materials that said irrigation pipe line meets all of the requirement for City sanitation sewer or storm drain lines and all
applicable standard specifications and drawings covering same.
B. Notice Of Changes: The irrigation entity charged with the delivery of irrigation water to, through or utilizing the above-referenced system of relocated
and reconstructed ditches, turn-out gates and control facilities, underground pipes, etc., must be kept advised of any changes regarding the same. The
subdivider, or his engineer, shall be responsible for securing the irrigation entity's approval of said relocated and reconstructed irrigation system and
shall provide written verification of same. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
Chapter 6
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
11-6-1: IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
A. Required: The subdivider of every proposed subdivision shall be responsible for having a complete set of subdivision improvement plans prepared for
his subdivision. All subdivision improvement plans must be designed, signed, and sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State.
The subdivision improvement plans shall be on linen or mylar (3 mil or thicker) sheets, twenty three inches by thirty six inches (23" x 36") in size. Lines
and lettering shall be in heavy black pencil or black ink.
B. Contents: The plans shall clearly and completely show all street facilities (including right-of-way lines, sidewalks, curb and gutter, cross drains,
dimensions, grades, widths, curve data, typical street cross sections, signs, barricades, etc.) both in plan and profile. They shall also show the sizes
and locations of all water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm drain lines, irrigation lines (including all their various appurtenances such as valves, tees,
crosses, reducers, manholes, service lines, inlet boxes, catch basins, storm drainage directional flow arrows, sanitary sewage or storm drainage lift
stations, etc.) both in plan and profile. Other utilities such as electricity, gas, telephone, cable TV, power poles, telephone poles, guy poles, etc., shall
also be shown on said plans. Stations and offsets, distances, depths, elevations, etc., shall all be utilized as required to adequately locate all survey
control points, corners, street intersections, utilities and their various appurtenances, etc., for design, construction, and as- built record or archival
purposes. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 195/201
C. Scale: The subdivision improvement plans shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals ten feet (1" = 10') or one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20')
unless circumstances indicate that a different scale would be more suitable, in which case the Public Works Director's approval of the use of said
different scale must be secured.
D. Conformity With Plats And Drawings: The subdivision improvement plans shall be in general conformity with the approved preliminary plat, preliminary
engineering drawing and the final plat.
E. Lettering; Symbology:
1. Lettering size, line width, symbology, etc., used on the subdivision improvement plans shall all be as approved by the Public Works Director.
2. Lettering shall be readable from the bottom of the sheet or from the right-hand side of the sheet.
F. Written Approval: All subdivision improvement plans must be received by and have the Public Works Director's approval written thereon. (Ord. 403, 7-
21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
11-6-2: REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
Every subdivider or owner shall be required to install at least the following listed public improvements. All such improvements shall be installed in
accordance with the applicable City standard specifications and standard drawings governing and depicting the type of construction associated therewith.
All such construction work and facilities shall also be constructed and installed in accordance with the requirements of this Title, the Water Ordinance, the
Sanitary Sewer Ordinance, the Storm Drainage Ordinance, and in accordance with the approved subdivision improvement plans and the applicable
annexation or development agreement, as such are approved by the City Council and the Public Works Director. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
A. Monuments: Monuments shall be required, located and installed in accordance with the standard drawings, subdivision improvement plans, and chapter
5 of this title.
B. Streets And Alleys: All streets and alleys shall be paved with an asphalt or concrete surface constructed in accordance with the subdivision
improvement plans, this title and the above referenced standard specifications and standard drawings, etc. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
C. Curbs And Gutters: Curb and gutter shall be constructed on all collector and arterial streets. Curb and gutter shall be constructed on all minor streets
except as such may be exempted herein for large lot subdivisions. (Ord. 508, 4-6-2004; amd. Ord. 2013-564, 8-20-2013)
D. Sidewalks And Pedestrianways:
1. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all collector and arterial streets. Sidewalks shall also be required on both sides of all minor streets
except as such may be exempted herein for large lot subdivisions.
2. Sidewalks for pedestrians shall be required wherever they are so shown on the subdivision improvement plans or required by this title.
E. Driveways:
1. Concrete driveways shall be constructed in all areas where curb and gutter sidewalks are required. They shall be constructed in accordance with this
title and the above referenced standard specifications and standard drawings.
2. Rural type paved driveways shall be required in those areas where curb and gutter and sidewalk are not required. These rural type driveways shall
be constructed in accordance with the applicable requirements of this title, the subdivision improvement plans, and the city standard drawings and
specifications covering same.
F. Bicycle Paths: Bicycle pathways may be required within subdivisions as part of the public street or alley rights of way or easements where specified and
required on the subdivision improvement plans or in the overall bicycle plan as such may be adopted by the city council.
G. Public Water System: All public water supply and distribution systems (serving 2 or more separate premises or households) shall be constructed in
accordance with the above referenced city standard specifications, standard drawings, water ordinance, etc. All new public water systems shall be an
extension of the existing public water system whenever possible. In the event that the proposed public water system is not an extension of the existing
public water system, there must be a showing by the subdivider that the extension of said public water system is not in the best interest of the public.
The city will maintain and operate such a separate public or private water system only under such circumstances and conditions as are set forth in the
annexation or development agreement. All private water systems shall conform in all respects to those standards established for the city's public water
system.
H. Public Sanitary Sewer System: All public sanitary sewer systems (serving 2 or more separate premises or households) shall be constructed in
accordance with the above referenced city standard specifications, standard drawings, sanitary sewer ordinance, etc. All new public sanitary sewer
systems shall be an extension of the existing public sanitary sewer system whenever possible. In the event that the proposed public sanitary sewer
system is not an extension of the existing public sanitary sewer system, there must be a showing by the subdivider that the extension of said public
sanitary sewer system is not feasible and/or not in the best interest of the public. The city will maintain and operate such a separate public or private
sanitary sewer system only under such circumstances and conditions as are set forth in the annexation or development agreement. All private sanitary
sewer systems shall conform in all respects to those standards established for the city's public sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 196/201
I. Public Storm Drainage System: An adequate storm drainage system shall be provided in all subdivisions. The requirements for each particular
subdivision shall be as established by the public works director or the city council. The installation and construction of said system shall be done in
accordance with the above referenced standard specifications, standard drawings, ordinances, etc.
J. Fire Protection System: An adequate fire protection system and facilities shall be required and provided in all subdivisions, and all fire hydrants, fire
hydrant location and spacing, water main sizes, pump sizes, motor sizes, etc., shall be in accordance with the city water ordinance and other such
appropriate standards, policies, and requirements as have been adopted by the city council.
K. Maintenance And Operation Of Public Services: Where the City does not agree to provide the necessary maintenance and operation of the public
water, fire protection, sanitary sewer, storm drain and/or street systems, the subdivider shall be responsible for providing such services, and shall, as
part of the requirements for the approval of said subdivision, provide for a perpetual method of maintenance and operation of said systems to ensure
the continued usefulness and operation of same.
L. Utility Connections: All individual service connections for sanitary sewer, domestic water, storm drainage, natural gas, electricity, telephone, cable TV,
etc., shall be installed to a point at least ten feet (10') behind the street or alley right of way (i.e., 10 feet into the adjacent lot) before the placement of
any crushed gravel base or other such new street surfacing is started. All such utility improvements shall be installed in accordance with the City
standard specification requirements and the installation, backfill and compaction of the trenches for same must be inspected and approved by the
Public Works Director.
M. Installation Of Public Utilities: All utilities are encouraged to locate or install their facilities under ground and such undergrounding may be required
subject to the City Council's adopted policies and ordinances.
N. Street Signs And Barricades: Street name signs, no parking signs, stop signs, yield signs, etc., and barricades at the ends of dead-end streets or at
other hazardous locations, shall all be installed at their appropriate locations (i.e., at street intersections, at the ends of streets, etc.) in accordance with
the subdivision improvement drawings, the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and/or in accordance with local standards and requirements.
Whichever regulations or requirements are the more restrictive or demanding are those which shall apply. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
O. Street Lighting: Street lights shall be required to be installed at intersections throughout the subdivision. The subdivider shall conform to the
requirements of the City and the public utility providing such lighting. The costs of such street lighting shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. (Ord.
455, 5-7-1996)
P. Greenbelts: Greenbelts, landscaping, or screening may be required for the protection of residential properties from adjacent arterial streets, waterways,
railroad rights of way, commercial or industrial areas, or other such incompatible features. The subdivision plat shall show the location of any such
greenbelt or landscaping areas, and the subdivision improvement plans shall show the types of trees, bushes plantings, watering or sprinkling systems,
etc., to be installed therein. The subdivider shall be responsible for the plantings within these greenbelt or landscaped areas and the property owner
(on whose property said facilities are situated) shall be responsible for the continued maintenance and upkeep of said greenbelt, landscaping, or
screening facilities. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-6-3: AS-BUILT DRAWINGS; CERTIFICATION:
As-built or record drawings of all subdivision improvement plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer and the corrected original drawings or a
duplicate mylar copy of the corrected original drawings shall be provided to the City. As-built plans shall include a certification thereon signed by the
registered professional engineer in charge of the work that the as-built drawing of the street facilities, water line system, sewer line system, storm drainage
system, etc., are all true and correct in that he (the registered professional engineer) inspected the construction of all such facilities and that the materials
and the installation of same was all done in conformance with the City standard specifications and standard drawings governing the construction of same
and that such are also in conformance with the applicable Water Ordinance, Sewer Ordinance, Storm Drainage Ordinance, etc., for such facilities. (Ord.
403, 7-21-1987)
11-6-4: WATER LINES:
A. Construction Required: The owner or developer of any piece of property or tract of land is responsible for the construction of the water line (or for the
water line costs) along any of the property sides or frontages of the property along which a water line is needed for the overall completeness and
continuity of the City's water main system. If it is a large tract of land, the owner or developer of said land shall also be responsible for the necessary
and required system of water lines within the interior of the tract of land.
B. Deposit In Lieu Of Construction: The owner or developer of any piece of property shall construct all needed water lines (of the approved size) within and
along all sides or frontage of any piece of property prior to the time any building constructed thereon is occupied or utilized unless phased construction
of the water main system is specifically allowed or provided for in the annexation or development agreement. In lieu of actually constructing said
required water line or water lines, the property owner or developer may deposit adequate monies with the City to fully cover the cost(s) of said required
water line construction.
C. Size Of Water Line; Responsibility For Cost: The owner or developer of any property or subdivision will normally be responsible only for the cost of up
to an eight inch (8") diameter water line. The additional cost of providing a water line of a diameter or size greater than eight inches (8") will normally be
a City responsibility. The City will reimburse the developer for the extra cost of the additional water line size (over the 8 inch diameter size referenced
above) as set forth in the annexation or development agreement between the developer and the City. Provided, however, that if proposed subdivision
or development is of such size or magnitude that it requires a water main size larger than eight inches (8") in diameter, then the owner or developer of
such subdivision or development shall be responsible for the entire cost of whatever size of water main is required for said subdivision or development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 197/201
D. One Side Of Property: If the property owner or developer owns or is developing the property on only one side (as compared to both sides) of any street,
alley, or easement where a water line is located or required, he shall be responsible for only one-half (1/2) of the cost of said water line construction.
However, in the absence of any mutual agreement between the two (2) (or more) property owners, the City will participate with the first owner or
developer to the extent of paying for one-half (1/2) the cost of up to an eight inch (8") diameter water line along or across said referenced property
frontage. The second (or other) property owner(s) will thereafter be responsible for reimbursing the City for his one-half (1/2) of the costs of this water
line construction at the time he (the other adjacent property owners or developers) begins to develop or build upon his property that is adjacent to the
water line installed by the first property owner. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
E. City Option To Decline Participation In Cost: Provided further, however, that if the water line construction is for an area or a development that is outside
of the City limits or if the length of water line construction in which the City would be participating (as referred to above) exceeds one thousand (1,000)
lineal feet, the City may decline to participate in the cost of said water line construction except to pay for the extra cost differential between an eight
inch (8") diameter line and the actual size of the line that the City designates shall be installed to meet its Master Plan requirements. When this
situation or set of circumstances exists, the property owner or developer who first initiates or actually begins the development of his property shall be
responsible for front-ending the entire cost of the water line construction and for actually constructing said water line. The second (or other) property
owner(s) will thereafter be responsible for reimbursing the first property owner for his share of the costs of the water line construction along his frontage
at the time he (the other adjacent property owners or developers) begin(s) to develop or build upon his property adjacent to the water line installed by
the first property owner. In the absence of any agreement between the first property owner or developer and the other adjacent property owners or
developers covering the cost of said water line(s), the referenced other adjacent property owners or developers shall pay to the City the amount of
twelve dollars ($12.00) per lineal foot (or such other amount as the City Council may hereinafter establish and adopt by resolution) for the length of
water line across his frontage. The City, in turn, will reimburse this same amount to the first party, which reimbursement shall be deemed adequate and
appropriate compensation for his share of the cost of said water line. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
11-6-5: SEWER LINES:
A. Construction By Owner:
1. The owner or developer of any piece of property or tract of land is responsible for the construction of the sewer line (or for the sewer line costs) along
any of the property sides or frontages of the property along which a sewer line is needed for the overall completeness and continuity of the City's
sewer main system. If it is a large tract of land, the owner or developer shall also be responsible for the necessary and required system of sewer
lines within the interior of the tract of land.
2. The owner or developer of any piece of property shall construct all needed sewer lines (of the approved size) within and along all sides or frontages
of any piece of property prior to the time any building constructed thereon is occupied or utilized unless construction of the sewer main system is
specifically allowed or provided for in the annexation or development agreement. In lieu of actually constructing said required sewer line or sewer
lines, the property owner or developer may deposit adequate monies with the City to fully cover the cost(s) of said required sewer line construction.
B. Size Of Sewer Line:
1. The owner or developer of any property or subdivision will normally be responsible only for the cost of up to an eight inch (8") diameter sanitary
sewer line.
2. The additional cost of providing a sanitary sewer line of a size greater than eight inches (8") will normally be a City responsibility. The City will
reimburse the developer for the extra cost of the additional sanitary sewer line size (over the 8 inch diameter size referenced above) as set forth in
the annexation or development agreement between the developer and the City. Provided further, however, that if any proposed subdivision or
development is of such size or magnitude that it requires or necessitates a sewer size larger or than an eight inch (8") diameter line or if the type of
development is such as to produce a wastewater flow in excess of the capacity of an eight inch (8") diameter sewer line, then the owner or developer
of said subdivision or development shall be responsible for the entire cost of whatever size of sewer line is needed to accommodate his
development.
3. The additional cost of providing any extra sewer line depth required by the City (over and above that sewer line depth required to adequately serve
the owner's or developer's property when assuming at least a 12 foot sewer line depth at the upper most end of the sewer line extended through or
along said property) will be a City responsibility and the City will reimburse the owner or developer for the cost of said extra depth of sewer line as
agreed upon and as set forth in the annexation or development agreement between the developer and the City.
C. One Side Of Property:
1. If the property owner or developer owns or is developing the property on only one side (as compared to both sides) of any street, alley, or easement
where a sewer line is located or required, he shall be responsible for only one-half (1/2) of the cost of said sewer line while the property owner on the
other side of said street, alley, or easement shall be responsible for the other one-half (1/2) of the cost of said sewer line construction. However, in
the absence of any mutual agreement between the two (2) property owners, the City may participate with the first owner or developer to the extent of
paying for one-half (1/2) the cost of an eight inch (8") diameter sewer line across said referenced property frontage. The second property owner will
thereafter be responsible for reimbursing the City for his one-half (1/2) of the costs of this sewer line construction at the time he (the second property
owner or developer) begins to develop or build upon his property that is adjacent to the sewer line installed by the first property owner. (Ord. 403, 7-
21-1987)
2. Provided further, however, that if the sewer line construction is for an area or a development that is outside of the City limits or if the length of sewer
line construction in which the City would be participating, (as referred to above) exceeds one thousand (1,000) lineal feet, the City may decline to
participate in the cost of said sewer line construction except to pay for the extra cost differential between the size and depth of sewer line required to
serve the development and the actual size and depth of line that the City designates shall be installed to meet the requirements of its Sewer System
Master Plan. When this situation or set of circumstances exists, the property owner or developer who first initiates or actually begins the development
of his property shall be responsible for front-ending the entire cost of the sewer line construction and for actually constructing said sewer line. The
second (or other) property owners(s) will thereafter be responsible for reimbursing the first property owner for his frontage at the time he (or they, the
other adjacent property owners or developers) begin(s) to develop or build upon his property adjacent to the sewer line installed by the first property
owner. In the absence of any agreement between the first property owner or developer and the other adjacent property owners or developers
covering the cost of said sewer line(s), the referenced other adjacent property owners or developers shall pay to the City the amount of fifteen dollars
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 198/201
($15.00) per lineal foot (or such other amount as the City Council may hereinafter establish and adopt by resolution) for the length of sewer line
across his frontage. The City, in turn, will reimburse this same amount to the first party, which reimbursement shall be declared adequate and
appropriate compensation for his share of the cost of said sewer line. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
11-6-6: SEWAGE LIFT STATIONS:
A. Design: Sewer mains shall be kept as deep as practicable to keep sewage lift stations to the smallest number possible. When a sewage lift station and
its related facilities is required, it and the sewer main system directing sewage to it shall generally be designed for an entire definable area and not just
to serve a single property owner or developer.
B. Responsibility For Cost: The cost of the sewage lift station shall be equitably divided between the developer and the City as set forth in the annexation
or development agreement. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-6-7: STORM DRAINAGE FACILITIES1:
A. Owner Responsible For Installation: The owner or developer of any piece of property or tract of land shall be responsible for taking care of the storm
drainage from said property and for providing and installing the storm drainage facilities or for the storm drainage costs of any such storm drainage
facilities required within or along said piece of property.
B. Large Tract: If it is a large tract of ground, the owner or developer shall also be responsible for the necessary and required system of storm drainage
lines or other required facilities within the interior of the tract of land. The owner or developer of any piece of property shall construct all needed storm
drainage lines (of the approved sizes) within and along all sides or frontages of any piece of property prior to the time any building constructed thereon
is occupied or utilized unless phased construction of the storm drainage system is specifically allowed or provided for in the annexation or development
agreement. In lieu of actually constructing said required storm drain line or lines, the owner or developer may deposit adequate monies with the City to
fully cover the costs of said required storm drainage construction.
C. Permanent Containment And Disposal: The owner or developer will normally be expected to collect all of the storm drainage from the tract of ground
that he owns or is developing, and take it (the storm drainage) either by overland flow or through a system of storm drain pipes to a common exterior
location at the edge of the property or subdivision being developed, whereat he shall make provision for the permanent containment and disposal of
said storm drainage water or shall provide pumping facilities and shall pump said storm drainage to an adjacent creek or irrigation canal, or shall
provide adequate and approved underground disposal facilities that will permanently and lawfully take care of all of the storm drainage waters collected
from and within said tract of property or subdivision being developed. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-6-8: BRIDGES, STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The responsibilities of the developer and of the City regarding the construction of bridges, streets, and alleys shall be is follows:
A. Cost Borne By Developer: Bridges, pipes or culverts which are required across canals, ditches, and streams lying entirely within a single subdivision
and primarily for the benefit of circulating local traffic shall be paid for entirely at the cost of the developer.
B. City Responsibility: The City shall construct all bridges and all pipes or culverts having an inside diameter of six feet (6') or more on local, collector, and
arterial streets when such bridges, pipes, or culverts are deemed necessary by the City, except where such are the responsibility of the developer as
defined in subsection A above. Pipes or culverts having an inside diameter of less than six feet (6') shall be the responsibility of the developer. (Ord.
403, 7-21-1987)
C. Controlled Access Streets: Construction of controlled access streets shall be the responsibility of the City. However, the developer shall be responsible
for obtaining and dedicating to the public a maximum of fifty seven feet (57') of width for right-of-way purposes for such streets. Standards and typical
sections for controlled access or major arterial street construction are on file in the office of the Public Works Director and all construction shall comply
therewith. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
D. Arterial And Collector Streets: The development and construction of arterial and collector streets, where local individual property access is allowed,
shall be primarily the owner's or developer's responsibility. The owner or developer shall be responsible for the dedication of the right of way for said
arterial street up to a maximum width of fifty seven feet (57') per each side of the street along which the subdivision borders. The owner or developer
shall be responsible for the construction of the sidewalk, curb and gutter, and a two and one-half foot (21/2') width of street surface (per each side of the
street along which the subdivision has frontage). The ballast depth of the paved street surface for which the owner or developer has responsibility shall
consist of up to a three-tenths of a foot (0.3') depth of asphalt plantmix and an eight-tenths of a foot (0.8') depth of three-fourths inch (3/4") crushed
gravel (3/4 inch aggregate for base) irrespective of the type of development or zoning designation. The City shall be responsible for the costs of the
extra width of street paving (over and above the 21.5 foot width per side of the street defined above as the developer's responsibility) and the extra
depth of street paving and crushed gravel (over and above that maximum ballast depth defined above as the owner or developer's responsibility)
required to complete the street construction in conformance with the approved typical section for the street; provided, however, that:
1. If the developer chooses to develop his subdivision in such manner that there is no individual private access to an adjacent arterial street (even
though said arterial street has not been designated as one of the controlled access streets defined above), the developer shall only be responsible
for the cost of the construction of the curb and gutter, sidewalk and storm drainage facilities along said arterial street frontage; and the City shall be
responsible for the cost of the construction of the entire paved street surfacing along said arterial street frontage.
2. If the developer chooses to develop his subdivision in such manner that there is no individual private access to an adjacent collector or local street,
the developer shall still be responsible for the costs of constructing the sidewalk, curb and gutter, paved street surfacing and storm drainage facilities
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 199/201
along said collector or local street frontage even though he may have chosen to not provide individual property access to said street.
3. If the developer chooses to develop his subdivision in such a manner that any street therein is roughly parallel with and immediately adjacent to a
canal, river, freeway, controlled access arterial street or other such similar facility whereby the access to and use of said subdivision street is from
one side only, the developer shall be entirely responsible for the complete development (including all sidewalk and curb and gutter along both sides
of the street, full width street paving and storm drainage facilities) of said street. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-6-9: ARTERIAL STREET AND BRIDGE FEE AND FUND:
A. Fees Assessed; Collection:
1. An arterial street and bridge fee shall be assessed to each developer seeking annexation of lands to the City. This fee shall be based upon the
number of parking spaces required by ordinance for the zoning classification of the land and is herewith fixed as set forth in the table below. (Ord.
403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
Zones Parking Spaces Per Acre
RP, RPA, R-1 Actual lot count
(or 5 spaces per acre if unplatted)
R-2 10
R-2A 14
R-3, R-3A, I&M1, I&M2, M-1, PB 25
Commercial (RSC-1, C-1, HC-1, GC-1) 25
2. The arterial street and bridge fee shall be collected by the City Treasurer in accordance with the terms specified in the annexation agreement.
B. Payment Of Fees:
1. For all lands annexed except those so zoned as to require a total payment of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per acre in fees, a
payment of at least ten percent (10%) of the total calculated arterial street and bridge fee shall be paid to the City at or before the time the
annexation agreement is submitted to the City Council for approval. The annexation agreement, signed by the developer, shall contain a schedule for
payment of the balance of said fee and shall become binding when approved by the City Council. Such schedule must provide for full payment of the
total fee within one year after the date of annexation.
2. For all lands so zoned as to require a total payment of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per acre in fees, a payment of at least ten
percent (10%) of the total calculated fee shall be paid at or before the time the annexation agreement is submitted to the City Council for approval.
The annexation agreement in such cases shall provide that an additional ten percent (10%) of the total fee shall be paid on or before six (6) months
following the date of annexation; that an additional ten percent (10%) of the total fee be paid on or before one year following the date of annexation;
and that one-fourth (1/4) of the balance of the total fee be paid each three (3) months thereafter so that the full amount of the fee be paid within two
(2) years following the date of annexation. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
3. The fees set forth in subsections B1 and B2 of this Section may be modified by resolution. (1999 Code)
C. Exceptions To Fee Schedule:
1. Church property shall be assessed twenty five percent (25%) of the calculated arterial street and bridge fee for the zone in which the property is
situated; provided, however, church property not designed or used primarily for worship or education shall not be entitled to a reduction in fees.
2. Publicly-owned property, or property upon which a public entity holds an option purchase, shall be exempt from said fee.
D. Arterial Street And Bridge Fund:
1. Fund Established: There is hereby established an Arterial Street and Bridge Fund to be maintained by the City. All revenues derived from the
payment of said arterial street and bridge fees as set forth in this Title shall be deposited in said Fund and shall be disbursed only for purposes set
forth in subsection D2 of this Section when authorized by the City Council.
2. Disbursement Of Monies From Fund: Disbursement of monies from the Arterial Street and Bridge Fund may be made only for the following purposes
and objectives:
a. Construction of bridges, pipes, and culverts which are the responsibility of the City as set forth in Section 11-6-8 of this Chapter.
b. Construction of arterial streets and parts of arterial streets which are the responsibility of the City as set forth in Section 11-6-8 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
Chapter 7
VARIANCES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 200/201
11-7-1: PURPOSE:
The Commission may recommend to the Council as a result of unique circumstances such as topographic-physical limitations or a planned unit
development, a variance from the provisions of this Title on a finding that undue hardship results from the strict compliance with specific provisions or
requirements of this Title, or that application of such provision or requirement is impracticable. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-7-2: FINDINGS:
No variance shall be favorably acted upon by the Council unless there is a finding upon recommendation by the Commission, as a result of a public
hearing, that all of the following exist:
A. That there are such special circumstances or conditions affecting the property that the strict impact of the provisions of this Title would clearly be
impracticable or unreasonable. In such cases, the subdivider shall first state his reasons in writing as to the specific provision or requirement involved.
B. That strict compliance with the requirements of this Title would result in extraordinary hardship (as distinguished from mere inconvenience) to the
subdivider because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, unusual topography, or other such conditions which are not self inflicted, or that
those conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of this Title.
C. That the conditions upon which the request for a variance are based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property.
D. That the variance is the least deviation from this Title which will mitigate the hardship.
E. That the granting of the specified variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in
the area in which the property is situated.
F. That such variance will not violate the provisions of the Idaho Code.
G. That such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the interests and purpose of this Title and the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
Chapter 8
ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES
11-8-1: ENFORCEMENT:
A. City Authority:
1. It shall be the duty of the Administrator to enforce this Title and to bring to the attention of the City Council any violations or lack of compliance
herewith.
2. The City Council shall thereupon take appropriate action to assure compliance with this Title.
3. No subdivision plat required by this Title or the Idaho Code shall be admitted to the public land records of the County Recorder until such subdivision
plat has received final approval by the Council.
4. No public board, agency, commission, official or other authority shall proceed with the construction of or authorize the construction of any of the
public improvements required by this Title until the final plat has received the approval by the Council.
5. The City Attorney shall, in addition to taking whatever criminal action deemed necessary, take steps to civilly enjoin any violation of this Title.
B. County Report To City:
1. Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the County Recorder that any of the provisions of this Title have been violated, it shall be his duty to
notify the Administrator and the City Attorney.
2. The County Clerk, the County Planner and the County Building Administrator are hereby instructed not to divide for assessment or taxing purposes
any properties that are being subdivided contrary to the rules and regulations as herein set forth until such time as the Administrator and the City
Attorney have been notified.
C. Provisions Not Exclusive: The provisions of this Section shall not be deemed exclusive and shall not be deemed to prevent the maintenance of any
other action or proceeding in law or equity to enforce the provisions of this Title or to vacate any map or plat made and recorded in violation of this Title.
(Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
11-8-2: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=998 201/201
A. City Approval And Filing With County Required: No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer
or sell any such parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Title, and filed
with the County Recorder.
B. Intent To Evade: The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease
with the intent of evading this Title, shall not be permitted. All such described subdivisions shall be subject to all of the requirements contained in these
regulations.
C. Building Permit Issuance Upon Compliance With Title: No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot
or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of this Title.
D. Plat Approval Required: No plat of subdivision shall be approved which does not comply with all the provisions of this Title.
E. Committing Violation: Violation of any of the provisions of this Title or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall be considered a separate
offense. The landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, public official or any other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such
violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council or any other public official or private
citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this Title or of the Idaho Code.
F. Penalty Assessed Per Lot Or Block: Whoever shall sell, or offer for sale, or lease any lot or block in any subdivision before complying with all of the
requirements of this Title shall be subject to a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each lot or block or part thereof so disposed of, offered for sale or
lease. Each day that sales or offers to sell or lease continue in violation of this Title shall constitute a separate offense, subject to the above penalties.
(Ord. 403, 7-21-1987)
G. General Penalty: Whoever shall violate any of the provisions of this Title shall be subject to a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for
each violation thereof. Each day that the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 403, 7-21-1987; amd. 1999 Code)