6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 1/303
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Sandpoint, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 1360, passed December 5, 2018.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 1050
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SANDPOINT, BONNER COUNTY, IDAHO, ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF SANDPOINT, IDAHO, FOR REVISING,
CODIFYING AND COMPILING THE GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SANDPOINT AS CODIFIED BY STERLING CODIFIERS THROUGH
AND INCLUDING CITY OF SANDPOINT ORDINANCE NO. 1044, PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR UNLAWFUL ALTERATION OR MODIFICATION OF
THE CODE, AND PROVIDING FOR THE PUBLICATION OF THIS ORDINANCE.
Be it ordained by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Sandpoint, as follows, to-wit:
Whereas, provisions of Title 50, Chapter 9 Idaho Code authorize publication of compiled ordinances of a city by compilation and codification, and
Whereas, it is sound practice to enact a periodic codification ordinance to establish a baseline for further codification efforts.
SECTION 1: Ordinance No. 773 adopted the official City Code of the City of Sandpoint, together with a method of perpetual codification by Sterling
Codifiers, Inc. on the 22nd day of February, 1983. Subsequent to such adoption, the city council has enacted ordinances through the ordinance number
#1044, a summary of which was published on the 2nd day of November, 2000. This ordinance hereby adopts the codification compiled by Sterling
Codifiers incorporating all ordinances enacted up to and including Ordinance #1044. By such adoption the City council also confirms, approves and reenacts
all previously adopted ordinance provisions and ordinance summaries of the City of Sandpoint, up to and inclusive of Ordinance #1044, as such
have been compiled by Sterling Codifiers. A copy of the compilation existing at the time of approval of this ordinance shall be filed and maintained with this
ordinance to serve as a codification reference from the effective date of Ordinance #1044, going forward.
SECTION 2: The codification completed by Sterling Codifiers through ordinance #1044 enacted on the 18th day of October, 2000, constitutes a
compilation of all ordinances of a general nature, together with subsequent changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of
the City. It shall be accepted in all courts as the official Code and law of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
SECTION 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official City Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official City Code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official City Code.
SECTION 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this Section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-4-1 of the City Code of Sandpoint, Idaho.
SECTION 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
SECTION 6: This Ordinance and this Code adopted by the same shall be in full force and effect upon publication of this Ordinance according to law in the
Bonner County Sandpoint Daily Bee, a newspaper of general distribution in the City of Sandpoint, Idaho, and hereby declared to be the official newspaper
for the publication of this Ordinance.
Passed and adopted as an ordinance of the City of Sandpoint, Idaho, at a special session of the Sandpoint City Council on the 7th day of March, 2001.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 2/303
Upon adoption by the City Council, this Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official Code of the City of Sandpoint. This Code
shall be known and cited as the SANDPOINT CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the City Council and shall be kept up to date as provided in
Section 1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number,
its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause, relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this
Code by title in any legal documents. (1983 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this State
as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect. (1983 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. All such amendments
or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place
in each copy of this Code. (1983 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Upon passage of amending ordinances by the City Council, the replacement pages provided
by the codifiers shall be properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the City Clerk's office and other City offices in a timely manner and under the
direction and supervision of the City Clerk. Any person having in his custody an official copy of the City Code shall make every effort to maintain the Code
in an up to date and efficient manner in cooperation with the City Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed to do so by the Clerk. (1983 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this Code, and the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
A. Appropriation ordinances; namely, that appropriation ordinance currently in effect at the time of adoption hereof, Ordinance 766. As each new
appropriation ordinance is adopted annually, it shall supersede any previous appropriation ordinance.
B. Franchise ordinances; namely, Ordinances 16 and 362, both to Spokane International Railroad; 419 and 436, both to Northern Lights, Inc.; 428 and
637, both for cable television; 606 to Pacific Power and Light Company and 607 to Washington Water Power Company.
C. Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; namely, Ordinances 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 14, 18, 20, 21, 23, 25, 32, 46, 131,
176, 215, 229, 253, 267, 278, 289, 306, 325, 352, 378, 386, 389, 391, 411, 682, 701, 702 and 767.
D. Improvement district ordinances; namely, Ordinances 429 and 433 for L.I.D. 25; and Ordinances 651, 656, 670, 671, 672, 677, 706 and 717 for L.I.D.
26.
E. Bond ordinances; namely, Ordinances 392, 358, 423 and 660. (1983 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Code excepting as this Code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case this Code shall be
considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1983 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein
repealed; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of
any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this
Code. (1983 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 3/303
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this
Code, or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1983 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not
be applied to any section of this code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be
repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or "subsection"
or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only.
The word "day" shall mean any twenty four (24) hour period from one twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to the next. All use of the word "day" or "days" in this
code shall be consecutive or calendar days unless otherwise declared to be "working" days.
"Working day" shall be days the city clerk's office is open to conduct city business. Any deadline that falls on a Saturday, Sunday or other day when the
city clerk's office is closed shall be extended to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. the following working day. (Ord. 1274, 7-18-2012)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The city of Sandpoint, county of Bonner, state of Idaho.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
city of Sandpoint".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: When a crime punishable by imprisonment in the state prison is also punishable by fine or imprisonment in a county jail, in the discretion
of the court, it shall be deemed a misdemeanor for all purposes after a judgment imposing a punishment other than imprisonment in the state prison.
Wherever the words "misdemeanor", "petty misdemeanor" or "violation" are used in this code, these terms or any of them shall be construed to mean
misdemeanor and shall be punished, unless otherwise provided under section 1-4-1 of this title.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the community.
OCCUPANT: The word "occupant" as applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land
whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Sandpoint".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: The word "owner" as applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole
or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every
right or interest therein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 4/303
PUBLIC SAFETY DIRECTOR: The public safety director shall be the fire department chief and the police department chief and shall have charge,
supervision, and direction over all officers and employees assigned to the fire department and the police department. Whenever a person has been
appointed as public safety director, the term "public safety director" shall be synonymous with fire chief and police chief as those terms are found within
this code.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: The word "tenant" as applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: The words "written" or "in writing" may include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the
written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such
person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark. (1983 Code; amd. Ord. 997, 2-19-1997)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken
to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any division or
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(1983 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed in this code, every offense declared to be a misdemeanor is punishable by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense, or imprisonment in a county jail not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment1.
Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed in this code, every offense declared to be an infraction is punishable by a penalty not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no imprisonment. (Ord. 1183, 10-17-2007)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where a duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a
continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under
which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do
any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (1983 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or
penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intent of the council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically
and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1983 Code)
Chapter 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1-5-1: MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL:
A. Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Wednesdays of each and every month or, if said Wednesday
is a holiday, on the next day following the first or third Wednesday which is not a holiday. (Ord. 1271, 6-20-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 5/303
B. Special Meetings: Special meetings may be held at the call of the mayor by serving notice on each member of the city council in writing stating the
object of said meeting as provided in Idaho Code 50-604. A majority of the members of the full council shall have the power to call special meetings of
the city council by serving notice in writing on all members of the city council stating the object of the meeting as provided in section 50-706 of the
Idaho Code. The city clerk shall record the proceedings at all special meetings in the city council meeting records. (Ord. 764, 4-19-1982)
C. Time Of Meetings; Open To The Public: All regular meetings shall convene promptly at five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. at the city hall (or at another
location when notice of the other location is posted at city hall at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting) and all meetings, regular or special, shall be
open to the public, except executive sessions as provided in Idaho Code title 74, chapter 2. (Ord. 1315, 7-1-2015)
1-5-2: RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS:
A. Quorum: A quorum shall consist of a majority of the full council and all matters coming before the city council shall be decided by a majority of those
present unless otherwise provided by law.
B. Presiding Officer: The presiding officer of the city council shall be the mayor or in the absence of the mayor, the president of the council. In the absence
of both the mayor and the president of the council, the clerk shall call the council to order and call the roll. If there is a quorum present, the council shall
then elect, by majority vote, a chairperson to act until the arrival of the mayor or president of the council. The presiding officer shall preserve strict order
and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the city council. (Ord. 764, 4-19-1982)
C. Roll Call: Before proceeding with the business of the city council, the mayor shall determine and announce who is present and who is absent and the
names of those present and absent shall be entered into the minutes by the city clerk. (Ord. 1147, 3-15-2006)
D. Functions Of Mayor:
1. Mayor's Voting Restricted: The mayor shall have a vote at city council meetings only when the council is equally divided and when not otherwise
prohibited by law. (Ord. 764, 4-19-1982)
2. Veto Power Of Mayor: The mayor shall have the power to veto or sign any ordinance passed by the city council. If the mayor shall veto an ordinance,
said veto must be in writing within ten (10) working days and notice be given by the city clerk to all council members in writing within five (5) working
days thereafter. The council may pass a vetoed ordinance by a vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full council. Should the mayor
neglect or refuse to sign an ordinance and return it to the city council at the next regular city council meeting, the same shall become law without the
mayor's signature upon proper publication. (Ord. 1274, 7-18-2012)
E. Attendance Requirement: (Rep. by Ord. 1147, 3-15-2006)
F. Order Of Business: The order of business at the city council meetings shall be as follows:
1. Call to order.
2. Roll call.
3. Opening ceremonies.
4. Announcements.
5. Public forum.
6. Consent calendar.
7. Old business.
8. New business.
9. Miscellaneous.
10. Adjournment. (Ord. 1147, 3-15-2006)
G. Speaking And Addressing The Council: (Rep. by Ord. 1147, 3-15-2006)
H. Motions, Procedure:
1. Motions shall be reduced to writing when required by the presiding officer of the city council or any member of the city council. All resolutions and
ordinances shall be in writing at the time considered and voted upon.
2. Motions to reconsider must be by a member who voted with the majority previously and must be presented at the same or next succeeding meeting
of the city council.
3. Motions to lay any matter on the table shall be first in order and on all questions, the last amendment, the most distant day and the largest sum shall
be first put to vote.
4. A motion for adjournment shall always be in order.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 6/303
I. Recording Of Votes: Whenever it shall be required by one or more members, the affirmative and negative votes shall be recorded. Any member may call
for a division on the question so that two (2) or more parts of a motion may be considered and voted upon as separate questions.
J. Questions Of Order: All questions of order shall be decided by the presiding officer of the city council with the right of appeal to the council by any
member allegedly aggrieved.
K. Altering Rules: The rules of the council may be temporarily altered, amended or suspended by unanimous vote of the members present constituting a
quorum of the full council.
L. Reports To Council: The chairperson of each respective committee or the council member acting in his place, shall submit or make all reports to the
council when so requested by the presiding officer or any member of the council.
M. Ordinance Passage Procedure:
1. Ordinances shall be read on three (3) different days, two (2) readings of which may be by title only and one reading shall be in full. No ordinance or
resolution of a permanent nature shall be adopted at the meeting at which it is introduced unless the rules concerning reading and adoption of
ordinances and resolutions of a permanent nature on separate days be suspended by a vote of at least one-half (1/2) plus one of the full council. Any
such vote on a motion to suspend the rules and a vote on the motion to adopt the ordinance or resolution under suspension of rules shall be by roll
call and so recorded in the minutes.
2. The passage of an ordinance or resolution to enter a contract shall be by roll call of the city council with the affirmative and negative vote of each
council member being duly recorded in the minutes.
3. All ordinances, resolutions or propositions submitted to the council which require the expenditure of public monies shall lie over until the next regular
council meeting; provided, however, that such ordinances, resolutions or propositions may be considered earlier by unanimous consent of the
members present constituting a quorum of the full council; and, provided further, that this rule shall not apply to current expenses, contracts
previously made or regular salaries or wages of employees of the city. (Ord. 764, 4-19-1982)
N. Rules Of Order: The parliamentary procedure of city council meetings shall be governed by "Parliamentary Procedure Made Easier", latest edition,
published by Washington State University, a copy of which is on file in the city clerk's office. (Ord. 1271, 6-20-2012)
1-5-3: COUNCIL COMMITTEES:
There shall be no permanent standing city council committees. (Ord. 1271, 6-20-2012)
Chapter 6
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-6-1: APPOINTIVE CITY OFFICERS:
The designated appointed officers and officials of the city are as follows:
Chief of police
City administrator
City attorney
City clerk
City treasurer
Fire chief
Parks and recreation director
Planning director
Public works director
Said officials and officers shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council in accordance with Idaho Code. (Ord. 1318, 10-21-2015)
1-6-2: TERMS OF OFFICERS:
Each and every appointive officer of the city enumerated in section 1-6-1 of this chapter shall serve at the discretion and pleasure of the mayor and city
council. Said officer or official may be terminated at any time by the mayor for any cause by him deemed sufficient. Such removal shall be confirmed by the
affirmative vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full council; provided, however, that the city council, by the unanimous vote of all its
members, may, upon its own initiative, remove any appointive officer1. (Ord. 755, 10-19-1981; amd. 1983 Code)
1-6-3: COMPENSATION OF MUNICIPAL OFFICERS:
The compensation of the officers hereinafter named for the city is established as follows:
Mayor $12,000.00 per annum, payable monthly
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 7/303
Council member 3,300.00 per annum, payable monthly2
(Ord. 1029, 8-25-1999; amd. Ord. 1285, 8-7-2013)
Effective January 1, 2016:
Mayor $14,400.00 per annum, payable monthly
Council member 4,800.00 per annum, payable monthly
(Ord. 1302, 8-6-2014)
Should the mayor have use of a city vehicle, it will be for official business only. The vehicle is to be parked at city hall overnight and during weekends. Said
vehicle will not be for personal use. (Ord. 1029, 8-25-1999; amd. Ord. 1285, 8-7-2013)
1-6-4: ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created and defined an official of the city, hereafter referred to as the enforcement officer of the city.
B. Duties: The duties of the enforcement officer of the city shall include the following:
1. Review all building permits for zoning compliance.
2. Perform a field survey of the city from a schedule such that total review and survey of all property shall be had at least once during every five (5)
year period. Said survey and review shall be used to maintain and assure a current, up to date land use map.
3. Investigate all complaints concerning zoning and/or land use violations.
4. Maintain a comprehensive file on all such complaints received and the ultimate action and process taken. (Ord. 718, 5-7-1980)
C. Enforcement Procedure: The enforcement procedure applicable for use by the enforcing officer shall be as follows:
1. Building Permits:
a. Building permit applications shall be submitted to the building inspector.
b. Building permit applications shall then be referred to the enforcing officer for review to determine compliance with the applicable and existing
zoning codes. This review shall be completed within five (5) working days following referral. (Ord. 1274, 7-18-2012)
c. If the plans as submitted are not satisfactory, a memorandum stating the reasons and causes of noncompliance shall be attached to the
application, and a copy of such memorandum shall be mailed to the applicant by certified mail with a return receipt requested.
d. If the plans are in compliance with the zoning code, the enforcement officer shall initial the appropriate block on the building application indicating
compliance.
2. Investigation Of Complaints: Procedure for the investigation of complaints received by the enforcing officer shall be as follows:
a. Upon the receipt of a complaint involving a possible zoning violation, the enforcing officer or his deputy shall within thirty (30) days investigate the
complaint and file a written report with the mayor's office. A copy of the complaint and report shall be maintained on file by the enforcing officer.
b. Upon the direction of the mayor's office, the enforcing officer shall notify the owner of the property concerned within fifteen (15) days of the
existence of the alleged violation. Further, the notice to the owner shall request correction, justification, prior authorization or a plan of correction
submitted to the enforcement officer within thirty (30) days of the notification.
c. The owner shall thereafter submit proof of authorization, prior compliance or a written plan for the correction of the violation within said thirty (30)
day period. Any plan or correction of violation shall include final correction within a reasonable time period.
d. If no response is received from the owner, he shall then be notified that the city will pursue the matter with affirmative legal action within the
following fifteen (15) days.
e. The mayor shall then review the record and within seven (7) days direct the legal department of the city to take affirmative legal action within thirty
(30) days to stop the work, obtain restraining orders or injunctions, obtain revocation of the certificate of occupancy or any other applicable and
available remedy.
D. Additional Powers And Duties: The enforcing officer is hereby empowered to perform all tasks, work assignments, investigations, reviews and
evaluations necessary and incumbent to the performance of his duties and responsibilities set forth herein. The records, reports, documents and
information resulting from the performance of the duties of the enforcing officer shall be maintained on file by the enforcing officer at city hall. All such
documents shall be the records and property of the city. (Ord. 718, 5-7-1980)
Chapter 7
CODE OF ETHICS
1-7-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 8/303
The public judges its government by the way public officials and employees conduct themselves in the post to which they have been elected or appointed.
The people have a right to expect that every public official and employee will conduct himself in a manner that will tend to preserve the public confidence in
and respect for the government he represents. Such confidence and respect can best be promoted if every public official and employee, whether paid or
unpaid and whether elected or appointed, will uniformly:
A. Treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality under the law; and,
B. Avoid both actual and potential conflicts between their private self interest and the public interest.
To help public officials and employees achieve this goal, is the objective of this code of ethics. (Ord. 761, 1-18-1982)
1-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in this code of ethics are hereby defined as follows:
FINANCIAL INTEREST: Any interest which shall yield, directly or indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit (other than the duly authorized salary or
compensation for his services to the City) to the official or employee or to any person employing or retaining the services of the official or employee.
OFFICIAL OR EMPLOYEE: Any person elected or appointed to or employed or retained by any public office or public body in the City, whether paid or
unpaid and whether part-time or full-time.
PERSON: Any person, firm, association, group, partnership or corporation or combination thereof.
PERSONAL INTEREST: Any interest arising from blood or marriage relationships or from close business or political association, whether or not any
financial interest is involved.
PUBLIC BODY: Any agency, board, body, commission, committee, department or office of the City of Sandpoint. (Ord. 761, 1-18-1982)
1-7-3: FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT:
A. Impartiality: No official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which is
the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large.
B. Use Of Public Property: No official or employee shall request, use or permit the use of any publicly owned or publicly supported property, vehicle,
equipment, labor or service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of himself or any other person. This rule shall not be deemed to
prohibit any official or employee from requesting, using or permitting the use of such publicly owned or publicly supplied property, vehicle, equipment,
material, labor or service which it is the general practice to make available to the public at large or which are provided as a matter of stated public
policy for the use of officials and employees in the conduct of official business. (Ord. 761, 1-18-1982)
1-7-4: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
A. Financial Or Personal Interest: No official or employee, either on his own behalf or on behalf of any other person, shall have any financial or personal
interest in any business or transaction with the public body unless he shall first make full public disclosure of the nature and extent of such interest.
B. Disclosure And Disqualification: Whenever the performance of his official duties shall require any official or employee to deliberate and vote on any
matter involving his financial or personal interest, he shall publicly disclose the nature and extent of such interest and disqualify himself from
participating in the deliberation as well as in the voting.
C. Incompatible Employment: No official or employee shall engage in private employment with or render services for any private person who has business
transactions with any public body unless he shall first make full public disclosure of the nature and extent of such employment or services.
D. Representation Of Private Persons: No official or employee shall appear on behalf of any private person other than himself before any public body in
the city.
E. Gifts And Favors: No official or employee shall accept any gift, whether in the form of money, thing, favor, loan or promise, that would not be offered or
given to him if he were not an official or employee of the city.
F. Confidential Information: No official or employee shall, without prior formal authorization of the public body having jurisdiction, disclose any confidential
information concerning any other official or employee or any other person or any property or governmental affairs of the city, whether or not this shall
involve disclosure. No official or employee shall use or permit the use of any such confidential information to advance the financial or personal interest
of himself or any other person. (Ord. 761, 1-18-1982)
G. Nepotism: No elected official shall appoint or vote for appointment of any person related by blood or marriage to any clerkship, office position,
employment or duty when the salary, wages, pay or compensation is to be paid out of public funds as provided in Idaho Code title 74, chapter 4. (Ord.
1315, 7-1-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 9/303
1-7-5: INTERPRETATION:
Any interpretation of this chapter and advisory opinion shall be made in the following manner:
A. Any city council member may question actions of any other public official by submission of facts to the city council as a whole, which facts shall be
reduced to writing by the city clerk. The defending public official shall be given an opportunity to respond immediately to any question or may request
continuance of a presentation and decision on such matter until the following regularly scheduled city council meeting. The opinion of a majority of the
city council hearing the questioned matter shall be the decision of the council of the whole. Such decision shall be advisory only.
B. Any voter registered to vote within the city limits of the city may raise a question under this chapter by setting forth the facts in writing and delivering
them to the mayor. The mayor shall immediately cause copies of said writing to be delivered to each member of the city council and shall cause the
matter to be brought before the city council at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. The city council shall resolve the question through a
majority vote of the council hearing the matter at the regular public meeting of the city council at which said question is reported by the mayor, unless
the defending public official or employee requests that the matter be continued until the next subsequent regular public meeting of the city council.
C. In all cases the mayor shall have the right to vote only in the event that it is necessary to break a tie. In the event that the mayor shall be the questioned
public official, the president of the council or if the president of the council is not present, such other member of the city council as a majority of those
council members present shall designate, shall preside over that portion of the city council meeting or meetings which concerns the question or charge
by either a city council member or registered voter.
D. The city clerk shall retain a record of the hearing on each such matter thus brought before the city council including a disposition of the matter and the
decision of a majority of the council hearing the question. (Ord. 761, 1-18-1982)
1-7-6: PENALTY:
Any public official who shall intentionally violate the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not more
than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six (6) months, or both. Any employee who shall intentionally violate
the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to appropriate action for censure, suspension or removal from employment. In addition, the conviction of any
public official of any violation of this Chapter shall be prima facie evidence that said public official has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude
and/or an offense involving a violation of his oath of office. (Ord. 761, 1-18-1982; 1983 Code)
Chapter 8
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
1-8-1: CREATION OF RIGHT:
The people of the city shall have the right to enact ordinances through the initiative process, and to repeal ordinances through the referendum process
according to the procedure set forth below. (Ord. 636, 3-19-1979)
1-8-2: PETITIONS FOR INITIATIVE OR REFERENDUM:
A. Conform To State Statute: All city initiative and referendum elections shall be conducted in conformity with chapter 18 of title 34, Idaho Code, and
chapter 5 of title 50, Idaho Code.
B. Number Of Petitioners Required: To enact an ordinance by initiative or to repeal an ordinance by referendum, there shall be attached or appended to
the petition the signatures of the legal voters of the city equal to at least twenty percent (20%) of the total number of electors who cast votes in the last
general election in the city.
C. Time For Filing Referendum Petitions: Petitions with the requisite number of signatures attached thereto shall be filed with the county clerk not less than
sixty (60) days following the final adoption of the ordinance which is subject to the referendum.
D. Time For Filing Initiative Petitions: Petitions shall be filed with the county clerk eighteen (18) months from the date petitioner received the official ballot
title from the county clerk or April 30 of the year of the next general election, whichever occurs earlier.
E. Requirements For Signature, Verification Of Valid Petition, Printing Of Petitions, And Time Limits: Referendum and initiative petitions shall conform with
requirements for signature, verification of valid petition, printing of petitions, and time limits as provided in Idaho Code section 34-1801 et seq. (Ord.
1273, 7-18-2012)
1-8-3: ELECTIONS:
Special elections shall be conducted pursuant to section 34-106 of Idaho Code. (Ord. 1273, 7-18-2012)
1-8-4: INITIATIVE REQUIRED FOR CONSOLIDATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 10/303
Before the council may adopt an ordinance consolidating the city's fire protection service with any fire protection district pursuant to Idaho Code chapter 14
title 31 as it is now written or as it may subsequently be amended, the city council shall be required to cause there to be a vote of the citizens of Sandpoint,
whether at a regular or special election, on an initiative which sets forth facts in favor of or opposed to such an action. (Ord. 995, 11-20-1996)
Chapter 9
ELECTION PRECINCTS
1-9-1: PRECINCTS ESTABLISHED:
A. Election Precincts: There shall be one voting and election precinct within the corporate limits of the city for all city elections which shall encompass the
entire corporate city limits.
B. Designated Places And Persons: Voting, polling and registration places and persons shall be designated by resolution of the city council for all
elections, voting and registrations for voting within the city. (Ord. 1058, 8-15-2001)
Chapter 10
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
1-10-1: CORPORATE LIMITS; MAP:
There are hereby defined, as hereinafter described and depicted, corporate limits and boundaries for the Municipal corporation of the City of Sandpoint,
Bonner County, Idaho. Said corporate limits and boundaries are depicted, pictured and set forth on the map adopted by reference and made a part hereof.
Said map is hereby adopted as a part hereof and declared to be a depiction of the legal corporate limits of the City, and said boundaries are further
described by written work setting forth the legal and geographic description of the outer property boundary line encompassing and constituting the outer
limits of the corporate boundary of the City. Said legal written description of said boundary line and corporate limit line shall be certified by the Mayor and
attested to by the City Clerk thereon and at least three (3) certified copies of the same shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and shall be open for
public inspection and dissemination and copies of the same shall be provided to any member of the public upon request.
The map depicting the boundary and corporate limits of the City, and made a part hereof and above referenced, shall likewise be certified by the Mayor
and attested to by the City Clerk upon its adoption. Thereafter said map shall be referred to as the official map depicting the corporate limits of the City,
until and unless modified or amended by appropriate ordinance. Said map shall, with this Section, upon adoption be filed and recorded with the Recorder
of Bonner County, Idaho and become a part of the official records of Bonner County, Idaho and of the official records of the City. Copies of the certified
map shall be made available to the general public and all interested persons and certified copies of the same shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk.
All real property located within and lying within the boundary limits and boundary lines as depicted on said official map, if previously unannexed into the
City, be and the same is hereby annexed to and within the City as contiguous, adjacent and adjoining property to existing annexed property. (Ord. 640, 4-
16-1979; amd. Ord. 735, 9-15-1980; 1983 Code)
The following is a legal description of the City boundaries:
Beginning at a point where the center of Sand Creek intersects the north line of Section 22, Township 57 North, Range 2 West; thence northerly along the
center of Sand Creek to a point which is the intersection of the center of Sand Creek and the south right-of-way line of the Burlington Northern Railroad
(transfer track), thence northwesterly along said south right-of-way line to a point which is the intersection of the south right-of-way line of the Burlington
Northern (transfer track) and the west line of North Boyer Avenue, thence south along said west line to a point which is 371.228 feet south and 30 feet
west of the center of Section 15; thence west 587.6 feet; thence south 204 feet; thence east 587.6 feet to the west line of North Boyer Avenue, thence
south along the west line of North Boyer Avenue to a point which is the intersection of the west line of North Boyer Avenue and the north line of the south
half of the south half of Section 15; thence west along said north line to a point which is the intersection of the north line of the south half of the south half
of Section 15 and the west line of North Ella Avenue; thence north along said west line to a point which is the intersection of the west line of North Ella
Avenue and the north line of Walnut Street; thence west along said north line to a point which is the intersection of the north line of Walnut Street and the
west line of Division Street; thence south along the west line of Division Street to a point which is 1090.4 feet north and 30 feet west of the southeast
corner of Section 16; thence north 89°35' west 1899.2 feet more or less to the east right-of-way line of the County Road; thence along said right-of-way
line 17°50' west, 413.66 feet; thence south 89°30'10" east approximately 368.61 feet, to a point which is south 89°30'10" west, 1657.19 feet, from a point
which is the intersection of the center line of Division Street and the south line of Spruce Street; thence south 0°34' west 308 feet, thence south 89°30'10"
east 48.9 feet; thence south 0°34' west 388.03 feet; thence south 89°26' east approximately 312.15 feet; thence south to the north line of Main Street;
thence southeasterly along said north line to the intersection of the north line of Main Street and the east line of Block 3, Ohadi Acres; thence south along
said east line extended to the south line of Main Street; thence southeasterly along said south line approximately 435.261 feet; thence south 244.046 feet
to a point of intersection with the north line of Poplar Street; thence east along said north line 111 feet; thence north to the south line of Main Street; thence
southeasterly along the south line of Main Street to a point which is the intersection of the south line of Main Street and the west line of Monroe Street;
thence south 1348 feet along said west line of Monroe Street; thence west 706.2 feet; thence south 689 feet to the north line of Pine Street; thence west
approximately 1841 feet along the north line of Pine Street to the point of intersection with the west line of tract "L" of Ohadi Acres; thence south
approximately 1340 feet along said west line to the point of intersection of the west line of tract "L" of Ohadi Acres and the thread of Chuck's Slough;
thence easterly along the thread of Chuck's Slough; thence southerly along said thread to a point which is approximately 537.4 feet north and 158.0 feet
east of the south quarter corner of Section 21; thence south approximately 222 feet to a point which is 315.4 feet north and 158 feet east of the south
quarter corner of Section 21; thence east 150 feet, thence south 290.4 feet to a point of intersection of the north line of Ontario Street; thence east 512.5
feet along the north line of Ontario Street; thence south to a point which is the intersection of the south right-of-way of U.S. Highway No. 2-200; thence
northeasterly along said south right-of-way to a point which is 267 feet south and 1050 feet west of the northeast corner of Section 28, Township 57 North,
Range 2 West, Boise Meridian, Bonner County, Idaho; thence south 422.2 feet, thence east 188 feet, thence north 560 feet to the point of intersection with
the south line of U.S. Highway No. 2-200; thence northeasterly along said south line to a point which is the intersection of the south line of U.S. Highway
No. 2-200 and the south line of Ontario Street; thence east along the said south line of Ontario to a point which is south 89°52' west 182.9 feet, from the
southwest corner of the intersection of Olive and Ontario Streets; thence south approximately 711.17 feet, to the south line of Birch Street extended;
thence south 89°50' west 207.30 feet; thence south 20°14'30" east approximately 510 feet; thence north 73°55'30" east 167.96 feet, thence south 37°40'
west 43.3 feet, thence south 25°27' east 68.8 feet, thence south 17°46' west 114.05 feet; thence south 54°17' east 149.6 feet; thence south 67°32' east
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 11/303
110.4 feet to the ordinary high water mark (OHW) of the Pend Oreille River, said waterline being at an elevation of 2062.5 feet above sea level, thence
southerly along a line that is perpendicular to the shoreline to a point 75 feet south of the sounding 2051.0 feet of the Pend Oreille River; thence easterly
along a line that is 75 feet south of the 2051.0 feet sounding to the point of intersection with a line that is 17 feet west of the center line of the right-of way
of U.S. Highway No. 95; thence northwesterly along a line that is 17 feet west of the center line of the U.S. Highway No. 95 right-of-way to the point of
intersection with the centerline of Pacific Street extended; thence east along said extension of Pacific Street to a point which is one-fourth mile east of the
east right-of-way line of the Burlington Northern Railroad; thence northerly along a line which is parallel to and one-fourth mile east of the ordinary high
water mark of Lake Pend Oreille to the north line of Section 23, Township 57 North, Range 2 West, Boise Meridian, Bonner County; thence west along
said north line to a point which is 108.28 feet east of the northwest corner of said Section 23, thence north 10°13'7" west 433.49 feet; thence south
79°46'53" west 150 feet; thence south 10°13'7", east 407.35 feet; this being the point of intersection with the north line of Section 22, Township 57 North,
Range 2 West, Boise Meridian, Bonner County; thence continuing west along the north line of Section 22 to the center of Sand Creek, the point of
beginning. (Ord. 746, 3-23-1981; amd. Ord. 779, 5-16-1983)
A portion of Sections 3, 9, 10, 15 and 16 in Township 57 North, Range 2 West, Boise Meridian, Bonner County, Idaho, more fully described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the thread of Sand Creek and the southerly right-of-way line of the Burlington Northern Railway transfer track which
traverses the southeast quarter of Section 15; the true point of beginning, said point also being a point at which the current City limits of the City of
Sandpoint and the City of Ponderay coincide; thence northerly along the thread of Sand Creek to a point which is 50 feet north of the section line between
Sections 10 and 3, Township 57 North, Range 2 West, thence west along this line approximately 1500 feet to a point which is 30 feet west of the northsouth
center line of Section 3; thence south along this line that is 30 feet west of the north-south section line 50 feet to a point on the section line between
Sections 3 and 10; thence west along the section line between Sections 3 and 10, approximately 1280 feet to a point of intersection with the 1/16 corner of
the southwest quarter of Section 3, thence northerly along this 1/16 line approximately 1,320 feet to a point where it intersects with the south 1/16 line of the
northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 3, Township 57 North, Range 2 West, thence westerly along said 1/16 line approximately 400 feet to
a point where it intersects with the east right-of-way line of the Burlington Northern Railroad main line track, thence southerly through Sections 3, 10, 9 and
16 along the east right-of-way line of the Burlington Northern Railroad to an intersection with the existing City limits of the City of Sandpoint, said point
being in the southeast quarter of Section 16; thence easterly through Sections 16 and 15 along the boundary of the City limits of the City of Sandpoint to
the true point of beginning. (Ord. 866, 7-18-1988)
Parcel A: Starting at a point which is the center of Sections 15, 16, 21 and 22 of the center line of Division Street; thence north along the section line
between Sections 15 and 16 approximately 690 feet to a point which is the intersection of the center line of Division Street and the south right-of-way line
of Spruce Street; thence north 89°30'10" west 2025.80 feet to a point, said point being on the east right-of-way line of the Burlington Northern Railroad
maintenance track and coinciding with the existing City limits of the City of Sandpoint, the true point of beginning; thence south 89°30'10" east
approximately 368.61 feet to a point which is south 89°30'10" west approximately 1657.19 feet from a point which is the intersection of the center line of
Division Street and the south line of Spruce Street; thence south 0°34' west 308 feet, thence south 89°30'10" east 48.9 feet; thence south 0°34' west
388.03 feet; thence south 89°26' east approximately 312.15 feet; thence south to the north line of Main Street; thence southeasterly along said north line
to the intersection of the north line of Main Street and the east line of Block 3, Ohadi Acres; thence south along said east line extended to the south line of
Main Street; thence southeasterly along said south line approximately 435.261 feet; thence south 244.046 feet to a point of intersection with the north line
of Poplar Street; thence east along said north line 111 feet; thence north to the south line of Main Street; thence southeasterly along the south line of Main
Street to a point which is the intersection of the south line of Main Street and the west line of Monroe Street; thence south 1348 feet along said west line of
Monroe Street; thence west 706.2 feet; thence south 719 feet to the center line of Pine Street; thence west approximately 2,191 feet along the center line
of Pine Street to the point of intersection with the east right-of way line of the Burlington Northern Railroad mainline track; thence northeasterly along said
right-of-way approximately 3,330 feet to the true point of beginning.
Parcel B: Beginning at a point that is 537.4 feet north and 158.0 feet east of the south quarter corner of Section 21; thence south approximately 222 feet to
a point which is 315.4 feet north and 158 feet east of the south quarter corner of Section 21; thence east 150 feet, thence south 290.4 feet to a point of
intersection of the north line of Ontario Street; thence east 512.5 feet along the north line of Ontario Street; thence south to a point which is the intersection
of the south right-of-way of U.S. Highway No. 2/200; thence northeasterly along said south right-of-way to a point which is 267 feet south and 1050 feet
west of the northeast corner of Section 28, Township 57 North, Range 2 West, Boise Meridian, Bonner County, Idaho; thence south 422.2 feet, thence east
188 feet, thence north 560 feet to the point of intersection with the south line of U.S. Highway No. 2/200; thence northeasterly along said south line to a
point which is the intersection of the south line of the U.S. Highway No. 2/200 and the south line of Ontario Street; thence east along the said south line of
Ontario to a point which is south 89°52' west 182.9 feet, from the southwest corner of the intersection of Olive and Ontario Streets; thence south
approximately 711.17 feet, to the south line of Birch Street extended; thence south 89°50' west 207.30 feet; thence south 20°14'30" east approximately
510 feet; thence north 73°55'30" east 167.96 feet, thence south 37°40' west 43.3 feet, thence south 25°27' east 68.8 feet, thence south 17°46' west 114.05
feet; thence south 54°17' east 149.6 feet; thence south 67°32' east 110.4 feet to the ordinary high water mark (OHW) of the Pend Oreille River, said
waterline being at an elevation of 2062.5 feet above sea level, thence southwesterly along the ordinary high water mark to a point of intersection with the
center line of Section 28; thence north along said center line of Sections 28 and 21 to a point of intersection of said center line and the thread of Chuck
Slough, thence easterly along the thread of Chuck's Slough; thence southerly along said thread to a point which is approximately 537.4 feet north and
158.0 feet east of the south quarter corner of Section 21; this point being the true point of beginning. (Ord. 868, 8-15-1988)
1-10-2: CORPORATE SEAL:
A. Design: The Corporate Seal of the City shall be circular in form with inner and outer circles. The outer circle shall be one and thirteen-sixteenths inches
(113/16") in diameter, and the inner circle shall be one and five-sixteenths inches (15/16") in diameter. It shall bear upon the space between the two (2)
circles the words, "City of Sandpoint, Idaho", and upon the space within the inner circle the word, "Seal", as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 12/303
B. Adoption: The Seal described hereinabove shall be, and the same is hereby adopted as the Seal of the City of Sandpoint. (Ord. 244, 9-23-1949)
C. Custodian: The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the Seal and shall affix said Seal's imprint upon all official documents, records, licenses, warrants
and/or checks, as required. (1983 Code)
1-10-3: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The Sandpoint Daily Bee, a daily newspaper printed and published in the City, is hereby appointed and designated the official newspaper and such
writings as are required under and by virtue of the Municipal government of the City to be given publication in a newspaper shall be published in said
Sandpoint Daily Bee. (1983 Code)
Chapter 11
ANNEXATION PROCEDURES
1-11-1: APPLICATION FOR ANNEXATION; CONTENTS:
Applications for annexation shall be made to the Planning Department in accordance with Section 9-9-2 of this Code. Annexation requests shall not be
heard by the Planning and Zoning Commission unless and until an application for annexation is submitted to the Planning Department. The application
must contain the following:
A. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. A vicinity map showing property divisions and ownerships within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the parcel; excluded from the
measurement are rights of way.
C. A legal survey of the parcel, tied at least to one section corner, with the metes and bounds description written in a counterclockwise direction and
compatible with the existing City corporate description. The survey shall be submitted in triplicate, drawn to a scale of no less than one hundred feet to
the inch (100' = 1").
D. A list of the owners of the parcels to be annexed; and if individual ownership is larger than five (5) acres, a notarized statement requesting annexation.
E. A statement by the owners stating whether they agree or do not agree to participate in a local improvement district for all standard improvements to the
right-of-way adjoining the property. (Ord. 762, 11-15-1982)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 13/303
1-11-2: APPLICABILITY:
A. The proposed annexation must conform to Idaho Code1.
B. The parcel of land shall be adjoining the corporate limits and be within the proposed corporate limits of the Comprehensive Plan Map. (Ord. 762, 11-15-
1982)
1-11-3: ZONING:
All properties shall be zoned in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan Map. (Ord. 762, 11-15-1982)
1-11-4: REQUIRED STANDARDS:
A. Fire hydrants shall be installed by the applicant at the direction and at the discretion of the Fire Chief.
B. Sidewalks shall be constructed along the through street as directed by the City Council.
C. A landscape maintenance plan, approved by the Commission shall become part of the annexation requirements. Failure to maintain property in
accordance with such plan shall constitute a nuisance subjecting the property owner to criminal and civil penalties and assessment for maintenance
provided by the City.
D. Owners of parcels previously developed shall be required to make dedications or improvements to conform to the ordinances in effect at the time of
annexation, unless specifically exempted by the City Council.
E. Upon presentation of petition for annexation initiated by landowners of areas adjacent to the City's corporate limits, the petition must be accompanied
by: 1) an agreement with the Sandpoint Independent Highway District providing for inclusion of the area to be annexed within the boundaries of the
Independent Highway District; or 2) an agreement between the said Independent Highway District and the Bonner County Commissioners formally to
include the area to be annexed within the boundaries of the said Independent Highway District.
F. Where annexation affects property on only one side of a public right of way, no part of the public right of way shall be included in the annexation.
G. Where annexation includes a public right of way, property annexed must be of a depth of not less than fifty feet (50') wherever it lies adjacent to the
public right of way. (Ord. 762, 11-15-1982)
1-11-5: FEES:
An application shall not be processed until all filing fees are paid in full. Such fees will be set from time to time by the City Council. (Ord. 762, 11-15-1982)
Chapter 12
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
1-12-1: CREATION; PURPOSE:
A. The city does hereby create a public corporation to carry out the purposes of the "act"1. This chapter shall not be construed to limit or restrict the
purposes of the act, but shall be liberally construed to effect such purposes.
B. The name of the public corporation shall be the "Economic Development Corporation of Sandpoint" (the "corporation"). (Ord. 772, 1-17-1983)
1-12-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The corporation shall have all the powers and be subject to all the limitations and provisions contained in the act. The corporation shall have all the powers
granted by the act. Such powers shall include, without limitation, all powers set forth in the charter, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk
and adopted herein as if set out in full. (Ord. 772, 1-17-1983)
1-12-3: CHARTER:
A charter (the "charter") is hereby issued by the city to the corporation. The charter grants to the corporation all powers authorized by the act. A copy of the
charter is on file in the office of the city clerk and incorporated herein by reference. The charter is hereby approved pursuant to section 50-2703(1) of the
act. The charter may be amended from time to time by the city council. The existence of the corporation commences at the time the enactment of this
chapter becomes effective. (Ord. 772, 1-17-1983)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 14/303
1-12-4: BOARD OF DIRECTORS:
The board of directors of the corporation (the "board") shall be comprised of three (3) to seven (7) persons, a majority of whom shall be residents of the
city of Sandpoint or persons who own, manage, or are employed by a business within the Sandpoint city limits, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by
the city council. Each member shall be appointed to a three (3) year term. If a vacancy occurs during an unexpired term, the mayor, with the consent of the
council, shall appoint a member to serve the remainder of the unexpired term. A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum, and the
approval of a majority of a quorum shall be necessary for the board to take any action. (Ord. 811, 8-19-1985; amd. Ord. 994, 11-20-1996; Ord. 1150, 6-21-
2006)
1-12-5: CONDUCT OF AFFAIRS; OFFICERS:
A. The affairs of the corporation shall be conducted and carried out by the board. The board shall elect officers from among its own members. Such
officers shall be elected at the initial meeting of the board in each calendar year, shall serve until their successors have been duly elected, and shall
include a president and a secretary and may include a vice president and an assistant secretary (provided that in the event the board shall be
comprised of only 3 members, the offices of vice president and assistant secretary may be simultaneously held by the same person; and, provided
further, that in the event the offices of the vice president and assistant secretary shall be simultaneously held by the same person, such person shall
not both execute and attest any resolution, document, certificate, deed, mortgage, deed of trust, note, bond, contract or other document or instrument).
The board may elect such other officers as it shall from time to time determine to be necessary or desirable.
B. The board shall adopt bylaws and/or rules and regulations governing the election of officers, the power and duties of such officers, the filling of
vacancies in offices, the scheduling, giving notice of and conduct of meetings and the conduct of the corporation. Such bylaws, rules and regulations
may be amended from time to time by the board, provided any such amendments shall be consistent with the provisions hereof.
C. Members of the board shall serve without compensation, but with reimbursement of expenses as may be provided in the bylaws, rules and regulations
of the board. (Ord. 772, 1-17-1983)
1-12-6: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
No director, officer, agent, employee or official of the corporation shall have a direct or indirect financial interest in any property to be included in or any
contract for property, service or materials to be furnished or used in connection with any industrial development facility financed through the corporation.
(Ord. 772, 1-17-1983)
1-12-7: MONIES; LENDING OR USE OF:
A. The city may not give or lend any money or property in aid of the corporation, except as expressly authorized by the act. This provision shall not
preclude the city from dealing with the corporation on an arm's length basis.
B. Any net earnings of the corporation beyond those necessary for retirement of indebtedness incurred by it shall inure to the city and not for the benefit of
any other person. Alteration of the charter of or dissolution of or audits of the corporation shall be as provided by the act and by subsequent ordinances
of the city. Upon dissolution of the corporation, title to all property owned by the corporation shall vest in the city. (Ord. 772, 1-17-1983)
Chapter 13
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING UNIT
1-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following mean:
BARGAINING AGENT: The designated representative or representatives, which shall include the president or vice-president, of the employee
organization.
DESIGNATED CORPORATE REPRESENTATIVE: The individual or individuals, which shall include at least one member of the Sandpoint City Council,
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council to represent the employer in negotiations.
EMPLOYEE OR PUBLIC EMPLOYEE: Any person employed by the employer on a full-time permanent or permanent part-time basis.
The following persons are excluded from the term employee or public employee for purposes of this Chapter: those persons elected by the people,
those persons appointed by the Mayor, members of boards or authorities or commissions, contract employees, attorneys for the employer, persons
employed on a temporary seasonal, full-time temporary or part-time basis, members of Local 2319 and those persons whose job descriptions, as
approved by the City Council, specifically preclude them from membership in the employees' collective bargaining organization by virtue of their
position with the City of Sandpoint.
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION OR ORGANIZATION: A labor organization, union, association, fraternal order or group of employees, however organized or
constituted, which represents or seeks to represent a majority of the public employees concerning employees' wages, benefits and working conditions.
EMPLOYER OR PUBLIC EMPLOYER: The City of Sandpoint, an Idaho municipal corporation. (Ord. 878, 12-19-1988)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 15/303
1-13-2: RECOGNITION PROCEDURES:
A. The employee organization may file a petition with the City Council for recognition as the representative of public employees for the purpose of
employment negotiations. The petition shall contain the following:
1. The name, affiliation, if any, and address of the petitioning employee organization and each of its designated representatives to the City;
2. A list of its elected officers, if any, and their addresses and telephone numbers;
3. Authorization cards, signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of the employees, which card shall include a request from the employee signing the
authorization card that the employee organization be recognized as the representative of that employee.
B. The City Council shall investigate the petition to determine its sufficiency and whether a request concerning representation by an employee organization
has been made.
C. After a petition is filed pursuant to the provisions of subsection A of this Section, and the City Council, following investigation of the petition, finds that a
request concerning representation by an employee organization has been made, the City Council shall:
1. Define the proposed bargaining unit and determine which public employees shall be qualified and entitled to vote in any election; and,
2. Order an election by secret ballot to be conducted within thirty (30) days of receipt of the petition.
D. Cause petitions for recognition and/or petitions to intervene to be posted on the official bulletin board of the City within two (2) days of receipt thereof by
the City Council. (Ord. 878, 12-19-1988)
1-13-3: ELECTION COMMITTEE:
When an election has been ordered, an Election Committee of one person selected by the Council, one person selected by the employees, and a third
person selected by the other two (2) persons shall conduct such election. The Election Committee shall:
A. Fix the date, time and polling place for the election;
B. Direct the manner in which notice of the election shall be given;
C. Supervise and regulate the election and resolve any disputes arising in the course of the election;
D. Certify the results of the election to the Mayor and City Council; and,
E. Assure that the provisions of Section 1-13-4 of this Chapter governing such elections are followed. (Ord. 878, 12-19-1988)
1-13-4: REPRESENTATION ELECTIONS:
A. An election shall be held within thirty (30) days following receipt by the City Council of a petition for recognition.
B. The election ballot shall contain the name of the petitioning employee organization.
C. Notices of the election shall be posted as soon as is practicable after the date, time and place of the election are fixed by the Election Committee;
however, all notices shall be posted at least ten (10) working days prior to the date of the election.
D. The employer and the employee organization may each designate one observer for each polling place. The observer shall wear a visible name tag
which includes their title. The function of an observer shall be to act as an observer at each polling place and to assist in the identification of voters.
E. The organization selected by a simple majority of the public employees, as certified by the Election Committee, shall be certified by the Mayor and City
Council as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent for the bargaining unit which was the subject of the election. (Ord. 878, 12-19-1988)
1-13-5: NEGOTIATIONS:
A. It shall be the obligation of the City, through its designated corporate representatives to bargain in good faith with the bargaining agent within thirty (30)
days after receipt of written notice requesting a meeting for collective bargaining purposes. The bargaining agent shall bargain in good faith with the
City.
To bargain in good faith is the performance of the mutual obligation of the City's designated corporate representatives and the bargaining agent to meet
solely with one another at reasonable times and to negotiate in good faith with respect to wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment.
This obligation shall include the duty to cause any agreement resulting from negotiations between the bargaining agent and the designated corporate
representatives to be reduced to a written contract.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 16/303
B. Whenever wages, rates of pay or any other matter requiring appropriation of money by the City are included as a matter of collective bargaining
conducted under the provisions of this Chapter, it is the obligation of the bargaining agent to serve written notice of request for collective bargaining on
the employer at least ninety (90) days before the last day on which money can be appropriated by the City (pursuant to Idaho Code 50-1007) to cover
the contract period which is the subject of the collective bargaining procedure.
C. In the event that the bargaining agent and the designated corporate representatives are unable, within sixty (60) days from and including the date of
their first meeting, to reach an agreement on a contract, any and all unresolved issues shall be submitted to a fact finding commission whose decision
shall be binding. The decision, as it relates to funding, shall be binding to the extent that funds are available to the city for complying with any monetary
requirements of the decision. (Ord. 878, 12-19-1988)
D. Within five (5) working days from the expiration of the sixty (60) day period referred to in subsection C of this section, the bargaining agent and the
employer shall each select and name one member of the fact finding commission respectively and shall immediately thereafter notify each other, in
writing, of the names and addresses of the person so selected.
The two (2) members so selected and named shall, within five (5) working days from and after the expiration of the five (5) working day period above
mentioned, agree upon and appoint and name a third member. If, on the expiration of the five (5) working day period, the two (2) members are unable
to agree upon the appointment of a third member, the state labor commission shall appoint such third member upon written request from either the
bargaining agent or the corporate authorities. The third member of the fact finding commission, whether appointed as a result of agreement between
the two (2) members selected by the bargaining agent and the employer, or appointed by the state labor commission, shall act as chairman of the fact
finding commission. No member of the fact finding commission shall be an elected official, an official of the employee organization, or on the city
payroll. Any expenses incurred by the third member of the fact finding commission shall be equally shared by the bargaining agent and the employer,
and each of those parties shall be solely responsible for the payment of the expenses of its member of the commission.
E. Fact finding shall be conducted as follows:
1. The fact finding commission shall appoint a time and place for hearing and cause notification to the bargaining agent and the employer to be served
personally or by registered mail not less than five (5) working days before the meeting. Appearances at the hearing waive such notice requirement.
The fact finding commission may adjourn the hearing from time to time, as necessary, and, on request of a party for good cause or upon their own
motion, may postpone the hearing. The fact finding commission shall hear and determine the controversy upon the evidence produced,
notwithstanding the failure of a party duly notified to appear. (Ord. 1274, 7-18-2012)
2. The bargaining agent and the employer shall be entitled to be heard, to present evidence material to the controversy and to cross examine
witnesses appearing at the hearing.
3. The hearing shall be conducted by all of the members of the fact finding commission, but a majority may determine any question and render a
decision.
F. The binding decision of the fact finding commission shall be rendered within thirty (30) days after the end of the hearing, and shall be in writing and
signed by the members of the commission. The decision, as it relates to funding, shall be binding to the extent that funds are available to the city for
complying with any monetary requirements of the decision. The fact finding commission shall deliver a copy of the decision to the bargaining agent and
corporate authorities.
If the fact finding commission is unable to render a timely decision, either party may petition the district court for relief.
G. The following shall relate to unfair labor practices:
1. It shall be an unfair labor practice for the employer, the employees, or the bargaining representative to:
a. Interfere with or coerce the employees in the exercise of their legal rights.
b. Discriminate against any employee who has filed a grievance or unfair labor practice charge.
c. Refuse to engage in collective bargaining.
2. Whenever a charge has been made concerning any unfair labor practice, the parties agree to submit the dispute to the department of labor and
industrial services. Those charges must be filed within fifteen (15) days of their occurrence.
3. A time and date for the hearing shall be scheduled no more than thirty (30) days after the charges have been filed.
4. During the hearing, both parties shall have the opportunity to present evidence and call and examine witnesses. The Department of Labor and
Industrial Services shall have the power to issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence
that relates to any matter under investigation or in question.
5. The Department of Labor and Industrial Services shall issue its decision within sixty (60) days after the conclusion of the hearing. Those findings
shall be final and binding on all parties. The findings, as they relate to funding, shall be binding to the extent that funds are available to the City for
complying with any monetary requirements of the decision. (Ord. 878, 12-19-1988)
1-13-6: PUBLIC EMPLOYEES' RIGHTS:
Public employees shall have the right to form, join and participate in, or to refrain from forming, joining or participating in any employee organization, the
right to be represented in negotiations over working conditions with the employer, and the right to exercise these rights without discrimination. (Ord. 878,
12-19-1988)
1-13-7: PUBLIC EMPLOYERS' RIGHTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 17/303
The public employer shall have the right to manage the affairs of the City and to direct its working forces, the right to set standards of service, the right to
hire and determine the procedures and standards of selection for employment and promotion, the right to discipline or discharge for proper cause, the right
to lay off for lack of work or funds, the right to make rules and regulations governing conduct, the right to determine the methods, processes and manner of
performing work and the right to establish job descriptions and work classifications. (Ord. 878, 12-19-1988)
1-13-8: NO STRIKE; NO LOCK OUT:
At no time may any employee or employee organization engage in any strike, slowdown or work stoppage, nor may the City lock out any of its employees.
(Ord. 878, 12-19-1988)
Chapter 14
CITY FUNDS
1-14-1: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
A. The City Finance Director/Treasurer is hereby authorized to place all funds classified as deposits in a banking institution that is a member of the
F.D.I.C., Sandpoint branch.
B. The City Council shall periodically designate the actual banking institution by resolution. (Ord. 1003, 6-18-1997)
1-14-2: INVESTMENT OF FUNDS:
The Finance Director/Treasurer shall be empowered to place all other funds not classified as deposits in investment accounts pursuant to resolutions
passed by the City Council. (Ord. 1003, 6-18-1997)
Chapter 15
PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT STANDARDS
1-15-1: KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS TO BE MAINTAINED:
A. All City departments shall maintain key performance indicators regarding monthly department performance, as directed by the City Administrator.
B. All City contracted entities shall maintain key performance indicators regarding monthly contracted performance, as directed by the City Administrator.
(Ord. 1357, 9-5-2018)
1-15-2: ALIGNMENT OF GOALS AND KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS:
By August of each calendar year, the City Administrator shall present the Operational Plan and proposed budget for Council review, which will demonstrate
for Council the alignment of City-wide operational goals and departmental goals and key performance indicators with Council priorities as established in
the City's 5-year Strategic Plan. (Ord. 1357, 9-5-2018)
1-15-3: CITY ADMINISTRATOR DUTIES:
A. The City Administrator shall assure long-range operational plans for all major City functions be in-place and kept up-to-date.
B. The City Administrator will routinely measure, analyze, and report to Council City-wide progress on operational key performance indicators and adopt
subsequent plans in an effort to continuously improve outcomes.
C. The City Administrator shall implement a process to ensure that the programs supported with Federal and/or State funds achieve measurable results
that support City goals, and shall ensure that measurement, monitoring, and reporting of these results meet funding source requirements.
D. The City Administrator shall annually assess and make recommendation for Council approval the appropriation of sufficient resources and subsequent
strategies necessary to meet the data information needs of Council, City Administration, City commissions, and Sandpoint citizens. (Ord. 1357, 9-5-
2018)
1-15-4: UTILIZATION OF KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATOR INFORMATION:
The City Council, City Administrator, and all City departments and divisions shall utilize information provided through the analysis of key performance
indicators when making policy, program, or any other decisions that will impact the City's service delivery capabilities. (Ord. 1357, 9-5-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 18/303
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter:
APPOINTIVE MEMBERS: All voting members of the Commission.
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission.
EX OFFICIO MEMBERS: Nonvoting ex-officio advisors appointed by the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 633, 2-20-1979)
2-1-2: COMMISSION CREATED; QUALIFICATIONS:
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City, which Commission shall consist of seven (7)
members to be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation of the Council.
Members of the Commission shall be selected without respect to political affiliation and shall serve without compensation. Members shall be residents of
the City; with the exception of one member who may be a nonresident of the City. Each and every member of the Commission shall meet the statutory
resident qualifications as set forth in Idaho Code 67-6504(a). (Ord. 633, 2-20-1979)
2-1-3: TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
A. Terms: The term of office for appointive members of the Commission shall be for three (3) years; provided, however, that the term of office of the three
(3) members of the initial Commission appointed hereunder shall be for a term of four (4) years. The term of office of the initial Commission members
appointed hereunder shall be determined by lot and all members appointed thereafter shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years.
B. Vacancies: Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms of office shall be filled in the same manneras original appointments;
provided, that a member appointed to fill a thus created vacancy shall be appointed to complete the term of office of the member whose departure from
the Commission created said vacancy.
C. Removal: Members of the Commission may be removed by a majority vote of the City Council. (Ord. 633, 2-20-1979)
2-1-4: RULES AND ORGANIZATION:
A. The Commission shall elect its own chairman and create and fill such other offices as it may determine required for the proper conduct of the affairs and
business of the Commission. (Ord. 633, 2-20-1979)
B. The Commission may appoint nonvoting ex officio advisors as may be deemed necessary, whose terms of office shall be one year. (Ord. 711, 3-17-
1980)
C. A majority of the appointive members of the Commission shall be necessary to constitute a quorum at any meeting.
D. Written organization papers and/or bylaws consistent with this Chapter and the laws of the State of Idaho for the transaction of business of the
Commission shall be adopted and confirmed by the City Council.
E. A record of meetings, hearings, resolutions, studies, findings, permits and actions taken shall be maintained and shall be open to the public.
F. At least one regular meeting shall be held each month for not less than nine (9) months in each calendar year. (Ord. 633, 2-20-1979)
2-1-5: DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION:
The Commission created hereunder shall perform such functions and duties as required by and in furtherance of those planning and zoning matters set
forth in the Local Planning Act of 1975 and contained in Idaho Code sections 67-6501 through 67-6529. The Commission shall further perform such
functions and fulfill such duties as assigned to the Commission by the City Council, and may at any time make recommendations to the City Council
concerning the plan, planning processes, implementation of the plan and zoning processes.
With the consent of the owner, the Commission and its members, officers and employees in the performance of their function may enter upon any land and
make examination and survey and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. (Ord. 633, 2-20-1979)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 19/303
2-1-6: MEETINGS:
The City's regular Planning and Zoning Commission meeting shall be set by the City Council by resolution. Should the meeting date fall on a holiday, the
Commission meeting shall be held on the next regular business day following. (Ord. 841, 6-15-1987)
Chapter 2
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
2-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
This chapter shall establish a development impact fee advisory committee pursuant to Idaho Code 67-8205. (Ord. 987, 6-19-1996)
2-2-2: APPOINTMENT:
The development impact fee advisory committee shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council pursuant to Idaho Code. (Ord. 987, 6-
19-1996)
2-2-3: MEMBERSHIP:
A. The development impact fee advisory committee shall be composed of not fewer than five (5) members.
B. At least two (2) members of the development impact fee advisory committee shall be active in the business of development, building or real estate.
Members under this category who miss two (2) consecutive meetings shall be automatically removed from the committee and replaced pursuant to the
appointment process outlined in this chapter.
C. At least two (2) members shall be persons who are not officials of or employees of the city of Sandpoint. (Ord. 1224, 12-16-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
2-2-4: DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS:
A. The development impact fee advisory committee shall serve in an advisory capacity only.
B. The function of the development impact fee advisory committee shall be to:
1. Assist the local government in adopting land use assumptions.
2. Review the capital improvements plan, and proposed amendments, and file written comments.
3. Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements plan.
4. File periodic reports at least annually with respect to the capital improvements plan and report to the mayor and city council any perceived inequities
in implementing the plan or imposing the development impact fees.
5. Advise the mayor and city council of the need to update or revise land use assumptions, capital improvements plan, and development impact fees.
(Ord. 987, 6-19-1996)
2-2-5: AVAILABILITY OF RECORDS:
The city of Sandpoint shall make available to the advisory committee upon request all financial and accounting information, professional reports in relation
to other development and implementation of land use assumptions, the capital improvements plan, and periodic updates of the capital improvements plan.
Request for such data and information shall be made through the mayor, who shall assure response from the appropriate employees, departments and
professional staff. (Ord. 987, 6-19-1996)
Chapter 3
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
2-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the public of the city of Sandpoint through
identification, evaluation, designation, and protection of those buildings, sites, districts, areas, structures, and objects that reflect significant elements of the
city's, the state's, and the nation's historic, architectural, archaeological, and cultural heritage. (Ord. 1081, 2-19-2003)
2-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 20/303
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following meanings:
CITY: The city of Sandpoint.
COMMISSION: The historic preservation commission of the city of Sandpoint created by this chapter with the duties and responsibilities set forth herein.
DESIGNATED HISTORIC PROPERTY: In order for any historic property to be designated in the ordinance, it must, in addition, meet the criteria
established for inclusion of the property in the national register of historic places.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The identification, evaluation, recordation, documentation, curation, acquisition, management, protection, restoration,
rehabilitation, stabilization, maintenance, interpretation, conservation, and education of buildings, structures, objects, districts, areas, and sites significant
in the history, architecture, archaeology, or culture of this state, its communities, or the nation.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: Any building, structure, district, area, or site that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, or culture of this
community, the state, or the nation. (Ord. 1081, 2-19-2003)
2-3-3: ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP:
A. There is hereby created a historic preservation commission which shall consist of at least five (5) but not more than nine (9) members who shall receive
no salary. They shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council, and members may, in like manner, be removed without cause. One
member of the city council shall act as a nonvoting liaison. One member may be a city of Sandpoint planning and zoning commissioner; one member
may be from a downtown business association; and at least three (3) members must be knowledgeable in Sandpoint history and architecture. All
members of the commission shall have a demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in history or historic preservation. The council shall
endeavor to appoint at least two (2) members with professional training or experience in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history,
urban planning, archaeology, engineering, conservation, landscape architecture, law, or other historic preservation related disciplines. A majority of the
members of this commission shall be city residents.
B. Initial appointments to the commission shall be made as follows: One 1-year term; two (2) 2-year terms; and two (2) 3-year terms. All subsequent
appointments shall be made for three (3) year terms. Commission members may be reappointed to serve additional terms. In the event there are
greater than five (5) members, each new appointee's term shall be staggered to allow no more than three (3) members' terms expiring in the same
year.
C. The Mayor shall determine which of the first appointed members' term of office shall expire after adoption of this chapter, and which shall expire at the
first City Council meeting one year and two (2) years after adoption of this chapter.
D. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments, and the appointee shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. (Ord.
1282, 6-5-2013)
2-3-4: ORGANIZATION, OFFICERS, RULES, AND MEETINGS:
A. The commission shall have the authority, subject to Sandpoint City Council approval, to make reasonable rules necessary for the execution of its duties,
as set forth in this chapter. Rules of procedure and bylaws, if any, adopted by the commission, shall be available for public inspection.
B. The commission shall elect officers from among the commission members. The Chairperson shall preside at meetings of the commission. The Vice
Chairperson shall, lacking the Chairperson, perform the duties of the Chairperson.
C. The Historic Preservation Commission shall meet at a regular place and time determined by the commission. All meetings of the commission shall
follow the requirements of Idaho's Open Meeting Laws to allow and promote public participation in the decisions of the commission. The commission
shall keep minutes and other appropriate written records of its resolutions, proceedings, and actions.
D. The commission will report at least annually to the Mayor and the City Council. The Mayor or the Mayor's designee may appoint from the staff of the
City of Sandpoint an ex officio member and Secretary of the commission. Said ex officio member shall have no voting privileges.
E. The commission may recommend to the City Council, within the limits of its funding, the employment of or the contracting with other parties for the
services of technical experts or other persons it deems necessary to carry on the functions of the commission. (Ord. 1081, 2-19-2003)
2-3-5: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The commission shall be advisory to the City Council, and to the extent permitted by law, shall be authorized to:
A. Facilitate the identification, preservation, protection, and enhancement of areas of special interest, historic value, and scenic beauty through the
following ways:
1. Encourage preservation of historically and architecturally significant properties.
2. Encourage the use of historically and architecturally significant properties for practical, useful purposes.
3. Encourage compatible development in areas of historic properties.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 21/303
4. Establish and facilitate local input in the designation of significant structures at the State and national levels, and establish a local Historic Resources
Program.
5. Encourage preservation of the community's interest in scenic and waterfront areas.
6. Assist in obtaining grants and donations in support of historic preservation. (Ord. 1296, 2-5-2014)
B. Develop a Historical Resources Program for the City of Sandpoint area which may include the following:
1. Develop and maintain a priority listing of historic and architecturally significant properties in the City that is based on the value of the structures and
their potential for preservation.
2. Recommend to the Sandpoint City Council properties and sites in the City of Sandpoint for nomination to the National Register.
3. Develop and implement, with the approval of the City Council, a visual form of recognition for significant properties to be designed, awarded, and
distributed. (Ord. 1081, 2-19-2003)
4. Develop and recommend a means by which merchants and property owners, as well as property owners elsewhere in the City, are encouraged to
preserve and restore significant properties in the Central Business District and to maintain architectural compatibility and character between new
structures or remodeling projects and existing structures. (Ord. 1348, 10-4-2017)
5. Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on historic properties within its jurisdiction.
C. Recommend appropriate zoning in areas of significant historic properties to ensure future compatible development resolution.
D. Cooperate with the Federal, State, and local governments in the pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation.
E. Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the purposes of historic preservation to the County or City Governing Body.
F. Perform such other duties and responsibilities as the Mayor and City Council may from time to time assign, including, when approved by the Mayor and
City Council, such duties and responsibilities as may be permitted by law. (Ord. 1081, 2-19-2003)
2-3-6: SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS:
The adoption of this chapter shall not in any manner affect the validity of any action heretofore taken by the Sandpoint City Council or the validity of any
such action to be taken upon matters pending before the Sandpoint City Council on the effective date hereof. (Ord. 1081, 2-19-2003)
Chapter 4
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
2-4-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the parks and recreation commission (hereinafter commission) to act in an advisory capacity to the directors of the parks and recreation
departments, the mayor, and city council to aid in the process of effective, responsible, and efficient government by:
A. Marshaling and channeling the resources available in the community to complement the judgment of city council and staff;
B. Providing a forum for dialog and public input;
C. Providing mechanisms appropriate to ascertain facts and discern views; and
D. Broadening citizen participation in self-government. (Ord. 1094, 10-15-2003)
2-4-2: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby established and created a commission to be known as the Sandpoint parks and recreation commission. (Ord. 1094, 10-15-2003)
2-4-3: DUTIES:
The commission shall be advisory to the parks and recreation directors, the mayor, and city council and, to the extent permitted by law, shall be authorized
to assist the parks director and the recreation director as follows:
A. To undertake a complete, comprehensive study and make recommendations to the city staff as to the needs for community recreation programs and
projects for persons of all ages.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 22/303
B. To determine and advise the city staff of the desires of the public concerning recreation requirements, the need for additional parks and park facilities,
as well as review and update the parks master plan.
C. To advise and recommend to the city staff the types of facilities required to accomplish the goals of a sound and comprehensive recreation program.
D. To inform the public of established recreational facilities/programs and to educate the public on the methods of improving recreational
facilities/programs.
E. To solicit support and cooperation among the citizens and various organizations of the community in the development, construction, and financing of
recreation programs/facilities.
F. To appoint members of subcommittees to provide community information to the commission concerning particular park facilities or recreational
programs.
G. To encourage multiuse and nonexclusive park facilities.
H. To review and make recommendations to the city staff on park and recreational fees, and/or rental fees.
I. To advise, through the appropriate director, the mayor, and city council in regard to the foregoing provisions. (Ord. 1094, 10-15-2003)
2-4-4: ORGANIZATION OF COMMISSION:
A. Membership: There shall be no fewer than five (5) and no more than nine (9) voting members of the commission, to be appointed by the mayor and
confirmed by the city council. If possible, one member thereof shall be a member of the school board (or an administrative staff person of the Lake
Pend Oreille School District 84) and a high school student between the ages of fourteen (14) and eighteen (18) years old. One member of the city
council shall act as a liaison. The other members shall be chosen as citizens at large from the residents of the city, providing that one member may
reside outside the city limits.
B. Staff Appointment: The parks director and the recreation director shall be ex officio members of the commission. The mayor or mayor's designee may
appoint from the staff of the city of Sandpoint a secretary of the commission. Ex officio members shall have no voting privileges.
C. Vacancies On Commission: The mayor, to be confirmed by the city council, shall fill any vacancies occurring in the membership of the commission.
D. Quorum: A majority of the appointed members of the commission shall be necessary to constitute a quorum and conduct any business at any
commission meeting.
E. Removal Of Members: Any member of the commission may be removed with or without cause by a majority vote of the entire city council.
F. Nonpolitical; No Compensation: The members of the commission shall be selected without regard to political affiliations and shall serve without
compensation.
G. Organization: At the first meeting of each fiscal year or as soon thereafter as practicable, the members of the commission shall meet and organize to
elect a chairperson, vice chairperson, and fill such other offices as determined necessary. The chairperson shall preside at meetings of the
commission. The vice chairperson shall, when the chairperson is absent, perform the duties of the chairperson.
H. Commission Terms: Each member of the commission shall serve a term of three (3) years or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified,
except for the high school student, whose term shall be one year. Vacancies arising in any member's position shall be filled for the remaining term of
the member originally appointed.
1. Initial appointments to the commission shall be made as follows: three (3) 1-year terms; three (3) 2-year terms; and three (3) 3-year terms. All
subsequent appointments shall be made for three (3) year terms (evenly staggered if there are fewer members). Commission members may be
reappointed to serve additional terms.
2. The mayor shall determine the term of office for first appointed members, consistent with subsection H1 of this section.
3. The ex officio members of the parks and recreation commission shall hold office corresponding with their respective tenures in regular city
administrative positions, and may be removed and replaced by the mayor. (Ord. 1094, 10-15-2003)
2-4-5: MEETINGS:
The commission shall meet at a regular place and time as determined by the commission. All meetings of the commission shall follow the requirements of
Idaho's open meeting laws to allow and promote public participation in the decisions of the commission. The commission shall keep minutes and other
appropriate written records of its resolutions, proceedings, and actions. (Ord. 1094, 10-15-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 23/303
2-4-6: RULES:
The commission shall have the authority, subject to Sandpoint city council approval, to make reasonable rules necessary for the execution of its duties as
set forth in this chapter. Rules of procedure and bylaws, if any, adopted by the commission shall be available for public inspection. The commission shall
make a written record of the meetings, its resolutions, findings, determinations, and of its recommendations, which said written record shall be kept as a
permanent public record. The commissionwill give monthly updates to the mayor and the city council, when appropriate. (Ord. 1094, 10-15-2003)
Chapter 5
ARTS COMMISSION
2-5-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND TITLE:
There is hereby established and created a commission to be known as the Sandpoint arts commission (hereinafter "commission"). (Ord. 1106, 2-18-2004)
2-5-2: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the commission to act in an advisory capacity to the mayor and city council to create and maintain an atmosphere conducive to the
fullest expression of all forms of the arts in order to enrich the lives of all Sandpoint citizens and visitors through public art. (Ord. 1106, 2-18-2004)
2-5-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The commission shall advise and assist the mayor and city council with respect to developing, coordinating, and promoting the performing and visual arts
for the enjoyment, education, cultural enrichment and benefit of the citizens of Sandpoint. In furtherance of these duties, the commission shall attempt to
accomplish, subject to council approval, the following objectives:
A. Encourage the preservation and growth of the city's art resources and advance Sandpoint as an arts and cultural destination.
B. Work with arts organizations, public agencies and community representatives, to plan and promote arts activities, provide opportunities for residents to
participate in artistic activities.
C. Assist in obtaining grants and donations in support of the arts, and encourage the donation of public art within the city.
D. Foster opportunities for artists to advance their art forms and recognize the achievements and excellence of outstanding artists and increase public
access to their works.
E. Encourage a public collection of artworks with strong inherent aesthetic qualities and a wide range of artistic styles and disciplines. (Ord. 1106, 2-18-
2004)
2-5-4: MEMBERSHIP, TERMS OF OFFICE, VACANCIES:
The commission shall consist of no fewer than seven (7) and no more than nine (9) voting members of the commission, to be appointed by the mayor and
confirmed by the city council. One member of the city council shall act as a liaison. The members shall be chosen as citizens at large from the residents of
the city, providing that three (3) members may reside outside the city limits. The members shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 1270, 6-20-2012)
A. Commission Terms/Vacancies: Each member of the commission shall serve a term of three (3) years or until his or her successor is appointed and
qualified. Vacancies arising in any member's position shall be filled for the remaining term of the member originally appointed. Initial appointments to
the commission shall be made as follows: three (3) 1-year terms; three (3) 2-year terms; and three (3) 3-year terms. All subsequent appointments shall
be made for three (3) year terms (evenly staggered if there are fewer members). Commission members may be reappointed to serve additional terms.
The mayor shall determine the term of office for first appointed members, consistent with this section. The ex officio member of the commission shall
hold office corresponding with their respective tenures in regular city administrative positions, and may be removed and replaced by the mayor. The
mayor shall fill any vacancies occurring in the membership of the commission, with the appointment to be confirmed by the city council.
B. Organization And Quorum: At the first meeting of each fiscal year or as soon thereafter as practicable, the members of the commission shall meet and
organize to elect a chairperson, vice chairperson, and fill such other offices as determined necessary. The chairperson shall preside at meetings of the
commission. The vice chairperson shall, when the chairperson is absent, perform the duties of the chairperson. A majority of the appointed members of
the commission shall be necessary to constitute a quorum and conduct any business at any commission meeting.
C. Removal Of Members: Any member of the commission may be removed with or without cause by the mayor with the consent of the city council.
D. Meetings: The commission shall meet at a regular place and time as determined by the commission. All meetings of the commission shall follow the
requirements of Idaho's open meeting laws to allow and promote public participation in the decisions of the commission. The commission shall keep
minutes and other appropriate written records of its resolutions, proceedings, and actions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 24/303
E. Rules: The commission shall have the authority, subject to Sandpoint city council approval, to make reasonable rules necessary for the execution of its
duties as set forth in this chapter. Rules of procedure and bylaws, if any, adopted by the commission shall be available for public inspection. The
commission shall make a written record of the meetings, its resolutions, findings, determinations, and of its recommendations, which said written record
shall be kept as a permanent public record. The commission will give monthly updates to the mayor and the city council, when appropriate. (Ord. 1106,
2-18-2004)
Chapter 6
PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
2-6-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND TITLE:
There is hereby established and created a committee to be known as the Sandpoint pedestrian and bicycle advisory committee (hereinafter "committee").
(Ord. 1250, 12-15-2010, eff. after 1-1-2011)
2-6-2: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the committee to advise the mayor, city council, and planning and zoning commission on pedestrian and bicycle issues throughout and
in the vicinity of the city of Sandpoint; to make recommendations regarding pedestrian and bicycle transportation (and ways to encourage such
transportation); to provide suggestions and information on location of and methods to establish walkways and bikeways; to provide suggestions that will
increase the safety of all transportation modalities; and to assist with community education regarding pedestrian and bicycle issues. (Ord. 1250, 12-15-
2010, eff. after 1-1-2011)
2-6-3: ORGANIZATION:
A. Members: The committee shall consist of no fewer than five (5) and no more than nine (9) voting members of the committee, to be appointed by the
mayor and confirmed by the city council. The committee shall strive to include at least one member who is disabled or who cannot otherwise operate a
motorized vehicle for transportation. Members must be supporters of a strong walking and bicycling transportation system within and outside the city.
Ex officio members may include a council member and the chairpersons of any similar committees established by Bonner County or neighboring
municipalities.
B. Vacancies: The mayor shall fill any vacancies with new members to be confirmed by the city council.
C. Quorum: A majority of the appointed members of the committee shall constitute a quorum and conduct any business at any committee meeting.
D. Removal Of Members: Any member of the committee may be removed with or without cause by the mayor with the consent of the city council.
E. Nonpolitical/No Compensation: The members of the committee shall be selected without regard to political affiliations and shall serve without
compensation.
F. Organization: At the first meeting of each fiscal year or as soon thereafter as practicable, the members of the committee shall meet and organize to elect
a chairperson, vice chairperson, and fill such other offices as determined necessary. The chairperson shall preside at meetings of the committee. The
vice chairperson shall, when the chairperson is absent, perform the duties of the chairperson. The committee shall also elect a secretary from within its
membership, who shall be responsible for meeting minutes.
G. Committee Terms: Each member of the committee shall serve a term of three (3) years or until his or her successor is appointed and confirmed.
Vacancies arising in any member's position shall be filled for the remaining term of the member originally appointed.
1. Initial appointments to the committee shall be made as follows: one or two (2) one-year terms; two (2) 2-year terms; and two (2) or three (3) 3-year
terms. All additional appointments shall be made at the discretion of the mayor (evenly staggered if there are fewer members). Committee members
may be reappointed to serve additional terms.
2. The ex officio members of the committee shall hold office corresponding with their respective tenures in regular committee or city administrative
positions and may be removed and replaced by the mayor. (Ord. 1250, 12-15-2010, eff. after 1-1-2011)
2-6-4: DUTIES:
The committee shall:
A. Hold meetings at least four (4) times per year.
B. Help update the master plan for bike trails within and in the vicinity of the city.
C. Discuss and provide advice in regard to bicycle and pedestrian infrastructure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 25/303
D. Study pedestrian walkway, multiuse path, and bike lane locations and conditions and advise regarding necessary improvements.
E. Study effectiveness of bike and pedestrian friendly treatments used in other communities and suggest how they may be applied in Sandpoint.
F. Advise on Americans with disabilities act requirements for public access and components of the transportation system and its extensions or additions.
G. Advise on programs to improve public awareness of and participation in nonmotorized transportation.
H. Advise in establishing city pedestrian and bicycle policies.
I. Establish, promote or support at least one event each year within the city which promotes bicycle use, pedestrian activity, sidewalks, pathways, or safety
for nonmotorized transportation.
J. When committee projects are applicable, work in conjunction with other city committees, including the planning and zoning commission and parks and
recreation commission. (Ord. 1250, 12-15-2010, eff. after 1-1-2011)
Chapter 7
SUSTAINABILITY COMMITTEE
2-7-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND TITLE:
There is hereby established and created a committee to be known as the Sandpoint sustainability committee (hereinafter "committee"). (Ord. 1283, 6-19-
2013)
2-7-2: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the committee to act in an advisory capacity to the mayor and city council to aid in the process of effective, responsible, and efficient
government, with the goal of enhancing connectivity, promoting good stewardship, ensuring resilience and fostering socioeconomic health. The goal of the
committee is to make recommendations that allow the city to meet the needs of the present, without compromising the ability to meet the needs of future
generations. (Ord. 1283, 6-19-2013)
2-7-3: ORGANIZATION:
A. Appointment: The committee shall consist of no fewer than five (5) and no more than nine (9) voting members, to be appointed by the mayor and
confirmed by the city council. A majority of the members shall live within Sandpoint city limits.
B. Members: The committee shall include the following:
1. A city council liaison, appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the city council person being appointed. The city council liaison may be removed
and replaced by the mayor. The city council liaison is a nonvoting member of the committee.
2. Members of the public, the majority of whom shall have experience and/or expertise related to sustainability.
C. Vacancies: The mayor shall fill any vacancies, with new members to be confirmed by the city council.
D. Quorum: A majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum and conduct any business at any committee meeting.
E. Removal Of Members: Any member of the committee may be removed, with or without cause, by the mayor, with the consent of the city council.
F. Nonpolitical/No Compensation: The members of the committee shall be selected without regard to political affiliations and shall serve without
compensation.
G. Organization: At the first meeting of each fiscal year or as soon thereafter as practicable, the members of the committee shall meet and organize to
elect a chairperson, vice chairperson, and fill such other offices as determined necessary. The chairperson shall preside at meetings of the committee.
The vice chairperson shall, when the chairperson is absent, perform the duties of the chairperson. The committee shall also elect a secretary from
within its membership, who shall be responsible for meeting minutes.
H. Committee Terms: Each member of the committee shall serve a term of three (3) years or until his or her successor is appointed and confirmed.
Vacancies arising in any member's position shall be filled for the remaining term of the member originally appointed. Initial appointments to the
committee shall be made as follows: one or two (2) 1-year terms; one or two (2) 2-year terms; and one or two (2) 3-year terms. All additional
appointments shall be made at the discretion of the mayor (evenly staggered if there are fewer members). Committee members may be reappointed to
serve additional terms. (Ord. 1283, 6-19-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 26/303
2-7-4: DUTIES:
The committee shall:
A. Hold meetings at least four (4) times per year;
B. Consider long term impact of city policies and activities on local natural resources, human resources, and economic viability;
C. Provide a forum for dialog and public input;
D. Provide mechanisms appropriate to ascertain facts and discern views; and
E. Broaden citizen participation in self-government. (Ord. 1283, 6-19-2013)
Chapter 8
PARKING COMMITTEE
2-8-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND TITLE:
There is hereby established and created a committee to be known as the Sandpoint parking committee (hereinafter "committee"). (Ord. 1327, 7-6-2016)
2-8-2: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the committee to act in an advisory capacity to the mayor and city council in order to aid in the process of effective, responsible, and
efficient government, with the goal of improving parking policies and enforcement. (Ord. 1327, 7-6-2016)
2-8-3: ORGANIZATION:
A. Number Of Committee Members: The committee shall consist of no fewer than five (5) and no more than seven (7) voting members of the committee, to
be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. A majority of the members shall live within the Sandpoint city limits.
B. Members: The committee shall include the following:
1. An ex officio city council liaison shall be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the appointed city councilperson, and may be removed and
replaced by the mayor. The city council liaison is a nonvoting member of the committee.
2. The committee shall be facilitated by a member of city staff, appointed by the mayor.
3. The mayor shall endeavor to appoint the following members from the public:
a. One downtown property owner;
b. One downtown business owner;
c. One downtown resident;
d. One downtown worker; and
e. Other interested citizens, as needed.
C. Vacancies: The mayor shall fill any vacancies with new members, to be confirmed by the city council.
D. Quorum: A majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum and conduct any business at any committee meeting.
E. Removal Of Members: Any member of the committee may be removed with or without cause by the mayor, with the consent of the city council.
F. Nonpolitical/No Compensation: The members of the committee shall be selected without regard to political affiliations and shall serve without
compensation.
G. Organization: At the first meeting of each fiscal year or as soon thereafter as practicable, the members of the committee shall meet and organize to
elect a chairperson, vice chairperson, and fill such other offices as determined necessary. The chairperson shall preside at meetings of the committee.
The vice chairperson shall, when the chairperson is absent, perform the duties of the chairperson. The committee shall also elect a secretary from
within its membership, who shall be responsible for meeting minutes. The chairperson shall be elected annually.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 27/303
H. Committee Terms: Each member of the committee shall serve a term of three (3) years or until his or her successor is appointed and confirmed.
Vacancies arising in any member's position shall be filled for the remaining term of the member originally appointed. Initial appointments to the
committee shall be made as follows: one or more one year terms; one or more two (2) year terms; and one or more three (3) year terms. All additional
appointments shall be made at the discretion of the mayor (evenly staggered if there are fewer members). Committee members may be reappointed to
serve additional terms. (Ord. 1327, 7-6-2016)
2-8-4: DUTIES:
The committee shall:
A. Hold meetings at least four (4) times per year;
B. Consider and address priorities introduced by city council and the city administration;
C. Consider and track impact of city parking policies on city finances and downtown merchants, with the goal of economic viability for the city of Sandpoint;
D. Provide a forum for dialog and public input;
E. Provide mechanisms appropriate to ascertain facts and discern views;
F. Broaden citizen participation in self-government;
G. Propose to the city council, on an annual basis, a set of recommended projects to improve the downtown parking environment, guidance on parking
rate setting, and other public policy recommendations concerning the downtown parking system;
H. Review complaints and issues that have been submitted to the city or to the designated parking services manager.
1. Recommend policy changes to improve parking system management and service to city council.
2. Review and waive fine if committee determines a fine has been improperly charged. (Ord. 1327, 7-6-2016)
2-8-5: SEVERABILITY:
A. That any provision of this code found to be inconsistent with this chapter be and the same is hereby repealed.
B. Should any provision of this chapter be deemed unlawful or unconstitutional, such finding shall not affect the remaining provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
1327, 7-6-2016)
Chapter 9
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA) ADVISORY COMMITTEE
2-9-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND TITLE:
There is hereby established and created a committee to be known as the Americans with disabilities act (ADA) advisory committee (hereinafter
"committee"). (Ord. 1340, 12-7-2016)
2-9-2: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the committee to act in an advisory capacity to the mayor and city council in order to aid in the process of effective, responsible, and
efficient government, with the goal of identifying and evaluating priorities and modification of accessibility to city of Sandpoint facilities and programs and to
review ADA complaints and grievances. (Ord. 1340, 12-7-2016)
2-9-3: ORGANIZATION:
A. Appointment: The committee shall consist of no fewer than five (5) and no more than seven (7) voting members of the committee, to be appointed by
the mayor and confirmed by city council. A majority of the members shall live within Sandpoint city limits.
B. Members: The committee shall include the following:
1. An ex officio city council liaison shall be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the appointed city council person, and may be removed and
replaced by the mayor. The city council liaison is a nonvoting member of the committee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 28/303
2. The committee shall consist of persons with disabilities or persons who have a demonstrated interest, competence or knowledge of the ADA and the
needs of the disabled.
C. Vacancies: The mayor shall fill any vacancies with new members, to be confirmed by city council.
D. Quorum: A majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum and conduct any business at any committee meeting.
E. Removal Of Members: Any member of the committee may be removed with or without cause by the mayor, with the consent of city council.
F. Nonpolitical; No Compensation: The members of the committee shall be selected without regard to political affiliations and shall serve without
compensation.
G. Organization: At the first meeting of each fiscal year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the members of the committee shall meet and organize to
elect a chairperson, vice chairperson, and fill such other offices as determined necessary. The chairperson shall preside over meetings of the
committee. The vice chairperson shall, when the chairperson is absent, perform the duties of the chairperson. The mayor or the mayor's designee may
appoint from the staff of the city of Sandpoint an ex officio member, who shall act as secretary of the committee. Said ex officio member shall have no
voting privileges.
H. Committee Terms: Each member of the committee shall serve a term of three (3) years or until his or her successor is appointed and confirmed.
Vacancies arising in any member's position shall be filled for the remaining term of the member originally appointed. Initial appointments to the
committee shall be made as follows: one or more one year terms; one or more two (2) year terms; and one or more three (3) year terms. All additional
appointments shall be made at the discretion of the mayor (evenly staggered if there are fewer members). Committee members may be reappointed to
serve additional terms. (Ord. 1340, 12-7-2016)
2-9-4: DUTIES:
The committee shall:
A. Hold meetings at least four (4) times per year;
B. Consider and address priorities introduced by city council and the city administration;
C. Advise the mayor and council regarding the identification, evaluation, designation, priority and modification of accessibility to city of Sandpoint facilities
and programs;
D. Provide a forum for dialog and public input;
E. Provide mechanisms appropriate to ascertain facts and discern views;
F. Broaden citizen participation in self-government;
G. Promote and conduct educational programs for city staff regarding ADA accessibility; and
H. Review complaints and issues that have been submitted to the city or to the designated ADA coordinator. (Ord. 1340, 12-7-2016)
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSE REGULATIONS1
3-1-1: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this code shall be made in writing to the city clerk, unless otherwise specifically provided by law. Each
application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be paid; and
each application shall contain such additional information as may be required by the issuing official. (Revised Code 1958)
3-1-2: PERSON SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 29/303
Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging
in any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds
himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform any
part of such business or occupation in the city. (Revised Code 1958)
3-1-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept on file by the city clerk. (Revised Code 1958)
3-1-4: SIGNATURES:
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signatures of the city clerk and such other official, if any, as may be required. (Revised Code 1958)
3-1-5: INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where laws of the city necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such
permit or license, the city clerk shall refer such application to the proper officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time of
receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days
after receiving the application or a copy thereof. (Revised Code 1958)
3-1-6: TERMINATION OF LICENSE:
All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the calendar year, where no provision to the contrary is made. (Revised Code 1958)
3-1-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall be issued for any thing, or act, if the premises and building to be used for
the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the city. No such license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or performance
of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning regulations of the city (title 9 of this code). (Revised Code 1958)
3-1-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted act, may be changed, provided ten
(10) days' notice thereof is given to the city clerk. (Revised Code 1958)
3-1-9: POSTING OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such
business at all times. (Revised Code 1958)
3-1-10: LICENSE FEES:
In the absence of specific provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor is
made to the city clerk. Licenses shall be required for the following activities and businesses upon payment of the fee set forth in the section indicated:
Beer Section 3-2-5
Dogs Subsection 5-4-4C
Liquor Section 3-2-5
Merchant security guards Section 3-6-2
Pawnbroker Section 3-5-2
Secondhand store Section 3-5-2
Taxicabs and limousines Section 6-4-4
Vacation home rental Subsection 3-12-4A1a
(Revised Code 1958; amd. 1983 Code; Ord. 807, 6-17-1985; Ord. 884, 5-15-1989; Ord. 938, 1-18-1994; Ord. 1121, 11-17-2004; Ord. 1128, 2-16-2005;
Ord. 1174, 5-16-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 30/303
Chapter 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE REGULATIONS
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
BEER: Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, malt and/or other ingredients in drinkable water.
LIQUOR: Includes all intoxicating liquors whether sold, consumed or dispensed alone or mixed with or combined with some other substance suitable for
consumption.
OFF PREMISES SALES: Includes all sales, transfers, distribution and dissemination of beer, wine and/or liquor by a person or establishment with the
intent and for the purpose that said substance shall not be consumed on the premises of the person or establishment selling, distributing, transferring or
dispensing the same.
ON PREMISES: Refers to the sale, transfer, distribution or dissemination of beer, wine and/or liquor by a person with the intent that the consumer or
purchaser shall consume the same on the premises of the person or business establishment selling, transferring, distributing or disseminating the
substance.
ON PREMISES SECONDARY TO RESTAURANT: Those sales of beer, wine and/or liquor sold, transferred, distributed or dispensed with the intent and
with provisions available that the substance will be consumed by the purchaser or available for consumption on the premises of the person or business
establishment selling, transferring, distributing or dispensing the same wherein the sale, transfer, distribution or dispensation is not the primary business
activity of the person or business establishment so doing and where said person or business establishment functions as a "restaurant" as hereinafter
defined and the sale, transfer, distribution or dispensation of the beer, wine and/or liquor is secondary to the restaurant business. Such activity shall
constitute a separate classification governed by the provisions hereinafter described as applicable to sale of wine, beer and/or liquor secondary to
restaurant.
PERSON: Includes an individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or any group or combination acting as a unit and includes the plural as well as
the singular unless the intent to give a more limited meaning is disclosed by the context in which said term is used.
RESTAURANT: As applicable to those licenses for the sale of wine, beer and/or liquor secondary to restaurant: any place of business commonly known
and recognized as a restaurant having a kitchen and cooking facilities for the preparation of meals and space and accommodation where, in consideration
for payment, meals are regularly served to the public for consumption on the premises. The term "restaurant" does not include lunch counters, lunch
stands, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, luncheonettes, sandwich stands, soda fountains or services of fry orders or short orders. A place of
business shall not be deemed a restaurant under the terms of this chapter unless the principal business conducted thereat is the regular preparation,
service and sale of meals to the public for consumption on the premises during all hours and times that the place of business is open for business.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar
content of fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar. (Ord. 692, 11-19-1979)
3-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, at retail, wine, beer and/or liquor within the corporate limits of the city without having first procured a license
therefor as hereinafter set forth. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the state or its agencies. (Ord. 692, 11-19-1979)
The application for license shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the applicant upon an application form furnished by, and available through, the office
of the city clerk. Such application shall be filed by the city clerk and processed pursuant to section 3-2-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 857, 12-21-1987)
3-2-2-1: CATERING PERMITS:
A. Application:
1. An alcohol beverage catering permit is a permit issued pursuant to this section, that authorizes the permittee to serve and sell liquor by the drink,
beer and wine, or beer, or wine, at a party, festival or convention, as defined by Idaho Code, not to exceed five (5) consecutive days, with an option
to request one permit extension on the same terms and conditions as the original permit, which extension may be issued or denied at the sole and
absolute discretion of the original issuing entity. An alcohol beverage catering permit shall be limited to authorization to sell liquor, or beer or wine, or
any combination thereof, based upon the type of license which the applicant possesses. Applications for such permit shall be made to the city clerk,
on such form as prescribed by the city, which shall contain at a minimum, but not limited to, the following information:
a. The name and address of the applicant and the number of his state liquor, beer or wine license.
b. The dates and hours during which the original permit is to be effective, not to exceed five (5) consecutive days.
c. The names of the organizations, groups, or persons sponsoring the event.
d. The address at which the liquor, beer or wine is to be served and, if a public building, the rooms in which the liquor, beer or wine is to be served.
2. The application shall be verified by the applicant and filed with the city clerk. A filing fee in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each day the
permit is to be effective shall be paid to the treasury of the city which shall not be refunded in any event. The permit shall be valid only within the city.
No alcohol beverage catering permit issued pursuant to this section shall be used on a licensed premises. An alcohol beverage catering permit
issued pursuant to this section shall only be exercised by the licensee on record.
B. Filing Of Application; Approval: Upon the filing of an application for an alcohol beverage catering permit, the city clerk receiving the application shall,
upon the advice and recommendation of the police chief and fire chief or their designated representatives, approve or deny the application and indicate
the determination on the face of the application by endorsement signed by the clerk. The police chief and fire chief are authorized to endorse an
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 31/303
application for an alcohol beverage catering permit with sufficient conditions to ensure public safety. Copies of the application with signed
endorsements thereon shall be delivered immediately to the police chief, the director of the Idaho state police, and the applicant, and a signed copy
retained by the clerk. An application approved in this matter shall constitute a permit.
C. Idaho Winery License: Any person who is the holder of an Idaho winery license shall be eligible to obtain an alcohol beverage catering permit. Two (2)
or more wineries may use a winery's licensed premises to host an event under an alcohol beverage catering permit to serve and sell their respective
wines at that event. (Ord. 1329, 7-6-2016)
3-2-3: QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
An applicant for a license shall possess all of the qualifications necessary to obtain a license from the director of the department of law enforcement of the
state as prescribed by the laws of the state1, and shall maintain qualifications throughout the period for which such license is issued. The possession of
licenses regularly issued by the department of law enforcement and Bonner County, shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant's qualification to receive
a license hereunder. (Ord. 692, 11-19-1979; amd. 1983 Code)
3-2-4: LICENSE PROCEDURES:
A. Processing Of Application For Issuance Of Renewal Of License: Upon filing of such application, the city clerk shall, within a period of three (3) days,
advise the applicant in writing of its approval or denial.
B. Issuance Of License: Upon filing the application for a license, production of evidence as required in section 3-2-3 of this chapter as to the qualifications
of the applicant, and payment of the required fees provided for herein, the clerk shall issue to the applicant a license to sell beer, wine and/or liquor at
retail within the city for a calendar year beginning January 1 or for the remainder thereof.
C. Transfer Of License: Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable. The possession of a transferred license regularly issued
by the department of law enforcement and Bonner County, shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant's qualification to receive a license transfer
hereunder. However, no license shall be transferred to any other person until such person has applied for such transfer on an application as provided
by the city clerk, and has been found to be qualified to obtain such license under the provisions of this chapter. Upon the approval of the transfer of any
license as herein provided, the city clerk shall charge and collect the required fee provided for herein.
D. Procedure In The Event Of Denial: In the event such application is denied, such notification of denial shall specify:
1. The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application.
2. The reasons for denial.
3. The actions, if any, the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal thereof.
An applicant denied a license, transfer or renewal thereof may appeal the city clerk's decision to the city council within thirty (30) days after mailing to
the applicant by the city of such notice of denial. The manner of such appeal shall be consistent with that relating to review of a contested case
pursuant to Idaho Code title 67, chapter 52. (Ord. 857, 12-21-1987)
3-2-5: LICENSE AND TRANSFER FEES:
License and transfer fees, as established by resolution adopted by the city council, shall be paid at the time application is made for, and as a condition
precedent to, issuance or transfer of a license. (Ord. 857, 12-21-1987)
3-2-6: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
Licenses to sell at retail, dispense or serve beer within the city limits shall not exceed twenty two (22) in number at any one time while the population of the
said city shall be four thousand five hundred (4,500) or less and for each five hundred (500) population in addition to four thousand five hundred (4,500),
an additional one license only, may be issued; provided, however, that the provisions herein shall not apply to the state or its agencies and shall not apply
to the retail sale of beer not to be consumed on the premises where sold; and, further, shall not apply to those licenses applied for and issued for the sale
of beer secondary to "restaurant" as above described. (Ord. 692, 11-19-1979)
3-2-7: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
Any license issued for sale of wine, beer or liquor secondary to restaurant shall be deemed to permit only the sale, dispensing and distribution of beer,
wine and liquor to be consumed on premises of the restaurant business. (Ord. 692, 11-19-1979)
3-2-8: SALE HOURS RESTRICTED:
It is unlawful for any person to sell beer and wine between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and liquor to be consumed on
the premises between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. In addition to the days on which liquor may be sold pursuant to title
23, chapter 9 of the Idaho Code, liquor may be sold on Sunday, Memorial Day and Thanksgiving. (Ord. 1126, 2-2-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 32/303
3-2-9: OPEN CONTAINER LAW:
A. No person in a motor vehicle, while the vehicle is on a public highway or the right of way of a public highway in the city, may drink or possess any open
beverage containing alcoholic liquor, beer, or wine, unless such person is a passenger in the passenger area of a limousine, or in the living quarters of
a recreational vehicle. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor for the individual in actual physical control of the vehicle pursuant to section 18-8004,
Idaho Code, and an infraction for other individuals violating this section. (Ord. 1295, 2-5-2014)
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume beer, wine or any other intoxicating beverage or to have in their possession any open bottle, can
or other container containing such beer, wine or other intoxicating beverage while on a sidewalk or anywhere within the public street right of way or in
any public park within the city, except as follows:
1. Consumption of alcoholic beverages is allowed in Farmin Park and at War Memorial Field when purchased on site from an authorized vendor with a
valid alcohol beverage catering permit issued by the city for events approved by the parks and recreation director or city council, as applicable.
Those consuming alcoholic beverages must remain in specific areas of the park designated for alcoholic beverage consumption. In all cases, they
must remain within the inner boundary of the park's fence or curb and not inhibit the use of the sidewalk by other persons. (Ord. 1297, 3-19-2014)
3-2-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The right to revoke a license issued pursuant to the provisions herein contained shall at all times remain vested in the mayor and city council, and the
mayor and the city council may, as hereinafter provided, revoke or cancel any license for fraud or misrepresentation in its procurement or for the violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter or for any conduct or act of the licensee or his employees or any conduct or act permitted by him or them on the
premises where such business is conducted or in connection therewith or adjacent thereto tending to render such business or such premises where the
same is conducted as a public nuisance or a menace to the health, peace, safety or general welfare of the city and its citizens; provided, however, that
revocation or suspension of the state license by the director of the department of law enforcement shall be deemed prima facie evidence for the revocation
and/or suspension of the license issued herein. If the mayor and the city council shall, for any reason, deem revocation, cancellation or suspension of the
license appropriate, the licensee shall be afforded a hearing before the city council and mayor, together with the right of representation at licensee's
expense and choosing, and the city council and mayor, through the city clerk, shall provide written notice to the licensee of said hearing setting forth the
time, place and date for said hearing. Only after such hearing is held or waived by the licensee, shall the license in question be suspended, canceled or
revoked. (Ord. 692, 11-19-1979; amd. 1983 Code; Ord. 857, 12-21-1987)
3-2-11: PENALTY:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or fails to comply with any of the terms and conditions
of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, as provided in Idaho Code 50-302. (Ord. 1295, 2-5-2014)
Chapter 3
AMUSEMENTS
(Rep. by Ord. 806, 6-17-1985)
Chapter 4
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this Chapter shall be as follows:
APPLICANT: Each natural person applying for registration pursuant to this Chapter.
CANVASSER OR SOLICITOR: Any individual, whether a resident of the City or not, traveling either by foot, or any type of conveyance, from place to place
or from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any
nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for
sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided, that such definition shall include
any person who for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room,
lodginghouse, apartment, shop or any other place within the City for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
PEDDLER: Any person, whether a resident of the City or not, traveling by foot, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from
house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm
products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers; provided, that one who solicits
orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this Chapter shall be
deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this Chapter. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster".
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the City or not, who engages in a
temporary business of selling, and delivering goods, wares and merchandise and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, or occupies any
building, structure, motor vehicles, tent, railroad boxcar, or boat, public rooms in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops or any streets, alleys or other
places for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction; provided, that such definition shall not be
construed to include any person who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the purpose of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 33/303
securing orders for further delivery only. The term "transient merchant" shall include the terms "itinerant merchant" and "itinerant vendor". (Ord. 886, 6-19-
1989)
3-4-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any canvasser or solicitor, peddler, or transient merchant as the same are herein defined, to engage in such business within the
corporate limits of the City without first registering therefor in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. Registration issued pursuant to this Chapter
shall not be transferable, nor valid after the end of either: a) the length of time for which the right to do business is requested, or, b) the calendar year in
which the application for registration was approved, whichever is the shorter time period. (Ord. 886, 6-19-1989)
3-4-3: REGISTRATION APPLICATION:
Applicants for registration under this Chapter must file with the City Clerk an application furnished by the City, which shall contain, but not necessarily be
limited to, the following information:
A. The name of the applicant. If the applicant is employed by an association, company, corporation or individual, its name shall be stated with the name of
each person who will be soliciting in the City in its behalf together with credentials establishing the exact relationship;
B. The applicant's place and date of birth;
C. The applicant's social security number;
D. The applicant's driver's license number;
E. The applicant's permanent home address, permanent mailing address, permanent telephone number, full local address and local telephone number;
F. A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches
by two inches (2" x 2") showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;
G. A brief description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold. If goods are products of a farm or orchard, the name of the producer;
H. Proposed method of operation;
I. The length of time for which the right to do business is requested;
J. The applicant's Idaho State sales tax certificate or temporary sales tax permit;
K. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle including the license number;
L. The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or
products are located at the time such application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery;
M. When food or other products for human consumption are to be sold, a certification by the applicable health agency shall be required prior to issuance of
a registration;
N. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any misdemeanor or felony, the date and nature of the offense and the
punishment or penalty assessed therefor;
O. For purposes of conducting the investigation provided for herein, each applicant shall sign a waiver authorizing the Chief of Police or his designated
agent to conduct the investigation including but not limited to a criminal history background check through local, State or National law enforcement
agencies. (Ord. 886, 6-19-1989)
3-4-4: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of a completed registration application, the City Clerk shall refer it to the Chief of Police who shall cause an investigation to be conducted
within five (5) days to determine the validity and completeness of the information presented on the application, thereafter endorsing upon the application
his approval or disapproval of the application.
If the application is approved, the applicant shall be so notified by the City Clerk, and, upon payment of the prescribed registration fee, a registration shall
be issued. Such registration shall show the name, address and photograph of the applicant, the kind of goods to be sold or the type of sales to be solicited
thereunder, the amount of the fee paid, the date of issuance and the date of expiration, and the license number and other identifying description of any
vehicle used. A permanent record of all licenses issued shall be kept by the City Clerk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 34/303
If the application is denied, the City Clerk shall provide written notification to the applicant, providing the reasons therefor, and advising the applicant of
appeal procedures. (Ord. 886, 6-19-1989)
3-4-5: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Before any registration as provided herein shall be issued for engaging in the business of peddler, solicitor or canvasser, or transient merchant as defined
in this Chapter, every business, firm, company, corporation or individual which has one or more employees or agents acting in such capacity shall file with
the City a surety bond covering all such employees or agents and running to the City, or a cashier's check, in the amount and pursuant to the procedure to
be established by resolution adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 886, 6-19-1989)
3-4-6: REGISTRATION FEE:
Registration fees, shall be payable in advance, in the amount and pursuant to the procedure to be established by resolution adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 886, 6-19-1989)
3-4-7: EXHIBITION OF REGISTRATION:
The registration issued to the applicant hereunder shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place if the applicant is using a vehicle or a building in his business
and otherwise must be kept on the person and exhibited at any time upon request. (Ord. 886, 6-19-1989)
3-4-8: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT:
No applicant who is registered with the City pursuant to this Chapter shall:
A. Fail to advise the City Clerk of having knowingly made any false statement on an application for registration hereunder;
B. Enter upon any premises where the same is posted with a sign stating "No Solicitation Allowed" or "No Peddlers Allowed" or other words to that effect;
C. Represent the issuance of any registration under this Chapter as an endorsement or recommendation of the solicitation;
D. Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation;
E. Misrepresent the affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation;
F. Engage in any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the course of carrying on the solicitation;
G. Make physical contact with the person being solicited unless that person's permission is obtained;
H. Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual informs the solicitor that he does not wish to give anything or to buy anything from that
solicitor;
I. Engage in any peddler's or transient merchant's activities on any City property or right of way or in any area within the City for which the City has
previously granted a concession. (Ord. 886, 6-19-1989)
3-4-9: APPEAL FROM DENIAL OF REGISTRATION:
An applicant aggrieved by the denial of the City to issue a registration under this Chapter shall have the right of appeal to the City Council. Such appeal
shall be filed with the City Clerk within five (5) days from the date of denial and must be in writing setting forth the reasons such registration should not
have been denied. The City Council shall hear the appeal within fourteen (14) days after the filing thereof, and shall render its decision immediately
following the hearing. The decision of the majority of the Council shall be final. Appeal of the Council's decision may be made in accordance with Idaho
law. (Ord. 886, 6-19-1989)
3-4-10: REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION:
The City Council shall have the power to revoke any registration granted in accordance with this Chapter for any violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 886, 6-19-
1989)
3-4-11: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 35/303
A. The City, its agents and concessionaires;
B. Any sales under court order;
C. Any bona fide auction sale;
D. Traveling salespersons who exclusively sell to, or solicit orders for future delivery from, local retail businesses, local wholesale firms, local governments
or local schools;
E. The sale of a newspaper subscription in which the seller is the person engaged in both the sale and delivery of the newspaper;
F. The occasional sale of admission to a local function or fund raising sales by recognized service clubs or organizations identified by resolution adopted
by the City Council;
G. Contribution solicitation where the person being solicited to contribute personally knows the identity of the person soliciting the contribution, the name of
the group or organization he represents, and the nature of the services performed or offered by the group or organization;
H. The sale of farm or garden products by person producing same; and,
I. Garage, yard or similar sales by individuals at their residence or place of business not exceeding two (2) days in length nor exceeding twice in one
calendar year, which sale shall not include business inventory. (Ord. 886, 6-19-1989)
Chapter 5
SECONDHAND DEALERS AND PAWNBROKERS
3-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or maintain a pawnbroker's business within the boundaries of the city without having first secured a
license and paid the license fee therefor.
Said license shall be obtained from the city clerk in the manner and form prescribed by the provisions set forth elsewhere in this code. (1983 Code)
3-5-2: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for each pawnbroker's establishment shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1117, 8-18-2004)
3-5-3: PAWNBROKERS:
A. Purchase From Minors: It shall be unlawful for any pawnbrokers, or any person, his agents, or employees who conducts the business of lending money
upon a pledge of personal property, to accept any article of personal property, goods, wares or merchandise, as a pledge for a loan from any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. Register Of Purchases Kept: Every such pawnbroker, or person or his agent or employee conducting such business of lending money on pledge of
personal property, shall keep a substantial and well bound register in which he shall enter at the time of making every such loan upon pledge of
property, by him, his agents, or employees, the following information:
1. The date, hour, and place of pledge and loan.
2. A true and accurate description of each article, so pledged, including the serial number, name of manufacturer, and any other identifying data, as
disclosed upon each article of personal property pledged.
3. The amount loaned for each article.
4. The name, address, date of birth, social security number, or state identification number, together with a physical description of the person pledging
said personal property.
5. Said register entries shall be in duplicate, the copy portion of which shall be submitted by the licensee to the city police department each and every
Friday reflecting that week's purchases and pledges.
All entries shall be made in the English language in a legible manner with ink or typewriter, and said register shall be open to the inspection of the
police of the city, the sheriff of Bonner County, and any other law enforcement officers of the state of Idaho at any and all reasonable times; provided,
further that whenever any such person conducting the business of loaning money upon pledges of personal property, abandons his occupation, as
such, he shall deliver in good condition, to the city clerk a register of the transactions that he has kept during the time that he has pursued said
occupation as a lender of money upon the pledge of personal property, goods, wares, or merchandise. (Ord. 743, 1-19-1981; amd. 1983 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 36/303
3-5-4: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The right to revoke a license issued pursuant to the provisions herein contained shall at all times remain vested in the mayor and city council, and the
mayor and city council may, as hereinafter provided, revoke or cancel any license for fraud or misrepresentation in its procurement or for the violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter or the state criminal code; provided, however, that conviction under the State Criminal Code shall be prima facie
evidence for the revocation and/or suspension of the license issued hereunder.
If the Mayor and the City Council shall, for any reason, deem revocation, cancellation or suspension of the license appropriate, the licensee shall be
afforded a hearing before the City Council and Mayor, together with the right of representation at licensee's expense and choosing. The City Council and
the Mayor, through the City Clerk, shall provide written notice to the licensee of said hearing setting forth the time, place and date for said hearing and
specifying the violation or default, and said license will be revoked or suspended at the expiration of fifteen (15) days unless a hearing is requested by the
licensee in writing and delivered to the City Clerk.
If a hearing is requested by the licensee, the matter shall be heard by the Mayor and Council and a full record of the proceedings will be made by
electronic recording. The decision of the Mayor and Council shall be the final administrative decision available to the licensee. The licensee may appeal
the governing body's decision by filing appropriate proceedings with a court of competent jurisdiction within ten (10) days of the date of said decision. All
costs of appeal, including prepayment of the costs of the transcript of the recorded hearing, shall be borne by the appellant. (1983 Code)
3-5-5: SECONDHAND DEALERS:
A. Purchase From Minors: It shall be unlawful for any person who conducts a business within the City, which business, wholly or in part, consists of buying
used or secondhand articles, goods, wares, or merchandise, or their agents or their employees, to purchase any such used or secondhand property,
goods, wares or merchandise from persons under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. Register Of Purchases Kept: Every such dealer in used or secondhand property, goods, wares, or merchandise shall keep a substantial and well-bound
register in which he shall enter, at the time of making every such purchase by him, his agents or his employees of such secondhand or used property,
goods, wares or merchandise, the following information:
1. The hour, date and place of purchase.
2. A true and accurate description of each article purchased, including the serial number, name of manufacturer, if any, and other identifying data, as
disclosed upon said article.
3. The amount paid for each article.
4. The name, address, date of birth, social security number, or State identification number from valid identification, together with a physical description
of the seller.
All entries shall be made in the English language in a legible manner with ink or typewriter, and said register shall be open to the inspection of the
police of the City, the Sheriff of Bonner County and any other law enforcement officers of the State of Idaho, at any and all reasonable times;
provided further, that whenever any dealer abandons his occupation as such, he shall deliver in good condition to the City Clerk a register of the
transactions he has kept during the time that he has pursued said occupation, as a dealer in used or secondhand goods, wares, or merchandise in
the City. (Ord. 743, 1-19-1981; 1983 Code)
3-5-6: PENALTY:
Violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, and any person, or persons violating the provisions of this Chapter, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00), together with costs. (Ord. 743, 1-19-1981; 1983 Code)
Chapter 6
MERCHANT SECURITY GUARD BUSINESS
3-6-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be referred to as the MERCHANT SECURITY GUARD BUSINESS ORDINANCE. (Ord. 884, 5-15-1989)
3-6-2: COUNTY ORDINANCE APPLICABLE:
Bonner County Ordinance No. 162 adopted April 1, 1985, as the same may be amended, shall apply within the City to govern the licensing of private patrol
services and patrolmen. (Ord. 884, 5-15-1989)
Chapter 7
GAS FITTERS
(Rep. by Ord. 1121, 11-17-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 37/303
Chapter 8
JUNK YARDS
3-8-1: JUNK YARDS RESTRICTED:
The operation of junk yards and automobile wrecking yards within the limits of the City is deemed detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare,
unless such establishments be regulated as hereinafter provided. (Revised Code 1958; 1983 Code)
3-8-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, conduct or engage in the business of a junk yard or automobile wrecking yard within the limits of the City
unless and until he is issued a permit by the City to engage in, conduct or establish such business or place. (Revised Code 1958; 1983 Code)
3-8-3: LOCATION RESTRICTION:
No junk yard or wrecking yard hereinafter established shall be originally located, conducted or operated within a radius of two hundred (200) yards of any
inhabitable dwelling house, school, church, store, business, tavern or restaurant. (Revised Code 1958; 1983 Code)
3-8-4: MINORS:
A. Purchasing From Minors Prohibited: No owner or operator of any junk yard or automobile wrecking yard shall purchase any junk, scrap or automobile
part from a minor person without first securing from the parent or legal guardian of such minor a verified statement setting forth the means of the
minor's acquisition of said property.
B. Minors Prohibited: The owner or operator of such junk yard or wrecking yard shall not permit nor allow any minor child to be on or loiter about the
business premises unless such child shall be accompanied by parent or other legal guardian. (Revised Code 1958; 1983 Code)
3-8-5: FENCE MAY BE REQUIRED:
The City Council shall have the right to require the operator or owner of any junk yard or automobile wrecking yard to enclose the same with a good and
sufficient fence, constructed in such manner as to obscure from view of passersby the junk and automobiles located within said premises. Said fence must
be constructed within thirty (30) days of receipt by the owner or operator of written notice from the City to so construct. (Revised Code 1958; 1983 Code)
3-8-6: ADDITIONAL RULES:
The City Council shall have power and authority to make, by ordinance, other and additional reasonable rules and regulations appertaining to the conduct
of such junk yards and wrecking yards. (Revised Code 1958; 1983 Code)
Chapter 9
CHILD CARE FACILITIES
3-9-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the CHILD CARE FACILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 855, 12-21-1987)
3-9-2: REPEAL:
Ordinance 789, governing child care facilities, enacted July 16, 1987, is repealed, and Idaho Code title 39, chapter 11 shall apply within the City to govern
basic day care licensing of child care facilities. (Ord. 855, 12-21-1987)
Chapter 10
HOTEL-MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
3-10-1: FINDINGS:
The city council of the city of Sandpoint, Bonner County, Idaho, hereby finds that said city is a resort city, with a population not in excess of ten thousand
(10,000), according to the most recent census within the state of Idaho, that it is organized under the general laws of the state, and that it derives the major
portion of its economic well being from businesses catering to recreational needs and meeting needs of people traveling to said city for an extended period
of time. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 38/303
3-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
HOTEL-MOTEL: Any business, including, but not limited to, hotels, motels, condominiums, tourist homes, bed and breakfast establishments and any other
business which, in the regular course of business, rents or leases for occupancy temporary lodging to individuals with or without meals, except where
residence is maintained continuously under terms of a lease or similar agreement for a period in excess of thirty (30) days.
IN THE CITY OF SANDPOINT: Within the municipal boundaries of the city of Sandpoint, Bonner County, Idaho.
PERSON: Means and includes any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, cooperative, assignee, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
ROOM OCCUPANCY CHARGE: Means and includes the total amount charged for the rental use or temporary occupancy of a room or living unit, valued
in money, whether paid in money or otherwise, without any deduction.
SALE: Shall include providing hotel, motel, condominium, tourist home or trailer court accommodations and services, except where residence is
maintained continuously under the terms of a lease or similar agreement for a period in excess of thirty (30) days.
SALES PRICE: Means and includes the total amount for which hotel-motel rooms are rented, valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise,
without any deduction.
TAXPAYER: Any person subject to or liable for any tax or payment of any tax imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-3: IMPOSITION AND RATE OF CERTAIN NONPROPERTY TAXES:
The city of Sandpoint hereby imposes and shall collect, as set forth herein, certain nonproperty taxes as follows:
A. Hotel-Motel Room Occupancy: A tax is hereby imposed at the rate of seven percent (7%) on any short term room occupancy charge (30 days or less)
for each hotel-motel room rented or leased within the city of Sandpoint, Bonner County, Idaho. Said room occupancy tax shall apply to, be computed
on and collected on all room occupancy charges, including all credit, installment, conditional or similar rental or lease fees at the time the fee for rental
is charged. Said room occupancy tax shall be collected by the owner of said property or his authorized agent from the renter or lessee.
B. Monies Held In Trust: All monies collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be held in trust for the city of Sandpoint and for payment thereof to
the city treasurer in the manner and at the times in this chapter provided. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-4: DURATION OF TAXES:
The nonproperty taxes authorized and collected under this chapter are hereby imposed for a duration of ten (10) years from the effective date hereof. (Ord.
1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-5: PURPOSES FOR WHICH REVENUE SHALL BE USED:
The nonproperty tax revenue derived from and collected under this chapter shall be used for the following purposes:
A. City infrastructure and capital projects.
B. Street overlays, sidewalk repair, extension and replacement, and additional bike paths.
C. Public safety services, including lifeguards, bicycle patrol, services for public events, public transportation, and grant match.
D. Public parks operations.
E. Any excess revenues received will be placed in a designated property tax relief fund.
F. The city will retain the actual cost of collecting and administering the tax. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-6: CREATION OF A PROPERTY TAX RELIEF FUND:
There is hereby created in the office of the city treasurer a fund to be designated as "municipal property tax relief fund". All monies collected under this
chapter, and not otherwise budgeted by the city council, shall be placed by the city treasurer into the municipal property tax relief fund. All monies collected
and placed into said fund shall be used to replace city property taxes in the ensuing fiscal year. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-7: AUTHORIZATION FOR CITY TREASURER TO ADMINISTER, REGULATE AND COLLECT SAID NONPROPERTY
TAXES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 39/303
The city treasurer of the city of Sandpoint is hereby authorized and empowered to administer, regulate and collect payment of all nonproperty taxes
adopted and imposed by this chapter. Said treasurer shall have all of the powers set forth in this chapter, together with those additional powers necessary
and proper to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-8: PERMITS; ISSUANCE:
A. Every person desiring to engage in or conduct the business of renting a hotel-motel room within this city shall file with the city clerk an application for a
municipal nonproperty tax permit for each place of business. A separate permit is required for each place of business within the city. Every application
for said permit shall be made upon a form prescribed by the city clerk and shall set forth the name under which the applicant transacts or intends to
transact business, the location of the business or places of business, and such other information as the city clerk may require. The application shall be
signed by the owner, if he is a natural person or, in the case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner or, in the case of a corporation,
by a corporate officer, or other person authorized by the business to sign the application.
B. Upon filing an application meeting the requirements set out above, the city clerk shall issue to each applicant a permit for each place of business. A
permit shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and for the transaction of business at the place
designated therein. It shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the location for which it was issued. Issuance of a permit may be subject to
additional requirements as set forth in this chapter.
C. On the face of the permit shall be fixed a municipal nonproperty tax permit number, which shall be used by the applicant as an identifying number on all
filing, payment and correspondence with regard to the nonproperty tax imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-9: METHOD FOR PAYMENT OF TAXES:
A. The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be computed and paid for each calendar month. Said taxes are due and payable to the city treasurer on or
before the twentieth day of the succeeding month. The amount of tax paid shall be computed on the total dollar value of hotel-motel room charges;
each person required to hold a municipal nonproperty tax permit and number shall file a municipal nonproperty tax return and a copy of their Idaho
state sales tax return for the month at the same time said taxes are paid to the city treasurer, unless said person has been permitted, in writing, by the
Idaho state tax commission to file quarterly sales or use tax returns. Persons who have been permitted to file other than quarterly returns shall notify
the city treasurer in writing, and the city treasurer thereupon may require reporting of state tax returns over some other period.
B. The first payment of any new taxes under this chapter shall be due and payable together on February 20, 2016, for that period beginning January 1,
2016, and ending January 31, 2016. Thereafter all payments shall be made monthly.
C. A municipal nonproperty tax return shall be filed each and every month by every person engaging in the sale of the hotel-motel rental or lease,
regardless of whether or not any tax is due. Returns shall be signed by the person required to file the return or by a duly authorized agent.
D. A valid sales tax exemption certificate issued by the Idaho state tax commission upon filing a copy thereof with the city clerk shall have the same effect
to exempt the sale from the taxes imposed hereunder as in the Idaho sales tax act. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-10: AUDITS; DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS:
A. The city treasurer may order an audit of any taxpayer under this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining the correctness or completeness of any return
or payment.
B. If any error or omission is discovered in such audits or in any other way, the city treasurer may compute and determine the amount of tax due upon the
basis of facts obtained from such information with its possession and assert a deficiency. One or more deficiency determinations may be made for the
amount due for one or for more than one period. In making such determinations, the city treasurer may offset overpayments against amounts due.
Further, said determinations shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person fails to make a return and shall be based upon any
information which is in the city treasurer's possession.
C. The city treasurer shall give written notice of its determination and the amount of its deficiency, including interest, at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per
annum or such other rate as may be allowed by Idaho Code and as set by resolution adopted by the city council from the date due, to the person from
whom such deficiency amount is due. Such notice may be given personally or mailed to the person at the address furnished to the city clerk in the
nonproperty tax permit application. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-11: REDETERMINATION OF DEFICIENCY:
A. Any person against whom a deficiency determination is made under this chapter, or any person directly interested, may petition the city clerk in writing
for a redetermination within thirty (30) days after service upon the person of notice thereof. If the petition for redetermination is not filed within the thirty
(30) day period, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the period.
B. If a petition for redetermination is filed within the thirty (30) day period, the city treasurer shall reconsider the determination and, if the person so
requests in the petition, the city treasurer shall grant the person an oral hearing and give said person ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the
hearing personally or by mail addressed to the person at the address furnished to the city clerk in said person's application for a nonproperty tax
permit. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 40/303
3-10-12: APPEALS; INTEREST ON DEFICIENCY:
A. When a redetermination is made, the city treasurer shall give notice to the taxpayer against whom the redetermination is made. Within thirty (30) days
of the date upon which such notice of redetermination is mailed or served, the taxpayer may file with the city treasurer an appeal to the city council for
redetermination, which will be heard at the next viable council meeting. If the council decision is unsatisfactory to the appellant, the taxpayer may file a
complaint with the district court for review of the city treasurer's or council's redetermination. There shall be no right of review to the city council nor to
the district court on the determination of taxes due made by the city treasurer unless a petition for redetermination has been timely filed. No
assessment of a deficiency in respect to the tax imposed by this chapter or proceeding for its collection filed until such notice has been mailed to the
taxpayer and expiration of such thirty (30) day period after notice of redetermination, nor if a protest is filed until a decision on the protest becomes
final. If the taxpayer does not protest to the city council or file an action in district court within the time prescribed in this section, the deficiency shall be
assessed and shall become due and payable upon notice and demand from the city treasurer.
B. Interest upon any deficiency shall be assessed at the same time as the deficiency and shall become due and payable upon notice and demand from the
city treasurer and shall be collected as part of the tax at the rate of twelve percent (12%) interest per annum from the date prescribed for payment of
the tax or at that maximum rate of interest as may be allowed by Idaho Code and/or set by resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-
2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-13: COLLECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
As soon as practical after monthly municipal nonproperty tax return and payment is filed, the city treasurer shall examine the same and determine the
correct amount of the tax. For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of any payment determining the amount of tax due where none has been made,
determining liability of any person for any tax payable under this chapter, or the liability at law or in equity of any person in respect to any tax provided by
this chapter or collecting any such liability, the city treasurer, or duly authorized deputy, is authorized: a) to examine the books, papers, records or other
data which may be relevant or material to the inquiry; b) to summon the person liable for the tax or any officer, agent or employee of such person, or any
person having possession, custody or care of books of accounting containing entries relating to the business of the person liable or the tax, to appear
before the city treasurer, or deputy, at a time and place named in its summons to produce such books, papers, records or other data and/or give such
testimony under oath as may be relevant or material to such inquiry. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-14: REFUNDS, LIMITATIONS AND INTEREST:
A. If the city treasurer determines that any amount due under this chapter has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
computed, the city treasurer shall set forth that fact in its records and the excess amount paid or collected may be credited on any amount due or
payable to the city treasurer for nonproperty taxes from that person, and any balance refunded to the person by whom it was paid or to his successors,
administrators or executors.
B. No such credit or refund shall be allowed or made after one year from the time the payment was made unless before the expiration of such period a
claim therefor is filed by the taxpayer.
C. Interest shall be allowed on the amount of such credits or refunds at the rate of twelve percent (12%) interest per annum from the date which such tax
was paid or the maximum rate of interest may be allowed by Idaho Code and/or set by resolution adopted by the city council.
D. Appeal from the city treasurer's decision denying in part or in whole a claim for refund shall be made in accordance with the laws of the state of Idaho
with regard to claims against municipalities. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-15: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT OF TAXES:
Every person with a duty to account for or pay over any tax imposed by this chapter on behalf of a corporation as an officer employee of the corporation, or
on behalf of any limited liability company or on behalf of a partnership as a member employee of the partnership shall be personally liable for payment of
such tax, plus penalties and interest. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-16: PERIOD OF LIMITATION UPON ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION:
A. The amount of taxes imposed under this chapter shall be assessed within three (3) years of the time the return upon which the tax asserted to be due
was or should have been filed, whichever is later; provided, however, if a deficiency determination or assessment has been made within the prescribed
time, such tax may be collected within a period of six (6) years after assessment. The running of limitations provided by this section shall be suspended
for the period during which the city treasurer is prohibited from making the assessment or from collecting or proceeding in court due to a petition for
redetermination or an appeal therefrom, and for thirty (30) days thereafter.
B. In the case of taxes due during the lifetime of a decedent, the tax shall be assessed any proceedings for collection begun within six (6) months after
written request therefor (filed after the return is made) by the executor, administrator, or other fiduciary representing the estate of such decedent, unless
the assessment is stayed by a petition for redetermination or any appeal therefrom.
C. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, or of a failure to file a return, the tax may be assessed, or a proceeding in court for
collection of such tax may be begun without assessment, at any time within three (3) years after the date of the discovery of the facts constituting fraud.
(Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-17: SUCCESSORS' LIABILITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 41/303
A. If a vendor liable for any amount of tax under this chapter sells out his business or stocks and goods, the purchaser shall make an inquiry to the city
treasurer and withhold from the purchase price any amount of tax that may be due under this chapter until such time as the vendor produces receipt
stating that no amount is due.
B. If the purchaser of business or stock or goods fails to withhold from the purchase price as above required, he is personally liable for the payment of the
amount required to be withheld by him. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-18: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION BY CITY TREASURER:
A. The city treasurer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and may prescribe, adopt and enforce rules and regulations relating to its administration
and enforcement. The city treasurer may employ qualified auditors for examination of taxpayers' books and records, and shall also employ such
accountants, investigators, assistants, clerks, and other personnel as are necessary for the efficient administration of this chapter, and may delegate
authority to its representatives to conduct hearings, or perform other duties imposed by this chapter.
B. Every taxpayer subject to this chapter shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers as the city treasurer may require. Every
such taxpayer who files tax payments required under this chapter shall keep all such records for not less than four (4) years after making such payment
unless the city treasurer in writing authorizes their destruction.
C. The city treasurer, or any person authorized in writing by the treasurer, may examine the books, papers, records, and equipment of any taxpayer or any
person liable for any tax, and may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no
return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Any taxpayer whose pertinent records are kept outside of the
city must bring the records to the city for examination by the city treasurer upon request of the latter or, by agreement with the city treasurer, permit an
auditor designated by the city treasurer to visit the place where the records are kept, and there audit such records. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-
2016)
3-10-19: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to six (6) months in jail and/or a one thousand
dollar ($1,000.00) fine, or both. Furthermore, each month in which a person fails to report, or intentionally fails to accurately compute, or intentionally
fails to accurately disclose the total amount of sales or rentals or the amount of tax to be paid as imposed under this chapter, shall be considered a
separate offense.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall have his municipal nonproperty tax permit and tax number revoked and any other municipal
license of any kind. The city clerk shall send written notice of revocation of said permit and tax number to the permit holder by mailing same certified
mail to the address given on the permit application. The permit holder shall have ten (10) days from the date said notice is mailed to file a written
request of appeal with the city council, challenging said revocation. If no appeal is timely made said revocation becomes final. Whenever a person
subject to this chapter has had said permit and tax number revoked, the city clerk shall not reissue said permit nor issue a new permit to said person
until said person places with the city clerk a bond or other sufficient security in the amount equal to three (3) times the actual, determined or estimated
average monthly amount of tax payable by such person pursuant to this chapter.
C. The city clerk, whenever it is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, may require any person subject to this chapter to place with the
city such security as it may determine. Security shall not be greater than three (3) times the estimated average monthly amount payable by such
persons pursuant to this chapter. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the city clerk at any time, subject to the limitations set
forth above.
D. Any amount of tax due under this chapter for which a person fails to report or accurately compute shall become a lien upon the property of said
taxpayer on the date that the same becomes due, and the city may seek to enforce said lien and collect all taxes and interest due, together with the
reasonable costs of collection, including attorney fees, in a court of competent jurisdiction.
E. For the purposes of proper administration of this chapter, and to prevent evasion of said nonproperty taxes, the burden of proving that a rental of hotelmotel
room is not a sale under this chapter is upon the person who makes the sale or rental in question. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-20: PENALTY CHARGES:
A. Any person who is required to collect and pay over any tax imposed by this chapter and fails or refuses to pay over to the city the same when due in
accordance with this chapter shall be liable for a penalty on the tax not paid. Said penalty charge may be modified by resolution adopted by city
council, but shall initially be equal to five percent (5%) of the tax not paid or a minimum of ten dollars ($10.00) (whichever is greater). The city treasurer
shall assess and collect said fee at the time any delinquent tax payment is tendered. The permit holder shall have ten (10) days from the date payment
is made to file a written appeal with the city council challenging said penalty determination. If no appeal is timely made as herein provided, said penalty
determination shall be final.
B. Any person who is required to collect, truthfully account for, and pay over any tax imposed by this chapter and who wilfully fails to collect such a tax or
truthfully account for or pay over such a tax, or wilfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat such a tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to the
other penalties provided by law, be liable to a penalty equal to the amount of the tax evaded, or not collected, or not accounted for and paid over. The
city treasurer shall determine and assess such penalties, and the same shall become due and payable upon notice and demand from the city treasurer.
The city treasurer shall send written notice of such penalty charge to the permit holder by mailing same certified mail to the address given on the permit
application. The permit holder shall have ten (10) days from the date said notice is mailed to file a written request of appeal with the city council
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 42/303
challenging said penalty charge determination. If no appeal is timely made, said penalty charge determination becomes final. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015,
eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-21: EXEMPTIONS:
All transactions by the city of Sandpoint, Bonner County, Lake Pend Oreille school district or the state of Idaho, otherwise subject to imposition of said
taxes, are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-10-22: CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION:
A. No city clerk of the city of Sandpoint, nor any duly authorized deputy city clerk, agent or employee shall divulge or make known to any persons, in any
manner, any information whatsoever submitted or obtained directly or indirectly, pursuant to this chapter, or to permit any nonproperty tax return or
information supplied with regard thereto, or any copy thereof, or any paper or book so obtained, to be seen or examined by any person except as
provided by law; provided that in any action or proceeding brought for the collection, remission, cancellation, or refund of the whole or any part of a tax
imposed under this chapter, or for enforcing the penalties prescribed for making false or fraudulent returns, any and all information contained in or
provided with said returns may be made accessible to the elected and appointed officials, officers and representatives of said city charged with
enforcing or defending same, all such returns, information, statements and correspondence relating thereto may be produced into evidence in any
action, civil or criminal, directly pertaining to such returns or the tax imposed on the basis of such returns.
B. The Sandpoint city council, as provided by law or under such rules and provisions as it may prescribe, may permit, notwithstanding the provisions of this
chapter as to secrecy, the commissioner of internal revenue of the United States or his delegate or the proper officer of any state imposing a tax to
inspect the nonproperty tax returns or information provided or obtained in connection therewith, or may furnish to such officer, or his authorized agent,
copies or an abstract thereof.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a taxpayer or authorized representative, upon proper identification, from inspecting and copying his own
nonproperty tax returns and information supplied therewith. (Ord. 1317, 10-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
Chapter 11
BUSINESS AND OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING1
3-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide personnel charged with the responsibility of protecting the health and safety of the public and the environment
with information relating to business operations within the city that will aid them in providing police, fire, and environmental protection, as well as
information regarding contact persons in the event of an emergency. It is the further purpose of this chapter to provide the city with information regarding
the types of businesses operating within the community in order to facilitate recruitment and retention of businesses and to further the economic
development of the community. (Ord. 1277, 12-5-2012)
3-11-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all wholesale and retail businesses and all activities, occupational callings, trades, pursuits or
professions that conduct business from or at a location within the city of Sandpoint with the object of gain, profit, benefit or advantage or that operate a
business at a special event or use the public right of way for a special event, on a temporary basis, including mobile food and merchandise vendors. Each
business location shall be deemed a separate business unless it is a specific annex to the main location of the business. The license is not intended to
repeal any license or franchise provisions of any other ordinance of the city of Sandpoint, nor is the license to be considered a waiver of any other
requirements of compliance with any federal, state and local laws. (Ord. 1277, 12-5-2012)
3-11-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. No person shall engage in any business within the city of Sandpoint for which licensing is required by this chapter without having submitted a license
application to the city clerk or a designee and receiving a general business license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. This license shall
be in addition to any other license required by other chapters of this title. Such license shall be valid from the date it is issued through December of that
same year, so long as the ownership, nature of the business, and location of the business remain unchanged.
B. No person shall engage in any temporary business within the city of Sandpoint for which licensing is required by this chapter without having submitted a
temporary business license application to the city clerk or a designee and receiving a temporary business license in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. Such license shall be valid for no more than four (4) days. Persons having a city of Sandpoint general business license are exempt from
obtaining a temporary business license when engaging in business at a special event.
C. Upon timely payment of the annual renewal fee for 2013, any person registered with the city under the business registration law in effect prior to the
effective date hereof will be issued a business license for 2013 and will continue to receive a license via the renewal process each year thereafter, so
long as payment of the annual renewal fee is made in a timely manner. (Ord. 1277, 12-5-2012)
3-11-4: EXEMPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 43/303
A. The fee provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
1. Persons qualifying as a charity within the meaning of section 501(c)(3) of the United States internal revenue code. Possession of a certificate, letter,
or other proof of such status from the internal revenue service shall be required to qualify for this exemption.
2. Any agency of the United States government and any political subdivision of the state of Idaho.
3. Persons who occupy space at a flea market or other similar type of temporary bazaar. However, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the
operator of the flea market or bazaar.
B. In addition, neither the fee nor the license provisions of this chapter shall apply to:
1. Persons who make occasional sales of their own household property, including garage sales or yard sales, not more than twice each calendar year
and children's lemonade stands or similar endeavors operated by children on an occasional and temporary basis;
2. Domestic servants, newspaper carriers or casual laborers not included as employees of a regularly conducted business; (Ord. 1277, 12-5-2012)
3. Lawyers, mediators, and other legal professionals who maintain their principal place of business outside Sandpoint city limits and are working in
Sandpoint only temporarily in order to participate in legal proceedings; (Ord. 1312, 3-18-2015)
4. Vendors participating in Farmers' Market, Pend Oreille Arts Council Arts And Crafts Fair, The Festival At Sandpoint, the county fair, or any other
sanctioned event on public property. However, those in charge of the event shall be required to obtain the same required information from every
vendor participating;
5. Lessors of any residential property having no more than two (2) family units. (Ord. 1277, 12-5-2012)
3-11-5: LICENSE APPLICATION:
A. A general or temporary license application shall be provided by the city clerk or a designee, and the application shall contain information including, but
not limited to:
1. Name of the business and any other name under which business is to be conducted;
2. Business entity type; (Ord. 1277, 12-5-2012)
3. Business mailing address and business phone number, along with the street address for those businesses located within Sandpoint city limits; (Ord.
1312, 3-18-2015)
4. The nature of the business to be conducted at such address or special event;
5. Date the business will open or the event will occur; (Ord. 1277, 12-5-2012)
6. Date of issuance; (Ord. 1312, 3-18-2015)
7. Fee and payment thereof; and
8. Such other information deemed necessary by the city for the health and safety of emergency service personnel or utility service providers.
B. Every application shall be personally signed by the owner or his agent. The application shall be submitted not less than ten (10) business days prior to
the date on which business will commence. (Ord. 1277, 12-5-2012)
3-11-6: LICENSE FEE:
A license fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council must be paid at the time the application is submitted to the city clerk or a designee and/or
prior to the issuance of a general or temporary business license. This fee is not refundable, nor shall it be prorated in the event a business moves or
ownership changes. The temporary business license fee shall be forty percent (40%) of the initial business license fee.
Failure to pay any fee within forty five (45) days after the day upon which it is due and payable shall render the person subject to a late fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) in addition to other penalties provided herein.
Any fee, including penalties thereon, shall constitute a debt to the city and may be collected by court proceedings in the same manner as any other debt in
like amount. No civil action or judgment shall bar or prevent a criminal prosecution for each and every violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1277, 12-5-2012)
3-11-7: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every business required under this chapter to obtain a general or temporary business license shall display such license in a prominent location upon the
business premises, at the location where business is conducted, or at the event location in the case of a temporary business. No business shall loan, sell,
give or assign to any other person or allow any other person to use or display, or to destroy, damage or remove, or to have in his possession any license
which has been issued to said business. No business shall allow any license to remain posted, displayed or used after the period for which it was issued
has expired, or when it has been suspended, revoked or, for any other reason, becomes ineffective. (Ord. 1277, 12-5-2012)
3-11-8: INSPECTIONS; RECOMMENDATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 44/303
A. The city may cause the business premises of any applicant for a new business license to be inspected for compliance with the laws of the state of Idaho
and of the city of Sandpoint.
B. The inspection may be conducted by an enforcement officer. If it appears that all conditions requisite to the issuance of a license have been
substantially met and that no safety hazards exist, a license shall be issued. Where potentially hazardous or explosive materials are being stored, the
city may require plans for the handling, location and identification of such materials. No license will be issued until the city has completed required
inspections. (Ord. 1277, 12-5-2012)
3-11-9: CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP, LOCATION OF BUSINESS, NATURE OF BUSINESS, OR MANAGEMENT:
A. Whenever the ownership, nature of the business or location of any business located within the city is changed, a new license application reflecting the
change shall be presented to the city clerk or a designee within ten (10) days of said change. New business license fees will apply.
B. Whenever the management of the business changes, the city clerk shall be notified, in writing, of the name of the new manager and the new manager's
contact information. (Ord. 1277, 12-5-2012)
3-11-10: LICENSE RENEWAL:
The city may issue renewal licenses to all licensees whose licenses have not been suspended at the time such licenses have expired upon timely payment
of the annual license renewal fee, which amount shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1277, 12-5-2012)
3-11-11: VIOLATION; INFRACTION; PENALTY:
A. Infraction: Unless otherwise provided, any person who shall commence or continue to carry on or transact any business or calling for which license is
required by any provision of this title without first procuring the same or, once procured, fails to maintain the standards required to retain the permit or
license shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00). An infraction is a civil public
offense, not constituting a crime, for which no period of incarceration is imposed. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. Violation: The operating or conducting of any business or occupation for which a license is required by this chapter without having a valid license as
provided herein is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. In addition to any penalty provided by this chapter, the city may bring an action in any court
of competent jurisdiction to obtain an order enjoining any person from operating or conducting any business or occupation in violation of this chapter.
C. Revocation Or Suspension: Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the city council for violation of any law of the
city, the state of Idaho, or of the United States Of America applicable to the business for which the license was issued. Such revocation must be
preceded by notice in writing to the licensee from the city clerk, informing the licensee that the council has ordered the holding of a hearing at a date
and time certain, not less than forty five (45) days from the date of such notice, at which hearing the licensee will be required to appear personally and
show cause why the license should not be revoked. At such hearing the licensee may be represented by counsel, may testify personally, may call
witnesses, and may cross examine any witnesses called by the city. Should the council determine that such license should be revoked or suspended, it
shall pass a motion to that effect, and such license shall thereupon be revoked, provided however, that no such motion shall be deemed passed
without the affirmative vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full council. (Ord. 1277, 12-5-2012)
Chapter 12
SHORT TERM RENTAL OF DWELLING UNITS
3-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the integrity of the City's residential neighborhoods and private property rights by limiting non-owner occupied
short term rentals within residential neighborhoods and by regulating all short term rentals of dwelling units to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of
short term rental occupants and that of neighboring residents. (Ord. 1353, 6-6-2018)
3-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE: An area property manager, owner, or agent of the owner, who is readily available to respond to tenant and neighborhood or
City questions or concerns.
OWNER: The person or entity that holds legal and/or equitable title to the private property. The owner may act through an agent or property manager, but
the owner shall remain responsible for compliance with these provisions.
OWNER OCCUPIED: Where the owner of a dwelling unit resides on the parcel for a minimum of six (6) months out of a calendar year. Homeowner
occupied tax exempt status shall be considered to be proof of homeowner occupied status for the purposes of this Code.
SHORT TERM RENTAL: The use of a dwelling unit, or a portion thereof which is rented for the purpose of overnight lodging for a period of thirty (30) days
or less. Short term rentals are also commonly referred to as vacation homes, tourist homes, bed and breakfast establishments or vacation rentals. (Ord.
1353, 6-6-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 45/303
3-12-3: REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: No person shall occupy, use, operate or manage, nor offer or negotiate to use, lease or rent a dwelling unit for short term rental
occupancy within the City without obtaining a short term rental permit.
B. Compliance With Chapter: Permits for short term rentals are allowed subject to all provisions of this chapter.
C. Occupancy Tax: Compliance with the requirements of chapter 10, "Hotel-Motel Occupancy Tax", of this title is required.
D. Residential Zones: Within residential zones, short term rentals shall have a minimum two (2) nights stay and shall be limited to one per parcel.
E. Non-Owner Occupied Short Term Rentals: The sum total of all non-owner occupied short term rentals within the entirety of all residential zones shall not
exceed thirty five (35) units, except as provided below:
1. Where the short term rental unit is included in a multi-unit development with the following standards:
a. Such development must include not less than ten (10) units.
b. Such development must include property that adjoins the waterfront.
c. Such development must be within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the downtown core defined as being within the boundaries of First
Avenue, Cedar Street, Fifth Avenue and Pine Street. Developments located farther than one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') from the
downtown core that meet standards in subsections E1a and E1b of this section may only be allowed non-owner occupied short term rentals at a
ratio of one per ten (10) units.
2. Where approved for greater short term rental density as part of an approved planned unit development. Existing approved planned unit
developments must be formally amended to be eligible for this greater density.
3. Where the short term rental was approved prior to the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 1353, 6-6-2018)
3-12-4: STANDARDS:
A. A short term rental shall comply with the following standards:
1. Permit:
a. Commencing on the effective date hereof, any person who is permitted to engage in the rental of a dwelling for short term occupancy shall have
obtained a short term rental permit. Application for such a permit shall be made upon suitable forms furnished by the City. The permit is valid for
one year and must be renewed annually. Renewal of the permit requires a complete permit application and fee. If a complete application and
applicable fees have not been received by the City on the annual renewal date, the short term rental shall be conclusively presumed to be
discontinued and the City shall revoke the short term rental permit.
b. A short term rental permit is issued to a specific owner of a dwelling unit. The short term rental permit shall be revoked when the permit holder
sells or transfers the real property. For purposes of this section, "sale or transfer" shall mean any change of ownership during the lifetime of the
permit holder or after the death of the permit holder whether there is consideration or not except a change in ownership where title is held in
survivorship with a spouse or child or transfers on the owner's death to a trust which benefits only a spouse or child. A permit holder may transfer
ownership of the real property to: a trustee, a limited liability company, a corporation, a partnership, a limited partnership, a limited liability
partnership, or other similar entity and not be subject to permit revocation pursuant to this section so long as the transferor lives and remains the
only owner of the entity. When the permit holder sells or transfers the real property, the new owner shall apply for and receive a short term rental
permit before using the dwelling as a short term rental.
2. Issuance: The issuance of a short term rental permit shall be subject to the following requirements:
a. Inspection:
(1) At the time of application for a new short term rental permit, the dwelling unit shall be subject to inspection by the building official or their
designee. Prior to the issuance of the short term rental permit, the owner of the dwelling unit shall make all necessary alterations to the dwelling
required by the building official pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.
(2) For renewals, applicants shall be required to submit a statement affirming compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter by completing
a City provided self-inspection checklist.
(3) Any inspections required under this chapter may be conducted by a private inspector certified by the International Code Council at the owner's
expense.
b. Windows: Bedroom windows shall be operable to allow for emergency egress. All emergency escape windows shall have a minimum five and
seven-tenths (5.7) square foot net opening with a maximum sill height of forty four inches (44").
c. Smoke Alarms: Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in accordance with manufacturers specification:
(1) On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
(2) In each room used for sleeping purposes.
(3) In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units
with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the
adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 46/303
d. CO Detectors: A CO detector is required on each floor if: there is a garage, solid fuel appliance or gas appliance.
e. Fire Extinguishers: The short term rental shall be equipped with one 2A:10BC type extinguisher per floor. Fire extinguisher(s) shall be mounted in
visible locations with the tops of the fire extinguishers mounted between three feet (3') and five feet (5') above the floor, and shall be accessible to
occupants at all times.
f. Occupancy: No recreational vehicle, travel trailer, tent or other temporary shelter shall be used as a short term rental.
g. Local Representative:
(1) Each short term rental shall list a local representative who permanently resides within twenty (20) vehicular miles of Sandpoint City limits.
(2) If the Police Department is not able to contact the local representative in a timely manner more than twice during the term of the annual permit,
this shall be considered a violation pursuant to section 3-12-5 of this chapter.
(3) The designated local representative may be changed by the permit holder from time to time throughout the term of the permit. However, to
change the local representative, the permit holder must file a revised permit application that includes the name, address and telephone number
of the new local representative. Failure to notify the City of a change in the local representative constitutes a violation pursuant to section 3-12-5
of this chapter.
(4) For non-owner occupied short term rentals within the residential zones that do not meet the standards of subsection 3-12-3E1 of this chapter,
property owners and/or residents within two hundred feet (200') of the dwelling shall be provided with the name and telephone number of the
owner or the local representative. The permit holder shall provide documentation to the City of this notification and list of the owners and/or
residents contacted.
h. Permit Posting: The short term rental permit shall be posted within the dwelling adjacent to the front door. At a minimum, the permit will contain the
following information:
(1) The name of the local representative and a telephone number where the representative may be reached;
(2) The name and a telephone number where the property owner can be reached;
(3) The telephone number and website address of the City of Sandpoint and the Sandpoint Police Department;
(4) The maximum number of occupants permitted to stay in the dwelling;
(5) The solid waste and recycling collection day; and
(6) The Sandpoint snowplowing regulations.
i. Inactivity: License issuance and continued validity for non-owner occupied short term rentals shall be contingent upon the owner's good faith effort
to actively engage in the rental of the property. Failure to provide documentation of rental activity for a minimum of twelve (12) nights during a
twelve (12) month period, pro-rated quarterly, prior to the short term rental permit renewal deadline shall constitute an immediate forfeiture of the
license. (Ord. 1353, 6-6-2018)
3-12-5: VIOLATION; INFRACTION; PENALTY:
A. The following conduct shall constitute a violation for which the penalties and sanctions specified in this section may be imposed:
1. Violations:
a. The tenants of the dwelling have created noise, disturbances, or nuisances, in violation of this Code, or violations of State law pertaining to the
consumption of alcohol, or the use of illegal drugs.
b. The owner has failed to comply with the standards of section 3-12-4 of this chapter.
2. Penalties:
a. For the first two (2) violations within a twelve (12) month period, the sanction shall be a warning notice.
b. For the third violation within a twelve (12) month period, the sanction shall be a revocation of the permit.
3. Written Notice: The City shall provide the permit holder with a written notice of any violation of this section that has occurred. If applicable, a copy of
the warning notice shall be sent to the local representative.
4. Appeal Of Suspension Or Revocation: Pursuant to this section, the City shall provide the permit holder with a written notice of the permit suspension
or revocation and the reasons therefor. The permit holder may appeal the suspension or revocation to the City Council by filing a letter of appeal to
the City Clerk within twenty (20) days after the date of the mailing of the Planning Director's order to suspend or revoke the permit. The Planning
Director's suspension or revocation shall be stayed until the appeal has been determined by the City Council. The City Council shall conduct a
hearing on the appeal within sixty (60) days of the date of the filing of the letter of appeal. At the appeal, the permit holder may present such
evidence as may be relevant. At the conclusion of the hearing, based on the evidence it has received, the Council may uphold, modify, or overturn
the decision of the Planning Director to suspend or revoke the permit based on the evidence received.
5. Application For Permit After Revocation: A person who has had a short term rental permit revoked shall not be permitted to apply for a subsequent
short term rental permit for a period of two (2) years from the date of revocation.
6. Infraction: Unless otherwise provided, any person who shall commence or continue to operate a short term rental for which a permit is required by
any provision of this title without first procuring the same shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined one
hundred dollars ($100.00). An infraction is a civil public offense, not constituting a crime, for which no period of incarceration is imposed. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 47/303
7. Advertisement Of Short Term Rental: An advertisement promoting the availability of short-term rental property in violation of this Code is prima facie
evidence of a violation and may be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a license.
Advertising that offers a property as a residential short-term rental shall constitute prima facie evidence of the operation of a residential short-term
rental and the burden of proof shall be on the owner, operator, or lessee of record to establish that the subject property is being used as a legal
residential short-term rental or is not in operation.
Any communication by a property owner, manager, operator, or lessee to any person where the owner, manager, operator, or lessee offers their
home for rent as a residential short-term rental shall constitute prima facie evidence of the operation of a residential short-term rental and the burden
of proof shall be on the owner, operator, or lessee of record to establish that the subject property is being used as a legal residential short-term rental
or is not in operation.
Other evidence of the operation of a residential short-term rental without a valid permit number may include, but is not limited to: guest testimony,
rental agreements, advertisements, and receipts or bank statements showing payments to the owner by a guest. (Ord. 1353, 6-6-2018)
Chapter 13
NONPROPERTY TAXES
3-13-1: FINDINGS:
The city council of the city of Sandpoint, Bonner County, Idaho, hereby finds that Sandpoint is a resort city with a population not in excess of ten thousand
(10,000), according to the most recent census within the state of Idaho, that it is organized under the general laws of the state, and that it derives the major
portion of its economic well being from businesses catering to recreational needs and meeting the needs of people traveling to Sandpoint for an extended
period of time. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
IN THE CITY OF SANDPOINT: Within the municipal boundaries of the city of Sandpoint, Bonner County, Idaho.
PERSON: Means and includes any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, cooperative, assignee, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
TAXPAYER: Any person subject to or liable for any tax or payment of any tax imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-3: IMPOSITION AND RATE OF CERTAIN NONPROPERTY TAXES:
The city of Sandpoint hereby imposes and shall collect, as set forth herein, certain nonproperty taxes as follows:
A. A tax is hereby imposed at the rate of one percent (1%) on all sales subject to taxation under chapter 36 of title 63, Idaho Code, except occupancy
sales subject to taxation under chapter 10 of this title.
B. All monies collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be held in trust for the city of Sandpoint and for payment thereof to the city treasurer in the
manner and at the times provided herein. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-4: DURATION OF TAXES:
The nonproperty taxes authorized and collected under this chapter are hereby imposed for a duration of five (5) years from the effective date hereof. (Ord.
1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-5: PURPOSES FOR WHICH REVENUE SHALL BE USED:
The nonproperty tax revenue derived from and collected under this chapter shall be used for the following purposes:
A. Priority one: For completion of War Memorial Field Grandstand project as designed by Sewell And Associates. If funds remain, then,
B. Priority two: To replace drainage and field surface at War Memorial Field infrastructure. If funds remain, then,
C. Priority three: For repair and replacement of War Memorial Field infrastructure. If funds remain, then,
D. Priority four: To improve parks infrastructure, such as City Beach Parking Lot and Travers Park Parking Lot.
The city will retain the actual cost of collecting and administering the tax. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-6: CREATION OF A PROPERTY TAX RELIEF FUND:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 48/303
There is hereby created in the office of the city treasurer a fund to be designated as "municipal property tax relief fund". All monies collected under this
chapter, and not otherwise budgeted by the city council, shall be placed by the city treasurer into the municipal property tax relief fund. All monies collected
and placed into said fund shall be used to replace city property taxes in the ensuing fiscal year. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-7: AUTHORIZATION FOR CITY TREASURER TO ADMINISTER, REGULATE AND COLLECT NONPROPERTY TAXES:
The city treasurer of the city of Sandpoint is hereby authorized and empowered to administer, regulate and collect payment of all nonproperty taxes
adopted and imposed by this chapter. The treasurer shall have all of the powers set forth in this chapter, together with those additional powers necessary
and proper to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-8: PERMITS; ISSUANCE:
A. Every person desiring to engage or conduct business in the city of Sandpoint shall file with the city clerk an application for a municipal nonproperty tax
permit for each place of business. A separate permit is required for each place of business within the city. Application shall be made on a form
prescribed by the city clerk and shall set forth the name under which the applicant transacts or intends to transact business, the location of the
business or places of business, and such other information as the city clerk may require. The application shall be signed by the owner, if he is a natural
person, or, in the case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner, or, in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or other person
authorized by the corporation to sign the application.
B. Upon filing an application meeting the requirements set forth above, the city clerk shall issue to each applicant a permit for each place of business. A
permit shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and for the transaction of business at the place
designated therein. It shall, at all times, be conspicuously displayed at the location for which it was issued. Issuance of a permit may be subject to
additional requirements as set forth in this chapter.
C. On the face of the permit shall be fixed a municipal nonproperty tax permit number, which shall be used by the applicant as an identifying number on all
filing, payment and correspondence with regard to the tax imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-9: METHOD FOR PAYMENT OF TAXES:
A. The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be computed and paid for each calendar month and shall be due and payable to the city treasurer on or before
the twentieth day of the succeeding month. The amount of tax paid shall be computed on the total dollar value of charges. Each person required to hold
a municipal nonproperty tax permit and number shall file a municipal nonproperty tax return and a copy of their Idaho state sales tax return for the
month at the same time taxes are paid to the city treasurer, unless that person has been permitted in writing by the Idaho state tax commission to file
quarterly sales or use tax returns. Persons who have been permitted to file other than quarterly returns shall notify the city treasurer in writing, and the
city treasurer thereupon may require reporting of state tax returns over some other period.
B. The first payment of taxes under this chapter shall be due and payable together on February 20, 2016, for that period beginning January 1, 2016, and
ending January 31, 2016. Thereafter, all payments shall be made monthly.
C. A municipal nonproperty tax return shall be filed each and every month by every person engaging in retail sales, regardless of whether or not any tax is
due. Returns shall be signed by the person required to file the return or by a duly authorized agent.
D. A valid sales tax exemption certificate issued by the Idaho state tax commission, upon filing a copy thereof with the city clerk, shall have the same effect
to exempt the sale from the taxes imposed hereunder as in the Idaho sales tax act. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-10: AUDITS; DEFICIENCY DETERMINATION:
A. The city treasurer may order an audit of any taxpayer under this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining the correctness or completeness of any return
or payment.
B. If any error or omission is discovered in such audits or in any other way, the city treasurer may compute and determine the amount of tax due upon the
basis of facts obtained from such information within his/her possession and assert a deficiency. One or more deficiency determinations may be made
for the amount due for one or for more than one period. In making such determinations, the city treasurer may offset overpayments against amounts
due. Further, determinations shall be made for the period or periods during which the person fails to make a return and shall be based upon any
information in the city treasurer's possession.
C. The city treasurer shall provide written notice of his/her determination and the amount of deficiency, including interest at the rate of twelve percent
(12%) per annum or such other rate as may be allowed by Idaho Code and as set by resolution adopted by the city council from the date due, to the
person from whom such deficiency amount is due. Such notice may be given personally or mailed to the person at the address furnished to the city
clerk in the nonproperty tax permit application. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-11: REDETERMINATION OF DEFICIENCY:
A. Any person against whom a deficiency determination is made under this chapter, or any person directly interested, may petition the city clerk in writing
for a redetermination within thirty (30) days after service upon the person of notice thereof. If the petition for redetermination is not filed within the thirty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 49/303
(30) day period, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the period.
B. If a petition for redetermination is filed within the thirty (30) day period, the city treasurer shall reconsider the determination and, if requested in the
petition, the city treasurer shall grant the person an oral hearing and provide the person ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing
personally or by mail addressed to the person at the address furnished to the city clerk in the person's application for a nonproperty tax permit. (Ord.
1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-12: APPEALS; INTEREST ON DEFICIENCY:
A. When a redetermination is made, the city treasurer shall give notice to the taxpayer against whom the redetermination is made. Within thirty (30) days
of the date upon which the notice of redetermination is mailed or served, the taxpayer may file with the city treasurer an appeal to the city council or
may file a complaint with the district court for review of the city treasurer's redetermination. There shall be no right of review to the city council or to the
district court on the determination of taxes due made by the city treasurer unless a petition for redetermination has been timely filed. No assessment of
a deficiency in respect to the tax imposed by this chapter or proceeding to collect for its collection shall be made, begun, or prosecuted until notice has
been mailed to the taxpayer and expiration of the thirty (30) day period after notice of redetermination, or, if a protest is filed, until a decision on the
protest becomes final. If the taxpayer does not protest to the city council or file an action in district court within the time prescribed in this section, the
deficiency shall be assessed and shall become due and payable upon notice and demand from the city treasurer.
B. Interest upon any deficiency shall be assessed at the same time as the deficiency, shall become due and payable upon notice and demand from the city
treasurer, and shall be collected as part of the tax at the rate of twelve percent (12%) interest per annum from the date prescribed for payment of the
tax or at the maximum rate of interest allowed by Idaho Code or set by resolution adopted by city council. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-13: COLLECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. As soon as practical after the monthly municipal nonproperty tax return and payment is filed, the city treasurer shall examine the same and determine
the correct amount of the tax. For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of any payment determining the amount of tax due where none has been
made, determining liability of any person for any tax payable under this chapter, or the liability at law or in equity of any person in respect to any tax
provided by this chapter or collecting any such liability, the city treasurer or his/her appointed deputy or other representative is authorized to: 1)
examine the books, papers, records or other data which may be relevant or material to the inquiry, and 2) summon the person liable for the tax or any
officer, agent or employee of such person, or any person having possession, custody or care of books of accounting containing entries relating to the
business of the person liable or the tax, to appear before the city treasurer or his/her appointed deputy or other representative at a time and place
named in a summons to produce such books, papers, records or other data and/or give such testimony under oath as may be relevant or material to
such inquiry. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-14: REFUNDS; LIMITATIONS AND INTEREST:
A. If the city treasurer determines that any amount due under this chapter has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
computed, the city treasurer shall set forth that fact in his/her records, and the excess amount paid or collected may be credited on any amount due or
payable to the city treasurer for nonproperty taxes from that person, and any balance refunded to the person by whom it was paid or to his successors,
administrators or executors.
B. No credit or refund shall be allowed or made after one year from the time the payment was made unless, before the expiration of this period, a claim is
filed by the taxpayer.
C. Interest shall be allowed on the amount of any credits or refunds at the rate of twelve percent (12%) interest per annum from the date the tax was paid
or the maximum rate of interest allowed by Idaho Code or set by resolution adopted by city council.
D. Appeal from the city treasurer's decision denying in part or in whole a claim for refund shall be made in accordance with the laws of the state of Idaho
with regard to claims against municipalities. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-15: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT OF TAXES:
Every person with a duty to account for or pay over any tax imposed by this chapter on behalf of a corporation as an officer employee of the corporation, or
on behalf of any limited liability company or on behalf of a partnership as a member employee of the partnership shall be personally liable for payment of
such tax, plus penalties and interest. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-16: PERIOD OF LIMITATION ON ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION:
A. The amount of taxes imposed under this chapter shall be assessed within three (3) years of the time the return upon which the tax asserted was due or
should have been filed, whichever is later; provided, however, if a deficiency determination or assessment has been made within the prescribed time,
the tax may be collected within a period of six (6) years after assessment. The running of limitations provided by this section shall be suspended for the
period during which the city treasurer is prohibited from making the assessment or from collecting or proceeding in court due to a petition for
redetermination or an appeal therefrom and for thirty (30) days thereafter.
B. In the case of tax due during the lifetime of a decedent, the tax shall be assessed any proceedings for collection begun within six (6) months after
written request therefor (filed after the return is made) by the executor, administrator, or other fiduciary representing the estate of such decedent, unless
the assessment is stayed by a petition for redetermination or any appeal therefrom.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 50/303
C. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax or failure to file a return, the tax may be assessed or a proceeding in court for
collection of such tax may begin without assessment at any time within three (3) years after the date of the discovery of the facts constituting fraud.
(Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-17: SUCCESSORS' LIABILITY:
A. If a vendor liable for any amount of tax under this chapter sells out his business or stocks and goods, the vendee shall make an inquiry to the city
treasurer and withhold from the purchase price any amount of tax that may be due under this chapter until such time as the vendor produces receipt
stating that no amount is due.
B. If the purchaser of business or stock or goods fails to withhold from the purchase price as above required, he is personally liable for the payment of the
amount required to be withheld by him. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-18: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION BY CITY TREASURER:
A. The city treasurer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and may prescribe, adopt and enforce rules and regulations relating to its administration
and enforcement. The city treasurer may employ qualified auditors for examination of taxpayers' books and records, shall employ such accountants,
investigators, assistants, clerks, and other personnel as are necessary for the efficient administration of this chapter, and may delegate authority to its
representatives to conduct hearings, or perform other duties imposed by this chapter.
B. Every taxpayer in this city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers as the city treasurer may require. Every taxpayer who
files tax payments required under this chapter shall keep all such records for not less than four (4) years after making such payment, unless the city
treasurer, in writing, authorizes their destruction.
C. The city treasurer, or any person authorized in writing by the treasurer, may examine the books, papers, records, and equipment of any taxpayer or any
person liable for any tax, and may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no
return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Any taxpayer whose pertinent records are kept outside of the
city must bring the records to the city for examination by the city treasurer upon request or, by agreement with the city treasurer, permit an auditor
designated by the city treasurer to visit the place where the records are kept and there audit the records. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-19: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to six (6) months in jail and/or a fine of three
hundred dollars ($300.00). Furthermore, each month a person fails to report or intentionally fails to accurately compute or disclose the total amount of
sales or rentals or the amount of tax to be paid as imposed under this chapter shall be considered a separate offense.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall have his municipal nonproperty tax permit and tax number revoked. The city clerk shall send
written notice of revocation of the tax permit and number to the permit holder by certified mail to the address given on the permit application. The permit
holder shall have ten (10) days from the date said notice is mailed to file a written request of appeal with the city council, challenging the revocation. If
no appeal is timely made, the revocation becomes final. Whenever a person subject to this chapter has had their permit and tax number revoked, the
city clerk shall not reissue the permit or issue a new permit to the person until the person places with the city clerk a bond or other sufficient security in
the amount equal to three (3) times the actual, determined, or estimated average monthly amount of tax payable by the person, pursuant to this
chapter.
C. The city clerk, whenever it is deemed necessary to ensure compliance, may require any person subject to this chapter to place with the city clerk such
security as the city clerk may determine. Security shall not be greater than three (3) times the estimated average monthly amount payable by persons
pursuant to this chapter. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the city clerk at any time, subject to the limitations set forth
above.
D. Any amount of tax due under this chapter which a person fails to report or accurately compute shall become a lien upon the property of the taxpayer on
the date that the same becomes due, and the city may seek to enforce the lien and collect all taxes and interest due, together with the reasonable
costs of collection, including attorney fees, in a court of competent jurisdiction.
E. For the purposes of proper administration of this chapter, and to prevent evasion of nonproperty taxes, the burden of proving that a sale is not a sale
under this chapter is upon the person who makes the sale in question. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-20: PENALTY CHARGES:
A. Any person who is required to collect and pay over any tax imposed by this chapter and fails or refuses to pay over to the city the same when due in
accordance with this chapter shall be liable for a penalty on the tax not paid. The penalty charge may be modified by resolution adopted by city council
but shall initially be equal to five percent (5%) of the tax not paid or a minimum of ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater. The city treasurer shall
assess and collect the fee at the time any delinquent tax payment is tendered. The permit holder shall have ten (10) days from the date payment is
made to file a written appeal with the city council challenging the penalty determination. If no appeal is timely made as herein provided, the penalty
determination shall be final.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 51/303
B. Any person who is required to collect, truthfully account for, and pay over any tax imposed by this chapter and who wilfully fails to do so or wilfully
attempts in any manner to evade or defeat the tax or payment thereof shall, in addition to the other penalties provided by law, be liable to a penalty
equal to the amount of the tax evaded, not collected, or not accounted for and paid over. The city treasurer shall determine and assess the penalties,
and the same shall become due and payable upon notice and demand from the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall send written notice of the penalty
charge to the permit holder by certified mail to the address given on the permit application. The permit holder shall have ten (10) days from the date the
notice is mailed to file a written request of appeal with the city council challenging the penalty charge determination. If no appeal is timely made, the
penalty charge determination becomes final. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-21: EXEMPTIONS:
All transactions by the city of Sandpoint, Bonner County, Lake Pend Oreille school district, and state of Idaho otherwise subject to imposition of the
municipal nonproperty tax are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-13-22: CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION:
A. No city clerk, deputy city clerk, other city employee, or agent of the city shall divulge or make known to any persons, in any manner, any information
whatsoever submitted or obtained directly or indirectly pursuant to this chapter or permit any nonproperty tax return or information supplied with regard
thereto, or any copy thereof, or any paper or book so obtained, to be seen or examined by any person except as provided by law; provided that, in any
action or proceeding brought for the collection, remission, cancellation, or refund of the whole or any part of a tax imposed under this chapter, or for
enforcing the penalties prescribed for making false or fraudulent returns, any and all information contained in or provided with said returns may be
made accessible to the elected and appointed officials, officers and representatives of the city who are charged with enforcing or defending same and
all such returns, information, statements and correspondence relating thereto may be produced into evidence in any action, civil or criminal, directly
pertaining to such returns or the tax imposed on the basis of such returns.
B. City council, as provided by law or under such rules and provisions as it may prescribe, may permit, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter as to
secrecy, the commissioner of internal revenue of the United States or his delegate or the proper officer of any state imposing a tax to inspect the
nonproperty tax returns or information provided or obtained in connection therewith or may furnish to such officer or his authorized agent copies or an
abstract thereof.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a taxpayer or authorized representative, upon proper identification, from inspecting and copying his own
nonproperty tax returns and information supplied therewith. (Ord. 1320, 12-2-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
Title 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 1
NUISANCES
4-1-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
This chapter seeks to assure that public nuisances will be eliminated and abated promptly and efficiently. (Ord. 1129, 2-16-2005)
4-1-2: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE; ACTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any "responsible party(ies)" (defined as any person or persons, corporation or other legal entity, tenant and lessee using or
occupying a premises) to cause, allow, maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city of Sandpoint. Any or all parties
may be held accountable. The following are hereby declared a public nuisance:
A. Abandoned, partially dismantled, discarded, wrecked, scrapped, or junked vehicles (including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, ATVs,
snowmobiles, motorcycles, campers) or parts thereof or any other vehicle not suitable for road travel specifically any vehicle that does not have affixed
to the vehicle a current state license tag, off road vehicle registration and/or recreational vehicle license, on any property, including public streets,
roads, highways. The absence of a current license from any vehicle shall be presumptive evidence that such vehicle is abandoned, discarded,
scrapped, ruined, or junked.
B. An accumulation of refuse or animal waste, including any carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any property.
C. Broken, discarded, or heavily damaged and unused machinery, equipment, or implements, including furniture or appliances.
D. Condemned, damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, vermin infested, partially dismantled buildings/structures or buildings/structures in ill
repair, including used or salvaged building supplies.
E. Accumulation of garbage, refuse, trash items, including, but not limited to, metal, glass or tires including any recycling business that allows the
accumulation to constitute a public health and/or safety hazard.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 52/303
F. Weeds deemed noxious by the state of Idaho or the city weed superintendent growing in any lot or tract of land in the city of Sandpoint.
G. Discharge of any offensive matter, including aromas and/or fumes, in residential areas, as well as, placing, throwing, discharging or flowing from any
house or premises of any filthy, putrid, or offensive matter or liquid of any kind.
H. Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. through six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M., it shall be unlawful for any person or business to make or cause
loud or offensive noise by means of voice, musical instrument, horn, radio, loudspeaker, sound amplifying equipment, automobile, machinery or power
tools, or any other means which disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of any reasonable person of normal sensitivities residing in the area.
I. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or
abandoned building, structure or dwelling under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator or other container which has a door or lid, snaplock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first
removing said door or lid, snaplock or other locking device, or by first fastening, bolting or locking the same in such a manner that it is impossible to
open the same by the use of the hands.
J. The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be exclusive but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and
prohibited by this code. (Ord. 1129, 2-16-2005)
4-1-3: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Materials and things described in the foregoing section may be retained within a building or a fence at least six feet (6') high which prevents the view (or
smell) of these things from the street or from other public or private property. The fence must be constructed of wood, masonry, or be a chainlink fence
with sight occluding slats, or be constructed of other materials approved by the building official. However, the fence may not be constructed within the
required front setback and shall comply with all applicable fence requirements.
B. Noise emitting utility work, road maintenance and construction work, and functions at municipal parks or town squares shall be exempt from this
chapter.
C. Authorized city dumps, transfer stations, or landfills shall be exempt from this chapter.
D. Noise from snow removal equipment. (Ord. 1129, 2-16-2005)
4-1-4: STANDARDS FOR ABATEMENT:
A violation shall be considered abated when the offending personal property is either removed from the premises, enclosed inside a building, or screened
from view from both the street and adjoining property and/or odor is eliminated. For weeds, abatement will be satisfied when the weeds have been
effectively sprayed as directed by the city weed superintendent or cut to a height of less than six inches (6"). Temporary measures, such as tarps,
unenclosed or unscreened areas, are not considered abatement. (Ord. 1129, 2-16-2005)
4-1-5: METHODS OF ABATEMENT:
Whenever a violation of this chapter is found, the code enforcement officer or any other official having the responsibility for the enforcement of the city of
Sandpoint ordinances may take one or more of the following actions:
A. Order the violation corrected by the responsible party(ies) by removal and proper disposal of materials within a specified period ranging from one to
thirty (30) days. A notice of violation shall be sent via mailing or hand delivery to the responsible party(ies).
B. If the responsible party(ies) agrees to abate the violation, but is unable to remove and/or dispose of the violation in the time frame specified in the notice
of violation, they may, at the code enforcement officer's discretion, enter into a voluntary nuisance abatement agreement. To secure the voluntary
nuisance abatement agreement, the responsible party(ies) must provide compelling evidence why they seek nuisance abatement relief.
C. Request the city of Sandpoint police department to issue a uniform infraction citation for the violation of this chapter if this is the first violation within two
(2) years or alternatively issue a uniform misdemeanor citation if this a second or subsequent violation within two (2) years.
D. The city of Sandpoint may file a petition for injunctive relief against the property owner in the district court of the state of Idaho for Bonner County
seeking an order compelling compliance with this chapter.
E. Any additional civil remedy available to the city of Sandpoint. (Ord. 1129, 2-16-2005)
4-1-6: VOLUNTARY NUISANCE ABATEMENT AGREEMENT:
The code enforcement officer (see also section 1-6-4 of this code) may secure voluntary nuisance abatement by contracting with the party(ies) responsible
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 53/303
for the violation. The voluntary nuisance abatement agreement is a contract between the city and the party(ies) responsible for the violation under which
such party(ies) agrees to abate the violation within a specified time and according to specified conditions.
A. Time Limit Extension: An extension of the time limit for abatement or a modification of the required corrective action may be granted by the code
enforcement officer. Extension or modification of the voluntary nuisance abatement agreement is allowed if the party(ies) responsible for the violation
has shown due diligence and/or substantial progress in correcting the violation but unforeseen circumstances render abatement under the original
conditions unattainable.
B. Abatement By The City: The city may abate the violation using city forces or contract for abatement if the terms of the voluntary nuisance abatement
agreement are not complied with or in the case were the nuisance constitutes imminent danger to public health and/or safety.
C. Collection Of Costs: If the terms of the voluntary nuisance abatement agreement are not met, the party(ies) responsible for the violation shall be
assessed all costs and expenses of abatement including attorney fees, if incurred. If such expenses are unpaid for thirty (30) days, the fees assessed
may be forwarded to a collection agency to be collected in accordance with Idaho Code or the city may accept a note placing a lien on the property for
the cleanup costs. In addition, if the voluntary nuisance abatement agreement is not completed, all other methods of abatement as listed in this chapter
shall apply. (Ord. 1129, 2-16-2005)
4-1-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A first violation of a provision of this chapter shall be charged as an infraction. The court may assess a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for each violation. Each day that a responsible party(ies) allows a nuisance to continue on property under his or her control may be a separate violation. A
new or subsequent violation within two (2) years may be charged as a misdemeanor with the maximum penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00) and/or
six (6) months in jail. (Ord. 1129, 2-16-2005)
Chapter 2
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
GARBAGE: All ashes, cans, rubbish, and other materials, including all putrescible wastes and recognizable industrial by-products. (Ord. 611, 8-18-1977;
1983 Code)
4-2-2: DISPOSAL AND COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE:
A. Manner Of Disposal:
1. All garbage at residences within the City shall be accumulated in watertight receptacles of not more than thirty (30) gallons each and shall be
equipped with two (2) handles and with tight covers. Such containers shall be so constructed of a material in such a manner as to be strong, not
easily corrodible and rodent and insect.proof.
2. All other trash and garbage shall be accumulated in commercial retainers and receptacles of larger than thirty (30) gallons each and shall be
equipped with tight covers and so constructed as to be strong, watertight, not easily corrodible and rodent proof.
3. Trash such as boxes, papers, grass clippings, tree cuttings and odd articles shall be crushed and boxed, or bundled in lengths not to exceed five feet
(5') and not to exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight. Containers for trash need not be watertight, but should have handles. Any items in excess of these
limitations shall be considered a special haul.
B. Collection Provisions: All trash and garbage shall be collected by the City or the contract collector as herein provided. The Mayor and City Council shall
provide for the collection of garbage and refuse either by the City, or contract with the lowest or responsible bidder for such time as the Mayor and
Council may direct after advertising in the official newspaper of the Municipality for bids.
C. Disposal Site: The disposal of all garbage, trash, debris, and offal, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, shall be at a landfill designated for such
use and approved by the State. (Ord. 611, 8-18-1977; 1983 Code)
4-2-3: RATES AND CHARGES:
A. The Mayor and City Council shall fix rates and may fix supplementary rules and regulations by resolution. Three (3) copies, duly certified by the City
Clerk, of said resolution shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk for use and examination of and by the public.
B. The occupant of every dwelling and the operator of every commercial establishment within the City shall be assessed at least the minimum charge
provided in the rate schedule fixed by the Mayor and City Council for the collection and disposal of garbage, trash and other waste materials.
C. The City may levy a special assessment against the premises for failure to pay charges and delinquency charges fixed by resolution of the Mayor and
City Council, in the same manner provided by law for the foreclosure and collection of other City special assessments. (Ord. 611, 8-18-1977; 1983
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 54/303
4-2-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Burning Garbage: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn garbage or refuse within the City limits, except waste papers, boxes, brush, grass, weeds,
and cuttings from trees, lawns or gardens, which may be burned only at times designated by the Fire Chief or by permit issued by the Fire Chief.
B. Accumulation Of Garbage Or Trash: It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to accumulate trash and garbage or to violate any of the prohibitory or
mandatory regulations and other rules authorized and established by this Chapter. (Ord. 611, 8-18-1977; 1983 Code)
Chapter 3
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE A. FIRE DEPARTMENT
4-3A-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a Fire Department which shall consist of a Fire Chief and such other personnel as may be provided for by the City Council.
(Revised Code 1958)
4-3A-2: DUTIES OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of members of the Fire Department to provide for the immediate answering of all fire calls and to fight all fires in the best and most
modern available methods. Members shall see to the care and maintenance of all firefighting equipment and have such equipment in constant workable
condition at all times. (Revised Code 1958)
4-3A-3: FIRE PREVENTION:
Every possible action shall be taken by the members of the Fire Department to eliminate fire hazards and to provide for fire prevention methods and
operations within the City. (Revised Code 1958)
4-3A-4: VOLUNTEER MEMBERS:
Any volunteer members of the Fire Department shall conduct themselves in the same manner and under the same rules and regulations as regular
members of the Department. They shall respond to all fire calls according to a schedule prescribed by the Chief of the Fire Department and they shall
attend all meetings and drills called by the Chief. (Revised Code 1958)
ARTICLE B. FIREWORKS
4-3B-1: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. It is unlawful for any person to possess, sell, give away or discharge any firecrackers or fireworks of any kind in the City except those fireworks
specifically approved by provisions of the Idaho Code.
B. It is unlawful for any person to possess, sell, give away or discharge any firecrackers or fireworks of any kind in the City parks, and all City-owned or
leased property, except those fireworks specifically approved under the provisions of Section 4-3B-2 of this Article. (Ord. 1027, 7-21-1999)
4-3B-2: PUBLIC DISPLAY PERMITS:
The Fire Chief is hereby authorized and empowered to issue written permits for the public display or exhibition of fireworks within the territorial limits of the
City. Such permits must specify the time and place for the giving of such public display or exhibition and shall prescribe the conditions governing the
conduct of the same. A reasonable fee for issuance of such permit shall be established by the City Clerk. (Ord. 232, 9-23-1949; amd. 1983 Code)
4-3B-3: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department and Chief of the Fire Department of the City to take such steps as may be necessary for the
enforcement of this Article. (Ord. 232, 9-23-1949; amd. 1983 Code)
4-3B-4: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 55/303
Any person violating the provisions of this Article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) and costs of prosecution, or by
imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 232, 9-23-1949; amd. 1983 Code)
Chapter 4
NOXIOUS WEED CONTROL ACT
4-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the NOXIOUS WEED CONTROL ACT. (Ord. 1025, 7-21-1999)
4-4-2: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVE:
It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to and for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public and inhabitants
of the city to provide for the abatement of noxious weeds from both vacant and occupied properties located within the city. The objectives of this chapter
are to:
A. Define noxious weeds; legal requirements, duties and responsibilities of landowners, citizens and city; prevent the accumulation of noxious weeds as
defined in this chapter which would otherwise pose a nuisance and fire hazard; to provide the statutory and financial means of the control of noxious
weeds wherever such noxious weeds occur within the city;
B. Provide an equitable means for the abatement of any such nuisance; and
C. Enhance the safety and beauty of the city. (Ord. 1025, 7-21-1999)
4-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified either in this section, or as specified in the
international building code, the international fire code, promulgated by the International Code Council and the uniform code for the abatement of
dangerous buildings, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted by the city. Where terms are not defined, they shall
have their ordinarily accepted meanings within the context within which they are used. The most recent edition of "Webster's New International Dictionary
Of The English Language, Unabridged", shall be construed as providing ordinarily accepted meanings. Words used in the singular include the plural and
the plural the singular. Words in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. The following terms are defined in this section
as follows:
AGENCY: The city of Sandpoint, any other local government unit or entity including, but not limited to, counties and any legal subdivision thereof, drainage
districts, irrigation districts, canal companies, highway districts, fire districts, and any special taxing district.
CITY WEED SUPERINTENDENT: The city of Sandpoint city fire department chief, or any other person duly appointed by the mayor.
CONTAINMENT: The halting of the spread of a weed infestation beyond specified boundaries.
CONTROL AUTHORITY: The city weed superintendent or his duly designated agent.
ERADICATION: The complete elimination of all aboveground plant growth deemed to be a noxious weed, nuisance and/or fire hazard.
LAND: All soil or water or other growing medium.
LANDOWNER: A. The person who holds legal title to the land except that portion for which another person has the right to exclude others from possession
of that parcel;
B. A person with an interest in a parcel of land such that the person has the right to exclude others from possession of the parcel.
NOXIOUS WEED: A. Any plant having the potential to cause injury to public health, crops, livestock, land or other property; which is designated as noxious
by the director of agriculture;
B. Any plant or natural vegetative matter as such, but not limited to, hay, grass, straw, weeds or other similar combustible or flammable plant material
when the same endangers the health, safety and welfare of the public or is liable to be fired.
OWNER: The title holder or purchaser entitled to possession of any tract of real property.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, company, society, association or any other entity.
PREVENTION: A. Any action that reduces the potential for the introduction or establishment of a plant species in areas not currently invested with that
species;
B. Any action that reduces the potential for the uncontrolled growth of any "noxious weed" defined hereunder from becoming a nuisance and/or fire
hazard.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 56/303
WEED CONTROL: Any or all of the following: prevention, restoration, eradication, modified treatment within the city limits. (Ord. 1075, 12-18-2002)
4-4-4: CITY'S DUTIES:
A. City Control Authority: The city control authority shall:
1. Carry out the duties and responsibilities vested in the city under this chapter and rules and regulations prescribed by the city council; and
2. Establish and maintain a coordinated program for control of noxious weeds as defined in this chapter in the city; designate or employ a city weed
superintendent who shall be qualified to detect and treat noxious weeds as defined in this chapter; and
3. Designate one of its city council members of the liaison between the city weed superintendent and any other agency; and
4. Provide operational and educational funds for the city weed superintendent.
B. Publish Notice: A general notice for control of noxious weeds shall be published annually in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. Failure to
publish the notice for control or serve individual notices herein provided does not relieve any person from full compliance with this chapter and
regulations hereunder. In all cases said published notice shall be deemed legal and sufficient notice.
C. Serve Individual Notices: The city shall cause individual notices on a form prescribed by the city weed superintendent to be served upon the landowner
and where possible on the occupier of the land giving specific instructions when and how certain named noxious weeds as defined under this chapter
are to be controlled. The individual notice shall also contain information concerning the right to appeal pursuant to sections 4-4-6 and 4-4-9 of this
chapter.
D. City Weed Superintendent: The city weed superintendent or his duly designated agent shall:
1. Examine all land within the city for the purposes of determining whether the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations of the city weed
superintendent have been complied with; and
2. Compile data and submit reports as the city council may require; and
3. Implement enforcement action as outlined in this chapter; and
4. Consult, advise and provide direction on matters pertaining to the most effective and most practical methods of noxious weed control; and
5. Investigate or aid in the investigation and prosecution of any violation of the provisions of this Chapter.
E. Failure To Control; Remedies: Whenever the landowner of any non-Federal land on which noxious weeds as described under this Chapter are present
has neglected or failed to initiate control as required pursuant to this Chapter within ten (10) working days from receipt of an individual notice given
pursuant to this Section, the City having jurisdiction shall have proper control methods used on such land, including necessary destruction of crops,
and shall advise the landowner of the cost incurred in connection with such operation. The cost of any such control, plus a civil penalty, as provided in
Section 4-4-7 of this Chapter, shall be at the expense of the landowner. If the costs have not been paid to the City within sixty (60) days, the Control
Authority may direct that suit be brought in a court of competent jurisdiction for the unpaid charges. On private lands if unpaid for sixty (60) days or
longer, the amount of such expense may become a lien upon the property; and thereafter the lien shall be subject to collection by the City by sale of the
property in the same manner as for delinquent taxes. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to require satisfaction of the imposed
obligation by the sale of property or to bar the application of any other available remedy. (Ord. 1025, 7-21-1999)
4-4-5: LANDOWNER AND CITIZEN'S DUTIES:
A. It shall be the duty and responsibility of all landowners to control noxious weeds as defined by this Chapter on their land and property in accordance
with this Chapter and the rules and regulations herein.
B. The cost of controlling noxious weeds as defined by this Chapter shall be the obligation of the landowner or the rightful occupier of said land.
C. Noxious weed control must be for prevention, eradication or restoration. However, the City may modify and waive certain eradication requirements upon
the determination of eradication being an unreasonable short-term prevention.
D. The landowner and/or occupier shall reimburse the City for work done, plus a civil penalty, as provided in Section 4-4-7 of this Chapter, because of
failure to comply with a ten (10) day notice as outlined in this Chapter. (Ord. 1025, 7-21-1999)
4-4-6: CITY POWERS:
The City Weed Control Authority is authorized to:
A. Control Of Noxious Weeds: Have noxious weeds as defined by this Chapter controlled without cost to the landowner, notwithstanding any other
provision of this Chapter relating to payment of costs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 57/303
B. Infestation Or Nuisance:
1. Control Or Containment: To put into immediate operation the required means for control or containment of such noxious weeds when it is found that
there is an infestation or nuisance of noxious weeds beyond the ability of the landowner to control.
2. Eradication Of Noxious Weeds: Any real property which is determined, after inspection by the Weed Superintendent or his authorized representative,
to be unsafe, dangerous or hazardous because of the accumulation of noxious weeds, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be
abated by the eradication of such noxious weeds in accordance with the procedure specified in this Section.
C. Inspections: The City Weed Superintendent is hereby authorized to make such inspections and take actions as may be required to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter.
D. Inspection Of Real Property: Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Chapter or, whenever the City Weed
Superintendent or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists on real property any condition or violation of this
Chapter which makes such real property unsafe, dangerous and/or hazardous, the Weed Superintendent or his authorized representative may enter
upon such real property at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Weed Superintendent by this Section;
provided, that if such real property be occupied he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; the Weed Superintendent or their duly
authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
E. Dissatisfaction With Amount Of Charge: If any person shall be dissatisfied with the amount of any charge made against it by a city control authority for
control work or for the purchase of materials or the use of equipment he/she may within thirty (30) days after being advised of the amount of the charge
file a protest with the city weed superintendent.
F. Dissatisfaction With Control Measures: If any person shall be dissatisfied with the control measures used or the manner in which control is conducted
upon his property, he may within thirty (30) days file a protest with the city weed superintendent. (Ord. 1025, 7-21-1999)
G. Serving Notice: Any person served with an individual notice may within two (2) working days of receipt of the notice appeal to the city mayor. A hearing
shall be set by the mayor within five (5) working days after receipt of the notice of appeal. Notice of the hearing shall be sent by the mayor to the
appellant. (Ord. 1274, 7-18-2012)
H. Board Of Appeals: In order to provide for reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this chapter and to hear appeals provided for hereunder, there
may be impaneled by the mayor, upon the request of an appellant, a board of appeals consisting of three (3) members who are qualified by experience
and training to pass upon matters pertaining to noxious weeds as defined under this chapter and their eradication. The weed superintendent shall be
an ex officio member of and shall act as secretary to the board. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the mayor and shall hold office at the
mayor's pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the
appellant with a duplicate copy to the weed superintendent. Appeals to the board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Copies of all rules or regulations adopted by the board shall be delivered to the fire chief and city weed superintendent who shall make them freely
available to the public.
I. Findings/Conclusions: Appeals of the board of review shall be brought before the city council. The city council's findings/conclusions and order shall be
final and binding on all parties. (Ord. 1025, 7-21-1999)
4-4-7: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES:
A. Any person knowing of the existence of any noxious weeds on lands owned or controlled by him who fails to control such weeds in accordance with this
chapter, or who prevents or threatens to prevent entry upon land as provided in this chapter, or who interferes with the carrying out of the provisions of
this chapter, or who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or up to one year in jail, or both such fine and imprisonment for each violation.
B. The director of agriculture, or the city weed superintendent, or the city fire chief may bring an action to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the
penalty provided for under this section.
C. 1. In addition to subsection A of this section, any person, firm, or corporation who owns or occupies any lot, tract, or parcel of land and fails to abate
within the time period required by the various sections of this code, after service of notice, shall be liable for a civil penalty in the amount of one
hundred dollars ($100.00).
2. If abatement of the same type of nuisance is required by the city a second time within the same season or calendar year as applicable, the owner or
occupant shall be liable for a civil penalty in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00).
3. If abatement is required by the city a third time within the same season or calendar year as applicable, the owner or occupant shall be liable for a
civil penalty in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 1025, 7-21-1999)
4-4-8: NOTICES AND ORDERS OF WEED SUPERINTENDENT:
A. Commencement Of Proceedings: Whenever the weed superintendent or his representative has inspected or caused to be inspected any real property
and has found and determined that such real property has growing on it noxious weeds, he shall commence proceedings to cause eradication of the
same.
B. Notice And Order: The weed superintendent shall issue a notice and order directed to the owner of the real property. The notice and order shall contain:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 58/303
1. The street address and/or a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the noxious weeds are located.
2. A statement that the weed superintendent has found the real property to have located upon it noxious weeds.
3. A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the weed superintendent. In the event the weed superintendent has determined that
the noxious weeds must be eradicated, the order shall require that the work physically commence within such time (not to exceed 10 working days
from the date of the order), and completed within such time as the weed superintendent shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances.
4. Statements advising that, if any required eradication work is not commenced within the time specified, the weed superintendent will proceed to
cause the work to be done and charge the cost, plus a civil penalty, as provided in section 4-4-7 of this chapter, thereof against the property or its
owner. (Ord. 1025, 7-21-1999)
5. Statements advising: a) that any person having any recorded title or legal interest in the real property may appeal from the notice and order of the
weed superintendent to the board of appeals, provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this section and filed with the weed
superintendent within two (2) working days from the date of service of such notice and order; and b) that any person having any recorded title or
legal interest in the real property may appeal from the notice of abatement and eradication cost by the weed superintendent to the board of appeals,
provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this section and filed with the weed superintendent within thirty (30) days from the date of
service of such notice and order; and c) that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an administrative hearing and determination of the
matter. (Ord. 1274, 7-18-2012)
C. Service Of Notice And Order: The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the recorded owner.
D. Method Of Service: Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice
and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person at his address as it appears on the last assessment role of
the county, or as known to the weed superintendent. If no address of any such person so appears, or is known to the weed superintendent, then a copy
of the notice and order shall be so mailed, addressed to such person, at the address of the real property involved in the proceedings. The failure of any
person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section seven (7) days after date of mailing.
E. Proof Of Service: Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury
executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time, date, and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt
card returned in acknowledgment of receipt of certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the weed superintendent.
(Ord. 1025, 7-21-1999)
4-4-9: APPEAL:
The procedures for appeal shall be analogous to those of section 4-4-6 of this chapter, as the same may be amended. (Ord. 1025, 7-21-1999)
4-4-10: PROCEDURE FOR CONDUCT OF HEARING APPEALS:
The procedures for appeal shall be analogous to those of section 4-4-6 of this chapter, as the same may be amended. (Ord. 1025, 7-21-1999)
4-4-11: ENFORCEMENT OF THE ORDER OF THE WEED SUPERINTENDENT OR THE BOARD OF APPEALS:
A. General Provisions: After any order of the weed superintendent or the board of appeals made pursuant to this chapter has become final, no person to
whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order. Any such person who fails to comply with such order is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
B. Failure To Obey Order: In the event, after any order of the weed superintendent or board of appeals made pursuant to this chapter has become final,
the person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the weed superintendent may: 1) cause such person to be
prosecuted under subsection A of this section; or 2) institute any appropriate action to abate such real property as a public nuisance.
C. Failure To Commence Work: Whenever the required eradication work is not commenced within ten (10) days after any final notice and order issued
under this Chapter becomes effective, the Weed Superintendent may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the noxious weeds to be
eradicated. Any such eradication work shall be accomplished and the cost, along with civil penalty, as provided in Section 4-4-7 of this Chapter, thereof
paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 1025, 7-21-1999)
4-4-12: PERFORMANCE OF WORK OF ERADICATION:
A. Procedure: When any work of eradication is to be done pursuant to this Chapter, the Weed Superintendent shall accomplish this work by use of City
personnel or by private contractor under the direction of the Weed Superintendent.
B. Cost: The cost of such eradication work, plus a civil penalty, as provided in Section 4-4-7 of this Chapter, may either be made a special assessment
against the property involved, or may be collected, along with costs and reasonable attorney fees, in a civil action. (Ord. 1025, 7-21-1999)
4-4-13: RECOVERY OF COSTS OF ERADICATION:
The Weed Superintendent shall, upon the completion of the work of eradication, file with the Clerk of the City a report specifying the work done, the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 59/303
itemized and total cost of the work, a description of the real property upon which the noxious weeds were located, and the name and address of the
person entitled to notice. The Clerk shall confirm the account and shall direct that the same be collected in any of the following ways:
A. Recovery Of Costs By Special Assessment:
1. The Council may cause the assessment to be recorded on the County assessment role. Thereafter such assessment shall constitute a special
assessment against and a lien upon the real property.
2. Immediately upon it being placed on the assessment role, the assessment shall be deemed to be complete, the amount assessed shall be payable,
and the assessment shall be a lien against the real property. The lien shall be subordinate to all existing special assessment liens previously
imposed upon the same property, and shall be paramount to all other liens except for State, County and property taxes upon which it shall be upon a
parity. The lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest due and payable thereon are paid.
3. All such assessments remaining unpaid after thirty (30) days from the date of recording on the assessment roles shall become delinquent and shall
bear interest at the rate of judgments in the State.
4. A certified copy of the assessment shall be filed with the County Auditor as required by law. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the
same time in the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and procedure and sale in case
of delinquency as provided for ordinary property taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of property taxes shall be
applicable to such assessment.
B. Recovery Of Costs By Civil Action:
1. The charge may be a personal obligation of the property owner, who shall be liable and responsible for payment of the same as a civil penalty, and
for payment of all fees, costs and attorney fees incurred in the collection of such civil penalty. The City shall be entitled to recover civil judgment from
a court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the civil penalty and all costs and fees incurred by such civil action. Upon entry of judgment as
provided to any judgment holder under the provisions of Idaho law.
2. The City Council may direct the City Weed Superintendent to turn over the claim to a collection agency for collection, with the same powers as in
subsection B1 of this Section. (Ord. 1025, 7-21-1999)
4-4-14: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
Any and all ordinances of the City or portions thereof, found to be in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter are hereby repealed. (Ord. 1025, 7-21-
1999)
Chapter 5
RIFLE RANGES
4-5-1: CITY PROPERTY DESIGNATED FOR USE:
A parcel of real property belonging to and being the property of the City, and being hereinafter more particularly described, is hereby designated and
authorized for use as a gun shooting and firing range. The use of said property shall be so authorized, restricted and controlled for persons using said
property for the firing and shooting of any type of rifle, pistol, any firearm or projectile emitting pneumatic device.
Said property so designated as a gun firing and shooting range is more particularly described as follows: The part and portion of the North half of the
Southeast quarter of the Southwest quarter of Section 7, Township 57 North, Range 2 West, Boise Meridian, Bonner County, Idaho, and the North half of
the South half of the Southeast quarter of the Southwest quarter of Section 7, Township 57 North, Range 2 West, Boise Meridian, Bonner County, Idaho
developed as and marked, designated and signed as a rifle, pistol and firearm firing and shooting range. (Ord. 680, 9-20-1979; 1983 Code)
4-5-2: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No such use of the abovedescribed property shall be held before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. nor later than one hour before sunset. (Ord. 680, 9-20-1979;
1983 Code)
4-5-3: PROHIBITION AGAINST INTOXICATING BEVERAGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume beer or any other intoxicating beverage or to have in his possession any open bottle, can or other
container containing such beer or other intoxicating beverage while in or at said property above described or at any City-owned property immediately
adjacent to it, more particularly described as follows: Government lots 3 and 4, and the east half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 7 Township 57 North
Range 2 West Boise Meridian, Bonner County, Idaho. (Ord. 845, 7-20-1987)
4-5-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating the use of said property as above described or violating the permitted hours for said use shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. (Ord. 680, 9-20-1979; 1983 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 60/303
Chapter 6
PRODUCTS CONTAINING PHOSPHORUS
4-6-1: PURPOSE:
It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to and for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and
inhabitants of the City to ban, within the City limits, the commercial sale of household cleaning products containing more than a trace level of phosphorus.
(Ord. 881, 3-22-1989)
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following mean:
CITY: The City of Sandpoint, Bonner County, Idaho, or its authorized or designated agent, representative, or deputy thereto.
HOUSEHOLD CLEANING PRODUCT: Any domestic or commercial cleaning product, including, but not limited to soaps, detergents, laundry bleaches and
laundry additives used for domestic or commercial cleaning purposes, including, but not limited to, the cleaning of fabrics, dishes, food utensils and
household and commercial premises. Household cleaning product does not mean foods, drugs, cosmetics, or personal care items such as toothpaste,
shampoo or hand soap.
MAY: Is permissive (see definition of "Shall").
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
PHOSPHORUS: Elemental phosphorus.
SHALL: Is mandatory (see definition of "May").
TRACE QUANTITY: An incidental amount of phosphorus which is not part of the household cleaning product formulation and is present only as a
consequence of manufacturing and does not exceed five-tenths percent (0.5%) of the content of the product by weight expressed as elemental
phosphorus. (Ord. 881, 3-22-1989)
4-6-3: COMMERCIAL SALE PROHIBITED:
No household cleaning product which contains more than a trace quantity of phosphorus shall be sold, offered, distributed or exposed for commercial sale
within the City limits. (Ord. 881, 3-22-1989)
4-6-4: LABELING REQUIRED:
All household cleaning products sold within the City limits shall have affixed thereto labeling which clearly indicates the percent of phosphorus contained in
the product to the nearest one-tenth of one percent (0.1%) accuracy. Household cleaning products which contain only a trace quantity of phosphorus may
be labeled "contains no phosphorus", "contains no phosphates", or similar labeling which makes a clear statement that no prohibitive quantity of
phosphorus is present in the product. (Ord. 881, 3-22-1989)
4-6-5: EXEMPTIONS:
The following products are specifically exempt from the provisions of this Chapter:
A. Existing stocks of household cleaning products; provided however, that such stocks shall be so exempt for a period of six (6) months after the effective
date of this Chapter;
B. Automatic dishwasher detergent containing eight and seven-tenths percent (8.7%) or less phosphorus by weight expressed as elemental phosphorus;
and,
C. Those products used for cleaning medical or surgical equipment or supplies in licensed acute care or long term health care medical facilities. (Ord. 881,
3-22-1989)
4-6-6: ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this Chapter shall be enforced by the City's Police Department who shall be assisted by the City's Fire Department. (Ord. 881, 3-22-
1989)
4-6-7: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to the general penalty of Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 881, 3-22-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 61/303
1989)
Chapter 7
WATERWAY ACTIVITIES
4-7-1: PURPOSE:
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the governing body of the city, to promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry, to
enhance the use and enjoyment of the waters within the city limits of the city and to ensure water safety by aiding and assisting any agency with
jurisdiction in the regulation of these waterways. (Ord. 892, 6-18-1990)
4-7-2: ADOPTION OF IDAHO SAFE BOATING ACT:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules, regulations, and penalties for the use of all waterways within the city limits of the city, that
certain code, identified as the "Idaho safe boating act", more particularly Idaho Code chapter 70, title 67 and as the same may hereafter be amended by
the Idaho legislature. (Ord. 892, 6-18-1990)
4-7-3: ALLOWED ACTIVITIES:
Water activities on waterways within the city limits of the city shall be limited to swimming and/or boating. "Boating" as an allowed activity under this
chapter is defined as an operator or an operator and one or more passengers occupying a vessel as a means of noncommercial transportation or one
operator and at least one observer operating a vessel and towing a person on water skis, aquaplane or similar contrivance which is intended to remain on
the surface of the water. (Ord. 892, 6-18-1990)
4-7-4: RESTRICTED AREAS:
Allowed activities shall be restricted to specific areas which have been clearly marked in accordance with, and as authorized by the laws of this state,
county, or city. It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or operate a vessel in any area that is posted by sign, buoys or other distinguishing device
including, but not limited to, "swimming area, no boating allowed", "boating area, no swimming allowed", or "no swimming". (Ord. 1023, 3-17-1999)
4-7-5: REGATTAS, RACES, MARINE EVENTS, TOURNAMENTS AND EXHIBITIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1115, 7-21-2004)
4-7-6: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
Jumping or diving from any bridge, railroad trestle or any other elevated structure or device is prohibited. (Ord. 892, 6-18-1990)
4-7-7: PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction, not a criminal misdemeanor, and, upon an admission of violation or upon a finding of violation
following trial, penalties shall be paid in the amounts established by resolution adopted by the city council. A person charged with a violation of this chapter
may be so charged by use of a uniform citation or formal complaint. No person charged with violation of this chapter shall be subject to jail sentence nor
entitled to a jury trial upon the alleged violation. Failure to appear at trial or other court proceeding shall constitute a misdemeanor pursuant to Idaho Code.
(Ord. 892, 6-18-1990)
Chapter 8
AIR QUALITY
4-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
AIR POLLUTION: The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of any contaminant or combinations thereof in such quantity or of such nature and duration
and under such conditions as would be injurious to human health or welfare, to animal or plant life, or to property, or to interfere unreasonably with the
enjoyment of life or property.
BUILDING: Any structure, dwelling, office, industrial plant, garage, or barn, whether publicly or privately owned or any other structure as defined by the
building code as adopted by title 8, chapter 1 of this code.
BURN DOWN: That period of time following an air pollution alert required for the cessation of combustion within any solid fuel heating appliance or any
outdoor fires or burning or incineration included within this chapter.
CLEAN BURNING APPLIANCE: A solid fuel heating appliance that is EPA certified and has been placed on the list of approved clean burning appliances
maintained by the city building inspector.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 62/303
ECONOMIC HARDSHIP: Fifty percent (50%) or less of Sandpoint's median income as established by the U.S. department of housing and urban
development.
OPEN BURNING: The combustion of any material not contained in a heating appliance or incinerator.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Gasborne particles resulting from incomplete combustion, consisting predominately, but not exclusively, of carbon and other
combustible matter.
REFUSE: All solid wastes, garbage and rubbish, including, but not limited to, cardboard, plastic, rubber, styrofoam, petroleum products, foodstuff,
Christmas trees, yard debris or chemically treated wood.
REFUSE INCINERATOR: Any device designed or operated to reduce the volume of refuse. Natural gas fired pathological incinerators are excluded.
SOLE SOURCE: One or more solid fuel heating devices which constitute the only source of heat in a building for the purpose of space heating. No solid
fuel heating device(s) shall be the sole source of heat if the building is equipped with a permanently installed furnace or heating system designed to heat
the building that is connected or unconnected from its energy source, utilizing oil, natural gas, electricity or propane.
SOLID FUEL: Nonliquid combustible material including wood, coal, pressed logs, pellet fuel, but excluding items defined herein as "refuse".
SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCE: An enclosed device designed for solid fuel combustion that is EPA certified. Explicitly excluded are furnaces, boilers,
cook stoves, and open fireplaces.
WORKING DAY: Monday through Friday, excluding holidays recognized by the city. (Ord. 965, 2-21-1995; amd. Ord. 1237, 7-21-2010; Ord. 1274, 7-18-
2012)
4-8-2: AIR QUALITY DESIGNATIONS AND ADVISORY ALERT CRITERIA:
A. The quality of Sandpoint's air shall be determined by monitoring pollutant levels with equipment and methods approved by the Idaho department of
environmental quality.
B. The quality of Sandpoint's air shall be designated according to the following table:
Good 0 - 50
Moderate 51 - 100
Unhealthy for sensitive groups 101 - 150
Unhealthy 151 - 200
Very unhealthy 201 - 300
Hazardous 301 - 500
Note:
1. An air quality index is applicable to all pollutants and is the EPA nationally recognized pollutant reporting system.
(Ord. 1237, 7-21-2010)
C. In order to prevent the existence of air quality that is unhealthy for sensitive groups and a potential exceedance of national ambient air quality standard
for particulate matter, a "yellow" air pollution "advisory" will be declared whenever:
1. The Idaho department of environmental quality ("DEQ") measures or forecasts levels of particulate matter concentrations exceeding seventy five
percent (75%) of the national ambient air quality standard, or
2. Forecasted air stagnation and conditions are expected to continue for at least twenty four (24) hours, or
3. When a "stage one" forecast and caution is declared by DEQ for particulate concentrations in accordance with the air pollution emergency rule
IDAPA 58.01.01.556.01. (Ord. 1258, 9-21-2011)
4-8-3: PUBLIC NOTIFICATION:
Whenever an air quality advisory is issued, local print, radio, and television news media will be notified. Announcements of the existence of an air pollution
"alert" will be made by the news media during regularly scheduled broadcasts and in all editions of the official newspaper of the city. (Ord. 1237, 7-21-
2010)
4-8-4: BURNING SOLID FUEL OR REFUSE:
Health Effect Designation Air Quality Index Value1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 63/303
A. No person shall cause or allow refuse or coal to be burned in a solid fuel heating appliance designed for wood fuel at any time, regardless of advisory
condition. (Ord. 1237, 7-21-2010)
B. No person shall cause or allow a refuse incinerator to be operated contrary to design specifications and manufacturers' instructions. (Ord. 965, 2-21-
1995)
4-8-5: AIR QUALITY ADVISORY; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS:
At the onset and during the pendency of a declared air quality "advisory", the following additional restrictions shall apply:
A. No person shall cause or allow, after a three (3) hour "burn down" period, the operation of a solid fuel heating appliance or open fireplace, unless an
exemption has been granted by the building department.
B. No person shall cause or allow the operation of a solid waste incinerator.
C. No person shall cause or allow open burning of refuse. (Ord. 1237, 7-21-2010)
4-8-6: AIR QUALITY ALERT EXEMPTIONS:
A. The building department shall grant exemptions from this chapter if it is directed by the building inspector or his designated representative that:
1. A solid fuel heating appliance is the sole source of heat for the building in which it is situated; or
2. Using alternative heating would cause an unreasonable economic hardship; or
3. The solid fuel heating appliance is listed by the building department as a clean burning appliance.
B. Any person denied an exemption under this chapter shall be provided, at the option of the applicant for exemption, a hearing before the city council as
provided for in this chapter.
C. Any building constructed after the effective date of this chapter shall not be eligible for an exemption under subsections A1 and A2 of this section. (Ord.
965, 2-21-1995)
4-8-7: SOLID FUEL HEATING APPLIANCE PERMITS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to install a solid fuel heating appliance in any new or existing structure until first procuring from the building
department a solid fuel heating appliance permit. Permit fees shall be set by resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. 965, 2-21-1995)
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to advertise for sale, offer to sell, or sell, for installation in any new or existing building, or to install or allow
to be installed in any new or existing building, a solid fuel heating appliance which has not been certified as clean burning by the United States
environmental protection agency (EPA). (Ord. 1237, 7-21-2010)
4-8-8: DENIAL OF PERMIT OR EXEMPTION:
Upon showing of sufficient cause to believe that grounds exist for denial of a permit, or exemption of the rules and regulations of the building department,
as provided for in this chapter, the building inspector or his designated representative may deny said permit or exemption by:
A. Notifying the applicant by certified mail, personal service, or substituted service of the grounds for said denial and of the applicant's opportunity to
appeal said denial to the city council.
B. Failure of a person to actually receive a notice sent or served shall not invalidate the denial.
C. The applicant, upon receiving notice of the denial, may appeal said denial by making application for a hearing before the city council within ten (10)
working days of receipt of above notice. (Ord. 965, 2-21-1995)
4-8-9: DENIAL HEARING AND DETERMINATION BY THE CITY COUNCIL:
The hearing shall be before the city council. At such hearing the applicant may present evidence, call witnesses and be represented by counsel. Within ten
(10) working days after the date of the hearing, the city council shall either:
A. Uphold the denial by the building inspector or his designated representative; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 64/303
B. Allow the issuance of the permit or exemption with modifications or conditions as the council may impose, such modifications or conditions to be
reasonably related to the use of the permit or exemption. (Ord. 965, 2-21-1995)
4-8-10: APPEAL OF DECISION OF THE BOARD:
The decision of the city council on a denial shall be final and conclusive. Appeal from a decision of the council must be made to the district court for
Bonner County. (Ord. 965, 2-21-1995)
4-8-11: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR CLEAN BURNING APPLIANCES:
A. Appliances shall meet the requirements of the code of federal regulations title 40, part 60, subpart AAA, "standards of performance for new residential
wood heaters". (Ord. 1237, 7-21-2010)
B. The building department shall maintain a list of appliances certified to be clean burning. (Ord. 965, 2-21-1995)
4-8-12: REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCES AND CODE SECTIONS IN CONFLICT:
Any and all prior and existing ordinances and code sections in conflict herewith be and are hereby repealed. (Ord. 965, 2-21-1995)
4-8-13: SEVERABILITY:
If any portion of this chapter is held invalid, it is the intent of the city that such part shall be deemed severable and the invalidity shall not affect the
remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 965, 2-21-1995)
4-8-14: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A first violation of a provision of this chapter shall be charged as an infraction. The court may assess a fine pursuant to Idaho Code section 18-113A. Each
day that a responsible party(ies) allows burning or incineration to continue on property under his or her control may be a separate violation. A new or
subsequent violation within two (2) years may be charged as a misdemeanor with penalties pursuant to Idaho Code section 18-113. (Ord. 1237, 7-21-
2010)
Title 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
5-1-1: POLICE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; PERSONNEL:
There is hereby created a Police Department in the City. Said Department shall consist of a Chief of Police and such other personnel as shall be
authorized by the Mayor and City Council. (Ord. 240, 9-23-1949; 1983 Code)
5-1-2: POLICE OFFICERS' TRAINING REQUIREMENTS:
The City Council declares that it adheres to the standards for recruitment and training established pursuant to chapter 51, title 19 Idaho Code. (Ord. 926,
4-19-1993)
5-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS:
The police of the City shall have the power to arrest all offenders against the laws of the State or of the City, by day or by night, in the same manner as
other police officers of the State. They shall likewise be vested with power to serve any other process issued under authority of the ordinances of the City
and in accordance with Idaho Code section 50-209. (Ord. 240, 9-23-1949; 1983 Code)
Chapter 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
5-2-1: ADVERTISEMENTS AND BILLPOSTING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 65/303
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint, tack or fasten to any telephone, electric light, telegraph poles or traffic control signs in this city any
advertisement, notice or sign.
B. Any person who shall stick, fasten, paste, or put upon any house, fence, wall, walk or other public or private place in this city any printed, written,
painted or other advertisement, bill, notice, sign or poster, or cause the same to be done without having first obtained permission of the owner of such
fence, house, wall or other structure, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 174, 6-10-1940; amd. Ord. 261, 6-5-1950; 1983 Code; Ord. 996,
12-18-1996)
5-2-2: LITTERING PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or throw upon the public thoroughfares any handbills, posters, advertisements or papers. Nothing herein shall
be construed to authorize any person to obstruct the public thoroughfares or create any nuisance therein. These provisions shall not interfere or prevent
the posting of notices required by law to be posted. (1958 Code)
5-2-3: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES IN CITY PARKS:
A. Glass Containers: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any glass beverage container in any city park.
B. Animals:
1. Unless specifically authorized, it shall be unlawful for a person to feed, or allow to be fed, any birds, waterfowl or fowl, including, but not limited to,
ducks, geese, swans, seagulls, pelicans, pigeons, doves, and other birds in any city park.
2. Unless permitted, no horses are allowed in city parks.
C. Activities: Unless specifically authorized, the following activities are prohibited in any city park:
1. Golf.
2. Snowmobiling.
D. Disturbing The Peace: The following behaviors are prohibited in city parks:
1. Allowing unauthorized amplified music to disturb the peace of any park user.
2. Abusive language disturbing the peace of any park user.
E. Penalty: Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be deemed to be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for any one offense. (Ord. 1319, 10-21-2015)
5-2-4: OVERNIGHT CAMPING:
A. Any overnight camping on or upon any city street or upon any property owned by the city, or upon any property in which the city owns or holds a right of
way is hereby prohibited and unlawful1.
B. No person shall, as above described, camp, reside or occupy on any such property or location overnight in any manner or fashion, whether within a
closed vehicle, van, camper, trailer or within a tent or other temporary movable structure or contrivance or in any other manner.
C. A first violation of this section is an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). A second or subsequent violation shall
be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any one offense, or by imprisonment in the county jail not
exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every day there is a violation shall constitute a separate violation/offense. (Ord. 1183,
10-17-2007)
5-2-5: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES:
It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric fence within the city. It is further unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any fence in
whole or part out of barbed wire or to use barbed wire as a guard to any parking lot or parcel of land within the city; provided, however, that fences of an
elevation of not less than six feet (6') may have barbed wire strands affixed to the top thereof with the prior written approval of the building inspector. (1958
Code)
5-2-6: NOISE:
5-2-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 66/303
"A" SCALE: The measurement of sound pressure approximating the auditory sensitivity of the human ear as measured with a sound level meter using the
"A" weighting network over a specified period of time (minutes, hours) at a prescribed distance. The unit of measurement is the decibel (dBA).
AMBIENT SOUND (Background): The sound level of the all encompassing sound associated with a given environment, usually a composite of sound from
many sources and excluding the specific sound under investigation.
CONSTRUCTION: Any or all activity, necessary or incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipment of buildings, public or
private highways, roads, premises, parks, utility lines or other property, including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling.
DECIBEL: A logarithmic (dimensionless) measure used in describing the amplitude of sound.
EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate
attention.
NOISE: Any unwanted sound.
NOISE DISTURBANCE: Any sound or vibration which:
A. May disturb or annoy reasonable persons of normal sensitivities; or
B. Causes or tends to cause, an adverse effect on the public health and welfare; or
C. Endangers or injures people; or
D. Endangers or injures personal or real property.
NOISE SENSITIVE ZONE: Any area designated to be exceptionally sensitive to noise disturbance. The following areas are considered to be noise
sensitive:
A. School, institution of learning while classes are in session;
B. Church;
C. Court;
D. Hospital, medical office; and
E. Nursing home or home for the aged.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE SOUND: Any sound for which the information content is unambiguously communicated to the listener, such as, but not limited to,
understandable speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal, repetitive bass sounds, or comprehension of musical rhythms, without the
aid of any listening device.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any real property, or structures thereon, which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument that is sensitive to minute pressure fluctuations. The output meter displays sound pressure levels.
SOUND REPRODUCTION DEVICE: Any device, instrument, mechanism, equipment or apparatus for the amplification of any sounds from any radio,
phonograph, stereo, electronic media player, musical instrument, television, loudspeaker or other sound making or sound producing device or any device
or apparatus for the reproduction or amplification of the human voice or other sound. (Ord. 1333, 9-7-2016)
5-2-6-2: UNAMPLIFIED NOISE:
No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any noise disturbance. Unamplified, noncommercial public speaking and public
assembly activities conducted at conversational voice levels on any public property or public right of way shall be exempt from the operation of this section
5-2-6, if such sound is not plainly audible beyond one hundred feet (100') or does not infringe on the legitimate rights of others. (Ord. 1333, 9-7-2016)
5-2-6-3: SOUND REPRODUCTION DEVICES:
A. No person shall use or operate or permit to be used or operated any sound reproduction device to create a noise disturbance or with louder volume
than is necessary for convenient hearing by the person or persons who are voluntary listeners thereto. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this section if sound emanating from such machine or device is:
1. Plainly audible beyond the property boundary of the premises upon which it is being used between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six thirty
o'clock (6:30) A.M. the following day.
2. Plainly audible at a distance of one hundred feet (100') or more beyond the property boundary of the premises upon which it is being used between
the hours of six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
3. Plainly audible at a distance of one hundred feet (100') or more from such machine or device if operated from within a motor vehicle on a public
street.
4. Plainly audible at a distance of one hundred feet (100') or more from such machine or device when operated in a public park or other public place.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 67/303
5. Sound exceeding sixty (60) dBA measured from the complainant's property boundary or at a distance of one hundred feet (100') or more from the
sound source or at a distance of one hundred feet (100') or more on a public right of way or on public property, as appropriate, is prima facie
evidence of a violation.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
1. The production of music in connection with any parade, or event authorized under any provision of law.
2. Any musical performance upon a public place where a permit has been obtained from the city for such purpose.
3. The use of amplifiers or other sound producing instruments or equipment in connection with any permitted athletic competition or recreational event
held on athletic fields, stadiums or public places in the city.
4. Power tools and landscaping equipment. The operation of a noise producing lawn mower, lawn edger, weed trimmer, blower, chipper, chain saw,
power tool or other similar noise producing devices which are used out of doors between six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
(Ord. 1337, 11-16-2016)
5-2-6-4: LOUDSPEAKERS AND PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEMS:
A. No person shall use or operate:
1. Any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance or is plainly audible across a
real property boundary in a residential zone or in a noise sensitive zone, or is plainly audible at a distance of one hundred feet (100') or more on a
public right of way or on public property.
2. Sound exceeding sixty (60) dBA measured from the complainant's property boundary or at a distance of one hundred feet (100') or more on a public
right of way or on public property, as appropriate, is prima facie evidence of a violation.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
1. The use of loudspeakers and public address systems in connection with any permitted athletic competition or recreational event held on athletic
fields, stadiums or public places in the city. (Ord. 1333, 9-7-2016)
5-2-6-5: ENTERTAINMENT VENUES IN COMMERCIAL ZONES:
Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier or similar device
which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound:
A. Between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight when sound exceeds ninety five (95) dBA measured from the
complainant's property boundary is prima facie evidence of a violation.
B. Between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. when sound exceeds eighty five (85) dBA measured from the
complainant's property boundary is prima facie evidence of a violation.
C. Between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. when sound exceeds sixty five (65) dBA measured from the complainant's
property boundary is prima facie evidence of a violation. (Ord. 1333, 9-7-2016)
5-2-6-6: USE OF SIGNALING DEVICES:
No person shall cause the sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or other vehicle, except as a danger warning.
(Ord. 1333, 9-7-2016)
5-2-6-7: EMERGENCY SIGNAL DEVICES:
No person shall operate or use or cause to be operated or used any emergency signal device, except:
A. On an emergency vehicle when such vehicle is in the act of responding to an emergency or performing emergency work;
B. To give notice as a warning of an emergency; or
C. In order to reasonably test such device. (Ord. 1333, 9-7-2016)
5-2-6-8: CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES:
A. No person shall engage in or permit any person to be engaged in construction activities which create noise disturbance at the property limits of the
construction site between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. of one day and six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. of the following day on any day of the week,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 68/303
except as is permitted in subsections B, C and D of this section.
B. Following the receipt of a written application for a variance from the requirements of subsection A of this section, the public works director may, within a
reasonable time, grant a variance authorizing such construction activities upon the applicant's demonstration of hardship and/or practical difficulty in
meeting said requirements or upon a determination that the public interest will be served by the granting of the requested variance. The public works
director shall set any stipulations deemed necessary in the interest of the public health, safety and/or welfare at the time of granting such a variance.
C. In the case of an emergency, construction activities directly connected with the abatement of such emergency may be undertaken without obtaining a
variance, for a period not to exceed seventy two (72) hours from the commencement of such activities, during which time application for a variance
hereunder shall be made. In such an emergency, construction activities shall not continue after the seventy two (72) hour period unless prior to the
expiration of that period written approval is issued by the public works director to continue such.
D. The removal of snow from parking lots, public property and public rights of way is allowed. (Ord. 1337, 11-16-2016)
5-2-6-9: LOADING AND UNLOADING OF BOXES AND CONTAINERS:
No person shall load, unload, or handle boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. the following day, or in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across real property boundary in a
residential zone or in a noise sensitive zone. (Ord. 1337, 11-16-2016)
5-2-6-10: ANIMALS:
Owning, possessing, or harboring any animal which howls, barks, meows, squawks, or makes other sounds continuously for over fifteen (15) minutes or
intermittently for over thirty (30) minutes and creates a noise disturbance across a real property boundary in a residential zone or in a noise sensitive zone
is a violation of this code. (Ord. 1333, 9-7-2016)
5-2-6-11: SPECIAL VARIANCE:
City council shall have the authority, consistent with this section, to grant a special variance as follows:
A. Any person seeking a special variance shall file an application with the city clerk. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that
bringing the source of sound or activity for which the special variance is sought into compliance with this section 5-2-6 would constitute an
unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community or on other persons.
B. City council shall hold a hearing to determine whether to grant or deny the application and if granted what conditions shall apply.
C. City council shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the community, and other persons of not granting the variance against the adverse impact on
the health and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on the property affected and any other adverse impacts of granting the variance. (Ord.
1333, 9-7-2016)
5-2-6-12: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
Industrial zoned districts are exempt from the provisions of this section 5-2-6. (Ord. 1337, 11-16-2016)
5-2-6-13: PENALTIES FOR OFFENSES:
Any person found to be in violation of this section 5-2-6 shall be deemed to be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for the first offense. The second offense shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). The third and any
subsequent violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor, as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1337, 11-16-2016)
5-2-7: AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION OR HANDBILLING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for a person to solicit or distribute handbills in an aggressive manner. Any person found guilty of violating this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
A. Definitions:
AGGRESSIVE MANNER: To:
1. Intentionally make any nonconsensual physical contact with another person in the course of a solicitation or handbill distribution; or
2. Approach or follow the person being contacted in a manner that is intended to cause a reasonable person to be intimidated into responding
affirmatively to the solicitation or handbill distribution for fear of imminent bodily harm to oneself or another, or damage to or loss of property; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 69/303
3. Continue to solicit or distribute handbills within five feet (5') of the person being contacted after the person has given or expressed a negative
response, if continuing the solicitation or handbill distribution is intended to cause a reasonable person to be intimidated into responding
affirmatively to the contact for fear of imminent bodily harm to oneself or another, or damage to or loss of property; or
4. Intentionally obstruct the safe or free passage of the person being contacted, causing the person, including a person operating a vehicle, to
move from his or her intended path to avoid reasonably imminent nonconsensual physical contact with the person making the contact; or
5. Make any threatening statement or gesture immediately before or during the contact or after a refusal to accept the handbill or make a donation
intended to cause a reasonable person to be intimidated into responding affirmatively to the contact for fear of imminent bodily harm to oneself or
another, or damage to or loss of property.
CONTACT: To make an offer to, or to touch, an individual in order to distribute a handbill or for the purposes of solicitation.
HANDBILL DISTRIBUTION: The passing out of one or more papers or pamphlets containing writings and/or pictures.
SOLICIT OR SOLICITATION: To request, ask or beg, whether by words, bodily gestures, signs, or other means, for an immediate donation of money
or other thing of value, including the purchase of an item or service for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable
person would understand that the purchase is a donation. (Ord. 1330, 8-10-2016)
5-2-8: OBSCENE CONDUCT:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on public property or public right of way or on private property open to public view, except in
restrooms and facilities provided for such purpose.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer or peep into, or to be found loitering around any window or aperture, within or on a building occupied as
a residence or place of lodging of another with the intent of watching or looking through said window or aperture to observe any person undressed, or
in an act of dressing or undressing, or with other lewd, lustful, lascivious and voyeuristic intent.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer or peep into, or to be found loitering around any partition or divider within or about any public restroom
or public dressing room with the intent of watching or looking through said partition or divider to observe any person in the act of dressing, undressing,
urinating or defecating or with other lewd, lustful, lascivious and voyeuristic intent.
D. The penalty for a violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
offense, or by imprisonment in jail for a period not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1183, 10-17-2007)
5-2-9: INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE BARRIER TAPE OR OTHER DESIGNATED BARRIER:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, unless otherwise authorized by a duly authorized law enforcement officer, to cross into an area around which there is
a barrier tape labeled "Police Line-Do Not Cross" or other such similarly labeled rope or fenced off areas.
B. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished as set forth by this code. (Ord. 1049, 2-22-2001)
5-2-10: DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED:
5-2-10-1: PURPOSE AND DECLARATION OF POLICY:
A. In order to ensure that all persons, regardless of sexual orientation, gender identity/expression enjoy the full benefits of citizenship and are afforded
equal opportunities for employment, housing, commercial property, and the use of public accommodations, it is necessary that appropriate legislation
be enacted.
B. It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city of Sandpoint to foster the employment of all individuals in accordance with their abilities.
C. It is the intention of this section 5-2-10 that all persons be treated fairly and equally, and it is the express intent of this section 5-2-10 to guarantee fair
and equal treatment under the law to all people of the city of Sandpoint.
D. This section 5-2-10 shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city of Sandpoint for the protection of the public welfare, prosperity, health
and peace of the city of Sandpoint, its residents and the community.
E. The prohibitions against discriminatory acts as provided for in this section 5-2-10 are intended to supplement state and federal civil rights law prohibiting
discrimination in the areas of employment, public accommodations, and housing. For complaints alleging discrimination on a basis proscribed under
state or federal law (e.g., race, color, religious creed, ancestry, age, sex, national origin, and/or disability) the complainant is advised of their right to file
their complaint with the Idaho commission on human rights and/or federal equal employment opportunity commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 70/303
F. No power or duty granted hereunder to the human relations review board is intended to exceed nor shall it be construed as exceeding those powers and
duties granted to the Idaho commission on human rights, Idaho Code 67-5901 et seq. (Ord. 1261, 12-21-2011)
5-2-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
ANY PERSON: Shall be construed to include the city and any owner/employer, lessee, proprietor, manager, agent, employee, whether one or more natural
persons, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, companies, cooperatives (including its officers and/or board of directors), boards and
commissions, engaged in or exercising control over the operation of any business, place of public resort, accommodation, housing, commercial property,
assemblage or amusement in the city of Sandpoint.
DENY: Is hereby defined to include any act which directly or indirectly, by any person or his agent or employee, that results or is intended or calculated to
result in whole or in part in any discrimination, distinction, restriction, or unequal treatment. It also includes, but is not limited to, the requiring of a person to
pay a larger sum than the uniform rates charged other persons, refusing to sell, rent or lease residential or commercial property or the refusing or
withholding from persons the admission, patronage, custom, presence, frequenting, dwelling, staying, or lodging in any place of public resort,
accommodation, assemblage, or amusement except for conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all persons, regardless of
sexual orientation, gender identity/expression.
FULL ENJOYMENT OF: Shall be construed to include, but not be limited to, the right to use, rent, lease or purchase real property, any service, commodity
or article of personal property offered or sold on, or by, any establishment to the public, and the admission of any person to accommodations, advantages,
facilities or privileges of any place of public resort, accommodation, assemblage or amusement, without acts directly or indirectly causing persons of any
particular sexual orientation, gender identity/expression to be treated as not welcome or accepted.
GENDER EXPRESSION/IDENTITY: A gender related identity, appearance, expression or behavior of an individual regardless of a person's assigned sex
at birth.
HUMAN RELATIONS REVIEW BOARD: A quasi-judicial group consisting of three (3) or more persons appointed by the mayor to process complaints and
determine if prohibited discriminatory acts have occurred in the city of Sandpoint.
PLACE OF PUBLIC RESORT, ACCOMMODATION, ASSEMBLAGE OR AMUSEMENT: Is hereby defined to include, but not to be limited to, any public
place where admission, service, occupancy or use of any property or facilities, whether conducted for the entertainment, housing or lodging of transient
guests, or for the benefit, use or accommodation of those seeking health, recreation or rest, or for the sale of goods and merchandise or for the rendering
of personal services.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION: Actual or perceived homosexuality, heterosexuality and/or bisexuality. (Ord. 1261, 12-21-2011; amd. Ord. 1284, 7-17-2013)
5-2-10-3: PROHIBITED DISCRIMINATORY ACTS:
The following acts are prohibited and constitute a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with Idaho Code 18-113. (Ord. 1261, 12-21-2011)
A. Any person who denies to any other person because of sexual orientation, gender identity/expression the right to work: 1) by refusing to hire, 2) by
discharging, 3) by barring from employment, or 4) by discriminating against such person in compensation or in other terms or conditions of
employment; or who denies to any other person because of sexual orientation, gender identity/expression, right to purchase, rent or lease residential or
commercial property or the full enjoyment of any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities or privileges of any place of public resort,
accommodation, assemblage, or amusement. (Ord. 1284, 7-17-2013)
B. Retaliation against any individual because such individual has made a charge, testified or assisted in any manner in any investigation, proceeding or
hearing under this section 5-2-10.
C. Aiding, abetting, inciting, compelling or coercing the doing of any act declared by this section 5-2-10 to be an unlawful practice, or obstructing or
preventing any person from complying with the provisions of this section 5-2-10. (Ord. 1261, 12-21-2011)
5-2-10-4: EXCEPTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision herein, nothing in this section 5-2-10 is intended to alter or abridge other rights, protection, or privileges secured under
state or federal law. This section 5-2-10 shall be construed and applied in a manner consistent with first amendment jurisprudence regarding the freedom
of speech and exercise of religion. (Ord. 1261, 12-21-2011)
5-2-10-5: ESTABLISHMENT OF HUMAN RELATIONS REVIEW BOARD:
A. Pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-210, there is hereby established a human relations review board in and for the city of Sandpoint (hereinafter referred
to as the "Sandpoint human relations review board" or the "review board").
B. The review board shall consist of a quorum of three (3) or more members. All members of the review board shall be appointed by the mayor of the city
of Sandpoint and confirmed by the city council. Members shall be residents of the city. No member of the review board shall hold any office in any
political party.
C. Members of the review board shall serve without salary but may be paid expenses incurred in the performance of their duties, as approved by city
council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 71/303
D. One of the review board's members shall be appointed by the members thereof as chairperson. The chairperson will be responsible for setting review
board meetings, coordinating with the mayor and city clerk regarding received complaints and answers, and generally ensuring that the duties of the
review board are fulfilled.
E. The review board shall have jurisdiction over prohibited discriminatory acts committed within the city of Sandpoint as it relates to sexual orientation,
gender identity/expression.
F. The review board shall be empowered to promulgate such additional procedures as it determines necessary to implement the intent of this section 5-2-
10.
G. The Sandpoint city council hereby grants to the review board, with respect to prohibited discriminatory acts as defined herein, all of the powers
necessary to the execution of its duties as set forth herein, provided that those powers shall not exceed those exercised by the Idaho commission on
human rights now or as may be granted in the future by the Idaho legislature. (Ord. 1261, 12-21-2011)
5-2-10-6: PROCEDURES:
A. Filing A Complaint:
1. Person(s) claiming to be aggrieved by a prohibited discriminatory act may make, sign, and file a verified complaint alleging violations of this section
5-2-10, which shall include the following information:
a. The name and address of the aggrieved person(s);
b. The name and address of the person(s) alleged to have committed the prohibited practice;
c. A concise statement of the facts, including pertinent dates, constituting the alleged discriminatory act;
d. If applicable, the address and a description of any property which is involved; and
e. Such other information as may be required by the review board.
2. Complaints may be filed in person or by mail at the city clerk's office. All complaints must be received by the city clerk's office within ninety (90) days
of the alleged discrimination, or the complaint will not be considered timely.
3. The city clerk shall convey each original complaint received by the city to the chairperson of the Sandpoint human relations review board within ten
(10) days of the receipt of such complaint.
B. Notification And Answer:
1. Within thirty (30) days of its receipt of a complaint, the Sandpoint human relations review board shall determine if it has jurisdiction hereunder to hear
the complaint. If the review board determines that it does not have such jurisdiction, it shall dismiss the complaint and notify the aggrieved party. If
the review board determines it has jurisdiction to hear the complaint, it shall proceed as follows:
a. Send a copy of the complaint to the person(s) charged with a prohibited discriminatory act (the "respondent"); and
b. Send a notice to the person(s) aggrieved (the "complainant"), informing them that the complaint has been received.
2. The respondent must file, with the city clerk, a written verified answer to the complaint within thirty (30) days of respondent's receipt of the complaint
from the city. The answer shall be conveyed by the city clerk to the chairperson of the review board within ten (10) days. The review board shall
within five (5) days send a copy of the answer to the complainant. (Ord. 1261, 12-21-2011)
5-2-10-7: MEDIATION:
A. After the answer has been received, the review board shall, within fifteen (15) days, invite the parties to voluntarily participate in mediation of their
dispute. The parties must respond within fifteen (15) days of being invited to mediate. The parties must accept or reject the invitation to mediation.
B. If accepted by parties, mediation shall be conducted in accordance with procedures promulgated by the review board. Parties may jointly select a
mediator. If parties cannot agree, a mediator shall be selected pursuant to procedures promulgated by the review board. The parties shall be jointly
responsible for all financial costs and expenses associated with mediation.
C. The parties shall notify the review board as to whether the mediation successfully resolved the complaint. Mediation proceedings shall otherwise be
confidential. Neither the results thereof, nor any record made in connection therewith, shall be made public unless agreed to in writing by both parties.
D. If the mediation has successfully resolved the complaint, the review board shall promptly notify the parties that it has dismissed the complaint. (Ord.
1261, 12-21-2011)
5-2-10-8: INVESTIGATION AND DETERMINATION:
If mediation is not desired or was not successful in resolving the complaint, the review board shall not dismiss the complaint but shall instead undertake
the following procedures:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 72/303
A. Investigation: The review board shall, in a timely fashion, investigate the allegations of a prohibited discriminatory act set forth in the complaint in
coordination with a local law enforcement agency. The city may, in the conduct of such investigation and upon request of the investigator, issue
subpoenas to any person charged with a prohibited discriminatory act, commanding such person to furnish information, records or other documents, as
necessary to assist in the review board's investigation.
B. Determination:
1. Finding Of No Cause: If it is determined after the review board's investigation that there is no basis for the allegations of the complaint, the review
board shall issue and serve upon the parties written notice of such determination and dismissal of the complaint.
2. Finding Of Cause: If it is determined after the review board's investigation that the respondent has engaged in or is engaging in any unlawful
discriminatory act, as defined in this section 5-2-10, the review board shall state its findings of fact, and will refer the matter to the city attorney to
pursue civil, equitable or criminal remedies. (Ord. 1261, 12-21-2011)
5-2-10-9: PENALTY:
A violation of this section 5-2-10 shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Idaho Code section 18-113. (Ord. 1261, 12-21-2011)
5-2-10-10: PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION:
There is no private right of action that is created by this section 5-2-10 or money damages available to any person based on this section 5-2-10. (Ord.
1261, 12-21-2011)
Chapter 3
FIREARMS, DEADLY WEAPONS
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
DEADLY WEAPON: A. Any firearm, whether loaded or unloaded; or
B. Any weapon which is capable of producing death or great bodily harm, including, but not restricted to, any types of daggers, brass knuckles,
switchblade knives, bowie knives, poniards, butcher knives, dirk knives and all such weapons with which dangerous cuts can be given or with which
dangerous thrusts can be inflicted, including sword canes and any kind of sharp pointed canes; or
C. Slingshots, slungshots, flippers or bludgeons; or
D. Bow and arrow, crossbow or related weapons; or
E. Any other weapons with which dangerous wounds can be inflicted.
FIREARM: Wherever the term "firearm" is used in this chapter, the term shall mean any instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shells, or bullets or other
harmful objects by the action of gunpowder exploded within it. (Ord. 1245, 9-15-2010)
5-3-2: DISCHARGE OF DEADLY WEAPONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or discharge deadly weapons of any kind or description within the city limits; provided however, that this shall not
apply to police officers in the discharge of their official duties. (Ord. 1245, 9-15-2010)
5-3-3: EXCEPTIONS; PERMITS:
The city council may, at any time, upon receipt of proper application, grant permits to shooting galleries, gun clubs and others for shooting in fixed localities
and under specified rules. Such permits shall be in writing, attested by the city clerk and conforming to such requirements as the city council shall demand,
and the permit thus issued shall be subject to revocation at any time by action of the city council. (Ord. 1245, 9-15-2010)
5-3-4: PELLET GUNS, AIR RIFLES, PAINTBALL GUNS, ETC.:
A. No person shall carry or discharge any pellet gun, BB gun, air rifle or air pistol, paintball gun of any description, by whatever name it may be known,
which weapon, by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs or any other means of propulsion is capable of discharging shots, pellets or any
other projectiles.
B. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to a licensed shooting gallery or on private grounds or premises under circumstances when such weapon
can be fired, discharged or operated in a manner such as not to endanger persons or property, and also in such manner as to prevent the projectile
from traversing any ground or space outside the limits of such gallery, grounds or residence. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 73/303
prevent the carrying of such weapons, when unloaded, to or from any range or gallery or to or from an area where the discharge of such weapons has
been permitted by law. (Ord. 1245, 9-15-2010)
5-3-5: VIOLATIONS:
Any person found guilty of violation of this section may be charged as a misdemeanor with penalties pursuant to Idaho Code section 18-113. (Ord. 1245,
9-15-2010)
Chapter 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT DOG OR CAT: Any dog or cat of an age requiring rabies vaccination as set forth in this chapter.
ANIMAL: Domestic and nondomestic mammals, fish, birds, primates, prosimians, arachnids or reptiles, not including human beings.
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY: The methods employed in keeping domestic animals in such a way as to provide adequate and species appropriate nourishment,
species appropriate stimulation, and housing levels which are comfortable, and protected so as to avoid abuse.
AT LARGE: Being on any private property without the permission of the person who owns, or has a right to possess or use the property; or unrestrained by
a leash on public property.
AT RISK DOG: Any dog that without justified provocation bites a person without causing a serious injury.
BIG GAME: Wildlife, including deer, elk, moose, bears, mountain lions and wolves.
BITE: Any breaking, bruising, or scratching of the victim's skin by the animal's teeth.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The authorized head of the city of Sandpoint police department or his or her designee who shall also serve as ex officio secretary to
the hearing board.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL OPERATION: Includes any kennel facility which meets any one or more of the following qualifications:
A. Breeding for sale of more than two (2) litters each year.
B. Offering a service for compensation in conjunction with the operation of a kennel; said service to include, without limitation:
1. Training.
2. Grooming.
3. Boarding.
4. Breeding.
C. Any kennel raising competition dogs for the purposes of compensation, racing, dog pulls or other events.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that:
A. Without justified provocation has inflicted serious injury on a person; or
B. Has been previously found to be at risk and thereafter bites or physically attacks a person without justified provocation.
DEPARTMENT: The Sandpoint Police Department, its agents, officers, City of Sandpoint animal control officers, including any other persons designated by
the City to enforce animal control ordinances.
DOG: Canis familiaris of either sex, altered or unaltered, or any member of the Canis genus if owned, kept or harbored.
HEARING BOARD: Shall consist of the Chief of Police's designated representative, a Sandpoint City Council member, and a third member to be named by
agreement of the first two (2) members of the board. If the chosen members of the Hearing Board cannot agree on a third member, the President of the
Sandpoint City Council shall appoint the third member to serve on the Hearing Board. The City Attorney shall be requested to attend for the purpose of
advising the board. Decisions of the Hearing Board shall be by majority vote.
A. The hearing shall be informal and the rules of evidence shall not apply. The owner may be represented by counsel, present oral and written
evidence and may cross examine witnesses.
B. The Hearing Board shall issue a decision within five (5) days after the close of the hearing and shall notify the owner in writing of the decision
within five (5) days after rendering its decision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 74/303
C. After considering all the relevant evidence, the Hearing Board may order the destruction of the abated animal, or may release the animal to its
owner, conditional upon the owner complying with the requirements of this chapter or other reasonable conditions, or conditional upon permanently
removing the animal from the City.
D. An audio recording of the proceedings shall be made and kept in accordance with the normal procedures for maintaining evidence. Decisions of
the Hearing Board are final.
INHERENTLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL: A. Any venomous animal, insect or arachnid.
B. Any nonvenomous snake in excess of five feet (5') in length.
C. A member of the order Crocodilia (crocodiles, alligators, caiman and gavials).
D. Nonhuman primates and prosimians.
E. Bears.
F. Nondomesticated species of felines.
G. Nondomesticated species of canines and their hybrids, including wolf and coyote hybrids.
JUSTIFIED PROVOCATION: To perform any act or omission that a reasonable person with common knowledge of dog behavior would conclude is likely
to precipitate a bite or attack by an ordinary dog.
KENNEL: Any place where more than three (3) adult dogs are kept, harbored, possessed or owned.
LEASH: Any rope, leather, chain or other material, not exceeding eight feet (8') in length, being held in the hand of a person capable of controlling, and
actually controlling, the animal to which it is attached. Retractable leashes not exceeding eight feet (8') shall constitute a leash.
LICENSE TAG: The dog license tag issued by the City of Sandpoint.
LIVESTOCK: Cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine and any other domesticated animals not commonly kept as household pets and generally raised on or
kept on a farm.
OWNER: Any person who is the legal owner, or any person who on an ongoing basis feeds or provides shelter for or knowingly permits an animal to
remain on premises occupied by that person.
PET ANIMAL: Any domesticated or tamed animal sold or retained for the purpose of being kept and cared for affectionately including, but not limited to,
dogs, cats, rabbits, birds, guinea pigs, hamsters, mice, ferrets, nonvenomous reptiles, amphibians, turtles, and any other vertebrate animal sold and/or
retained for the purpose of being kept as a household pet.
PET FACILITIES: Any place within the pet store that a pet animal and/or customer has access to, including, but not limited to, cages.
PET STORE: Any store and/or entity that offers for sale a pet animal(s).
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any animal that:
A. Is in violation of the rabies provisions in this chapter;
B. Creates a noise disturbance as provided in section 5-2-6-10 of this title.
RABIES CERTIFICATE FORM: A certificate form issued by a licensed veterinarian which must show:
A. Animal owner's name, address and telephone number;
B. Animal's name, species, breed, color, sex and month and year of birth;
C. The type, lot number and manufacturer of the rabies vaccine;
D. The date of the vaccination;
E. The signature of the licensed veterinarian who vaccinated the animal, or other signature authorized by the veterinarian administering the
vaccination; and
F. The date on which the vaccination expires.
RABIES TAG: A piece of metal or other durable material, inscribed with a date and a number, which has been issued by a veterinarian.
RESTITUTION: Cost associated with damage or injury caused by an animal running at large or in an unprovoked attack or bite.
SEVERE INJURY: Any injury caused by an animal which requires the services of a physician.
VACCINATED ANIMAL: Any animal inoculated with a rabies vaccine, and wearing a current rabies tag indicating proof of such vaccinations. Such rabies
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 75/303
vaccine must be approved by the State of Idaho and have been administered by a licensed veterinarian. (Ord. 1313, 5-20-2015; amd. Ord. 1338, 11-16-
2016; Ord. 1356, 9-5-2018)
5-4-2: RABIES PROVISIONS:
A. Vaccination Required: Owners of any animal of a species subject to rabies, including, but not limited to, dog and cat owners, shall obtain a rabies
vaccination for each animal, dog or cat, they own, keep, harbor, possess or for which they have custodial care, within thirty (30) days after it becomes
six (6) months of age, or within thirty (30) days after obtaining any animal, dog or cat over six (6) months of age. It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep, harbor, possess or have the custodial care of any animal, cat or dog, unless such animal, cat or dog has a current rabies vaccination,
administered by a licensed veterinarian, with a rabies vaccine approved for use in the State of Idaho for such animal, dog or cat. Such vaccinations
shall be repeated at such intervals as determined by the type of vaccine used and the licensed requirements of said vaccine.
B. Vaccination Certificate: Any veterinarian who vaccinates any animal of a species subject to rabies shall also certify, by properly completing the rabies
certificate form.
C. Exemption From Vaccination: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a dog or cat need not be vaccinated for rabies during an illness, if a
licensed veterinarian has examined the dog or cat, and certified in writing that such vaccination should be postponed because of illness. Old age and
pregnancy are not contraindications to rabies vaccination. Exemption is valid only for the duration of the illness.
D. Reporting Suspected Cases Of Rabies: Any person who is the owner of any animal which shows symptoms of rabies or which acts in a manner which
would lead to a reasonable suspicion that the animal may have rabies, shall notify the department immediately.
E. Reporting Of Bites: All persons bitten, and parents or guardians of minor children, bitten by a dog, cat, skunk, fox, coyote, bobcat or any animal of a
species subject to rabies shall notify the department as soon as possible thereafter. Physicians, other healthcare providers treating such bites, or any
other person having knowledge of such bites shall also be required to notify the department.
F. Isolation Of Suspected Rabid Animals: Upon the order of the department, a suspected rabid animal shall be isolated in strict confinement under the
proper care and observation of a licensed veterinarian in a veterinary hospital, animal shelter or other facility approved by the department. Such animal
shall not be killed or released for at least ten (10) days after the onset of symptoms, unless permission is obtained from the department to euthanize
the animal for the purpose of laboratory examination.
G. Isolation Of Biting Animals:
1. Any animal excluding dogs and cats of a species subject to rabies, whether currently vaccinated or not, which bites or otherwise exposes a person,
shall be isolated in strict confinement in a place and manner approved by the department for at least fourteen (14) days after the date of the bite or
exposure.
2. Dogs and cats, whether currently vaccinated or not, which bite or otherwise expose a person, shall be isolated in strict confinement in a place and
manner approved by the department for at least ten (10) days after the date of the bite or exposure.
3. It is hereby made the duty of an owner of any animal which has bitten or otherwise exposed any person to surrender the animal for confinement to
the appropriate animal shelter or a licensed veterinarian, or other place approved by the department for a minimum of ten (10) days.
4. If such animal shall be determined to be free of rabies, the same shall be returned to the owner upon payment of associated fees inclusive of, but not
limited to, impound, boarding and required veterinary care fees.
5. If such fee is not paid, the animal shall be deemed impounded following procedures set forth in this chapter.
6. If the rabies vaccination for the animal is current, it shall be the discretion of the department to determine whether the quarantine of an animal may
be upon the premises of the owner, or the person in charge of such animal. If on the owner's premises, the animal shall be securely confined, as
required by the department, and kept from contact with other animals or people, for at least ten (10) days, and until released by the department.
7. Notwithstanding all the foregoing provisions, the department, with the permission of the owner of the animal, if known, may authorize the
euthanization of the animal for the purposes of laboratory examination. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
5-4-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep, possess or have the custodial care of any dog more than six (6) months of age, within the
corporate limits of the City without first obtaining and exhibiting a dog license as provided herein; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to any person visiting in the City for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and owning or possessing a dog currently licensed, and
bearing the license issued by another municipality or other licensing authority.
B. Any person owning, possessing, harboring or having the custodial care of any dog shall obtain a license for such animal from the City, or other person
authorized to sell dog licenses before the dog reaches the age of six (6) months, or within ten (10) days of the acquisition of a dog over six (6) months
of age.
C. Any person failing to obtain a license for a dog within the time periods related above will in addition to the prescribed fee for the license pay a late fee,
the amount of which shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 76/303
D. Each application for a dog license shall be accompanied by the prescribed license fee in an amount determined from time to time by resolution of the
City Council, and by presenting a valid current rabies vaccination certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
E. Dog licenses may be issued for one or more years and will expire on the date of expiration of the valid current rabies vaccination certificate presented at
the time of purchase. (Ord. 1356, 9-5-2018)
F. The City Council may set by resolution varying fees for altered and unaltered dogs.
G. Any dog over the age of six (6) months regularly kept in a licensed private or commercial kennel shall be required to obtain a dog license as provided in
this section.
H. Replacements for lost or destroyed license tags shall be issued upon payment in an amount to be determined from time to time by resolution of the City
Council.
I. Renewal licenses shall be purchased prior to the expiration of the current license. Renewal after the expiration of the current license is subject to the
same late fee as previously provided.
J. The owner shall securely affix the current license tag to the collar or harness of the dog for which it was issued, and shall at all times ensure that the dog
wears such license tag at all times, except when the dog is being exhibited at a dog show, or is presently and currently engaged as a hunting dog or
stock dog.
K. A license tag issued for one dog shall not be transferred or attached to another dog.
L. No person shall remove a license tag or identification tag from any dog which is not owned by that person. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
5-4-4: KENNEL LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Provisions:
1. No person may keep, harbor, possess or have custodial care for more than three (3) dogs without first obtaining a kennel license as provided herein.
2. For the purpose of this chapter, the litter of a female dog may be kept with its mother until the litter reaches the age of six (6) months. Such litter,
together with its mother, shall count as one dog until after the litter reaches six (6) months of age. Animals counted in the litter must be sold, traded
or given away before the litter reaches six (6) months of age so as not to exceed the limits set out above.
3. Subject to the exceptions set forth within this chapter, all dogs owned, kept, boarded, possessed or in the custodial care of the kennel owner must be
individually licensed.
B. Application For License:
1. Application for a kennel license is to be made to the City. The application shall state the name and address of the owner, the location of the kennel
and the types and breeds of the animals to be kept. Kennel licenses shall not be transferable, and shall be valid for one year from the date of
issuance.
2. An authorized officer of the department or other person designated by the department or City shall inspect all prospective kennels prior to granting a
kennel license, and any application for a kennel license must include written approval from the inspecting person stating that adequate shelter has
been provided for the number of animals to be kept, including adequate means of restraining such animals from running at large. Such statement
shall also limit the number of animals that may be kept at the facility.
3. Any application for a kennel license must include written approval from the City Planning Department showing that the kennel is in compliance with
all requirements, standards and conditions established by the zoning ordinance of the city of Sandpoint.
C. Performance Standards For Kennels:
1. Noncommercial Kennels:
a. Interior surfaces must be of a nonporous material which is substantially impervious to moisture and may be readily sanitized;
b. Floor temperature shall be maintained for infant animals at no less than seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (75°F) in the immediate areas where
infant animals are present and at reasonable temperatures suited to adult animals in all other locations; an elevated floor pad may be used to
maintain reasonable temperatures, provided the surface meets the surface requirements set forth in this chapter.
c. Ceiling heights shall meet the minimum uniform building code standards, or other uniform code standards applicable to buildings subsequently
adopted by the city for an R type structure.
d. Adequate space shall be provided both internally and externally so as to provide adequate exercise area for the various dogs. Minimums for space
are provided herein:
MINIMUM SPACE REQUIREMENTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 77/303
Weight Of Dog
In Pounds
Primary Enclosure Kennel House
Width
In Feet
Square
Footage
Width
In Feet
Square
Footage
Up to 15 2 6 1.5 3
16 to 35 2.5 10 2 5
36 to 65 3 15 2.5 7.5
66 to 95 3 18 2.5 9
96 to 130 3.5 24 3 12
131 and over 4 32 3.5 14
e. Any fencing shall be of at least 9-gauge chainlink fence. No other type of fencing shall be permitted. Fences shall be installed in such a manner as
to prevent animals from escaping by digging under or escaping over the top.
f. All kennels shall have natural lighting sufficient to comply with uniform building code requirements, or other uniform code standards applicable to
buildings subsequently adopted by the city for an R type structure. Adequate artificial lighting shall be provided in accordance with uniform
electrical code requirements, or other uniform electrical code standards subsequently adopted by the city for residential structures.
2. Commercial Indoor Housing Facilities: The indoor housing facilities for commercial kennels shall meet all the preceding requirements for
noncommercial facilities and shall also meet the following requirements:
a. All indoor facilities shall have three foot (3') high solid, nontransparent walls or partitions between pens.
b. All flooring shall slope at one-half inch (1/2") per running foot to prevent pooling of urine and cleaning solutions. Floors shall be of a smooth,
nonporous, nonwater permeable substance.
c. All indoor housing facilities will have sound degrading characteristics that will prevent long sound reverberation or sound reaching neighboring
locations.
d. All indoor housing facilities shall also have an external space for various breeds. All kennel runs shall provide the square footage per dog based
on the maximum weight of each dog as set forth previously herein.
3. Outdoor Housing Facilities: All outdoor housing facilities, commercial or noncommercial shall meet the following general requirements set forth as
follows:
a. Any outdoor housing facility shall be of sufficient structural strength and shall be maintained in good repair so as to protect the animals from injury,
to contain the animals and to restrict the entrance of another animal.
b. Outdoor housing facilities shall provide sufficient shade from the sun so as to prevent overheating or discomfort to the animals.
c. Outdoor housing facilities shall provide access to shelter to allow animals to remain dry during inclement weather.
d. Outdoor housing facilities shall provide shelters for all animals with sufficient clean bedding and other protection so as to protect the animal from
harm when the temperatures are below fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F).
e. Outdoor housing facilities shall provide a suitable method for elimination of urine and other liquid substances. Suitable provision shall be
equivalent to a two inch (2") layer of pea gravel over a large drain field of at least six inches (6") in depth. The large gravel drain field shall not be of
such depth that it penetrates through the topsoil on which it is constructed.
f. All outdoor facilities shall provide sufficient space in the enclosure and in the kennel house. Minimum space requirements are set out in the table
previously set forth herein. If a kennel enclosure or kennel contains more than one dog, the minimum number of square feet required is the sum of
the square feet requirements for each individual dog kept therein.
g. Any fencing shall be of at least 9-gauge chainlink fence. No other type of fencing shall be permitted. Fences shall be installed in such a manner as
to prevent animals from escaping by digging under or escaping over the top.
4. Feeding And Care Of Animals: All kennels whether commercial or noncommercial shall meet the following feeding and care requirements:
a. Animals shall be provided food which is free from contamination and is wholesome, palatable and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value so as to
meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal.
b. Food receptacles shall be accessible to all animals and shall be located so as to minimize contamination by excreta. Feeding pans shall be
durable and shall be cleaned daily.
c. Clean potable water shall be available to the animals in conformance with the principles of good animal husbandry unless restricted for veterinary
care. Water receptacles shall be cleaned every day.
d. All food and bedding for the animals shall be kept in a storage area such that the food and bedding supplies are protected against infestation or
contamination by vermin.
e. Refrigeration shall be provided for any supplies of perishable food.
f. Each pen shall have a satisfactory bowl and bowl system for both food and water.
5. Sanitation Of Primary Facilities: All kennels whether commercial or noncommercial shall meet the following sanitation requirements:
Excreta shall be removed from each kennel enclosure and kennel house at least once daily to prevent contamination of the animals contained
therein and to reduce disease hazard and odors.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 78/303
a. Individual and subsurface disposal systems used to dispose of any kennel generated wastewater shall be reviewed by the Panhandle health
district:
(1) At the initial application for a kennel license; and
(2) At the discretion of the department at reasonable times.
Wastewater and subsurface sewage disposal system loading will be assessed for compliance with Idaho's rules and regulations for individual
and subsurface sewage disposal systems and Panhandle health district's environmental health code as well as ordinances and rules of the city
of Sandpoint applicable to waste disposal. On site dry wells must be registered with the department of water resources. Dry wells are not a
permitted wastewater disposal system.
b. Solid excreta, if removed from the said property, shall be double bagged and disposed of in such a manner as to prevent a public health hazard.
(1) Sanitizing: At least once each day each kennel enclosure shall be sanitized by washing with water and soap or detergent.
(2) Replacement Of Gravel: Pens using pea gravel or its equivalent shall be sanitized by removing the gravel and replacing it when it no longer
provides adequate sanitation so as to reduce disease hazard and odors.
(3) Vaccination: Each individual dog shall be vaccinated for rabies in accordance with this chapter.
(4) Records: The kennel operator shall keep available for inspection on the premises a record that shall show the name, current address and
telephone number of the owner of each animal being kept at the kennel, the description of the animal, including its age, breed, sex and color. As
a part of such record, a current valid rabies certificate or other written proof of vaccination, verified by phone, shall be maintained for each dog
required to be vaccinated by this chapter. In addition, each kennel operator shall have someone in attendance at the kennel who can identify
each animal in the kennel except that animals under six (6) months of age may be identified as to the litter.
(5) Pest Control: An effective program for the control of insects, ectoparasites, avian and mammalian pests shall be established and maintained.
6. Care And Treatment Of Sick And Injured Animals:
a. Isolation and quarantine areas shall be part of every commercial kennel facility to prevent physical contact by or between animals who are under
quarantine or treatment for a communicable disease. The facilities should protect from cross contamination by saliva, waste material or washing
solutions. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
b. Animals shall be separated according to the following standards. Commercial and noncommercial kennels shall meet these requirements:
(1) Females in estrus shall not be housed in the same kennel enclosure as males, except for the purposes of breeding;
(2) Any dangerous dog shall be housed individually in a separate kennel enclosure; (Ord. 1338, 11-16-2016)
(3) Puppies shall not be housed in the same kennel enclosure with any other adult dog other than their dam, except when the owner specifically
requests combined housing;
(4) Dogs shall not be housed in the same kennel enclosure with other species of animal.
7. Violation: In addition to the penalties set out in this chapter, any violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of a kennel license.
8. Authority To Inspect: The animal control officer or any other person authorized by the department or city may inspect any licensed kennel at any
reasonable time with or without notice.
9. Fees: The fee for a commercial or noncommercial kennel license shall be set from time to time by resolution of city council.
10. Revocation Of Kennel License, Denial Of Permit:
a. A kennel permit may be revoked or application for kennel permit denied by the department when any of the following conditions are found to exist:
(1) Animals from such kennel are picked up running at large more than three (3) times in any twelve (12) month period;
(2) Failure to maintain a list of animals kept at the kennel;
(3) Keeping more than the approved number and type of animals at the kennel;
(4) Failure to allow access of an authorized officer to inspect the kennel facility;
(5) Failure to maintain the kennel in a clean and sanitary condition;
(6) Failure to maintain adequate shelter and protection from the weather;
(7) Failure to maintain adequate and approved ventilation;
(8) Overcrowding of animals;
(9) Quartering together of animals which are temperamentally unsuited or allowing animals to approach as near to each other as to cause the
animals to be abused or tormented;
(10) Excessive loud noise;
(11) Failure to adequately treat or have treated any diseased or injured animal or to segregate such diseased animal so as to prevent the spread of
disease to other animals;
(12) Any other violation of the kennel regulations set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
b. The department shall notify the applicant or license holder in writing prior to any revocation or denial. Upon notice, a kennel license holder or
applicant shall have thirty (30) days to correct any defect and to petition the department to contest such revocation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 79/303
c. Thirty (30) days after the notice of revocation or denial, if no petition has been filed with the department, the kennel permit shall be deemed
revoked or the application denied.
d. If a petition has been filed within thirty (30) days, the Hearing Board will be convened within thirty (30) days of the filing of the petition to decide
whether to uphold the revocation or denial of the permit. A person may reapply for a kennel permit after one year if the conditions warranting the
revocation or denial have been ameliorated. (Ord. 1356, 9-5-2018)
5-4-5: CONTROL PROVISIONS:
A. Animals Running At Large Prohibited:
1. Livestock Prohibited: Owners shall not be permitted to let their livestock run at large in the City at any time during the year; and it shall be unlawful
for any person to herd or drive any animal through the streets without having said animal under control by means of rope, strap or other device by
which it may be led, unless such animal is being driven in harness or hauled. This subsection shall not be applicable to dogs and cats.
2. Fowl Or Poultry Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep fowl or poultry unless such fowl or poultry are at all times kept upon his own
premises.
3. Leash Law: No dog, whether licensed or not, shall be, or remain upon any public street or alley within the City, or any public place therein, or upon
any premises other than the premises of the person who owns, harbors, keeps, possesses or has custodial care of the dog, unless the dog is
maintained on a "leash" as heretofore defined, with the following exceptions:
a. Police dogs, in connection with lawful police work, so long as under adequate voice or other control of an authorized law enforcement officer.
b. Any dog being used and trained for search and rescue operations, under such conditions as may be reasonably necessary in the particular
circumstances.
c. Any licensed dog at large on private property with the express permission of the owner of the property.
Injury to any person or animal or damage to any property by a dog while at large, whether licensed or not, shall be the full responsibility of the dog
owner or person or persons responsible for the dog when such damages were inflicted.
Any dog found in violation of this section shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner of the animal is in violation of this section. (Ord. 1260,
12-21-2011)
4. Areas Where Dogs Prohibited: No person shall take or allow any dog, whether leashed or unleashed, on any public beach or public park within the
City except as herein provided. A maximum of three (3) dogs per handler shall be allowed in the following parks:
a. Lakeview Park, permitted on leash only. Dogs are excluded from: the children's playground area, within the fenced tennis courts, and within the
boundaries of the basketball court. Dogs are not allowed inside the fence at Memorial Field;
b. Hickory Park, permitted on leash only. Dogs are excluded from: inside the children's playground, within the boundaries of the basketball court and
within the boundaries of the skate feature; and
c. Humbird Mill Park, permitted with leashes recommended. (Ord. 1292, 12-18-2013)
5. Female Dogs In Season (Estrus): Dog owners shall securely confine their female dogs while in season within an enclosure so as to prevent the
attraction of male dogs.
6. Prosecution Of Dog Owners: Prosecution of owners of dogs running at large shall be in accordance with Idaho Code section 25-2805. (Ord. 1260,
12-21-2011)
B. Sanitation Responsibilities:
1. It shall be unlawful for an owner or any person having custody or control of any animal to fail to remove the fecal matter deposited by his/her animal
on public property or private property not belonging to the owner. Removal must be effected before the owner leaves the immediate area where the
fecal matter was deposited. The owner must dispose of the fecal matter in a sanitary manner by depositing the same in a trash receptacle.
2. It shall be unlawful for an owner or any person having custody or control of any animal to fail to have in his/her possession a plastic bag or other
equipment suitable to remove his/her animal's fecal matter when accompanied by said animal on public property or public easement.
3. Owners of service dogs, when under the control of the person with the disability, will be exempt from subsections B1 and B2 of this section, if
physically unable to comply.
4. A violation of these sanitation responsibilities shall constitute an infraction, with penalties and fines, as provided in Idaho Code section 18-113A.
C. Releasing Animals Within The City Limits: It shall be unlawful for any person to release or allow to escape from confinement any domestic or wild
animal within the City limits. This does not apply to house pet cats owned by City residents or feral cats released as part of a trap, neuter and release
program authorized by the City. (Ord. 1288, 9-4-2013)
5-4-6: DANGEROUS DOGS:
Proceedings against any dog which bites or physically attacks a person in the City shall be in accordance with Idaho Code section 25-2809 et seq., "Idaho
Dangerous and At Risk Dogs Act". (Ord. 1338, 11-16-2016)
5-4-7: INJURIES AND COMMUNICABLE DISEASE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 80/303
No person shall knowingly harbor or keep any animal with any serious injury, or inflicted with mange, ringworm, distemper or any contagious disease,
unless such animal is being given adequate treatment for such disease or injury. The department may take immediate possession of such animal not
being so treated, or not responding to such treatment, and immediately dispose of the animal unless the owner shall forthwith place such animal under the
control and treatment of a licensed veterinarian. The owner of such animal shall pay all fees and expenses related to veterinary care, including, but not
limited to, transportation, confinement, board, veterinary care and associated treatment. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
5-4-8: ANIMALS IN UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
No person shall leave an animal in any unattended vehicle without adequate ventilation, or in any manner as to subject the animal to extremes of
temperature which adversely affect the animal's health and welfare. Any person who leaves an unattended animal in an open vehicle and the animal is
harassing passersby may be cited as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
5-4-9: INHUMANE TREATMENT AND ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS:
No person shall treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner or willingly or negligently cause or permit any animal to suffer unnecessary torture or pain.
No person shall abandon any domestic animal without care on any public or private property. All animals shall be provided with appropriate nutritive foods
and shelter. Potable water must be available as prescribed by good husbandry standards. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the release of feral cats
as part of a trap, neuter and release program authorized by the City. (Ord. 1288, 9-4-2013)
5-4-10: INTERFERING OR OBSTRUCTING AN ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
Any person who shall hinder, delay, interfere with or obstruct the animal control officer or any peace officer engaged in the capturing, securing or taking of
any animal, or who shall open or in any manner directly or indirectly aid, counsel, or advise the opening of any animal or shelter cage, ambulance, wagon
or other vehicle used for the collecting or conveying of animal to the animal shelter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
5-4-11: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1334, 9-21-2016)
5-4-12: IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
A. Cause For Impoundment: The department may impound an animal for, but not limited to, the following circumstances: any released or escaped
domestic or wild animal, unlicensed dog, running at large, suspected exposure to rabies, animals being kept in unsafe or unsanitary conditions, or
lacking proper care, nutrition, or housing; declared a dangerous dog, or poses a serious harm or health risk to the public, an animal disturbing the
peace, or has injuries or a communicable disease, or for any other violation of this Code.
B. Notification: The department will notify the owner of the animal, if known, in person, by telephone, by depositing notice in the U.S. mail properly
addressed to the owner or last known address of the owner, or by posting a notice on the premises of the owner within five (5) days of an
impoundment.
C. Impoundment Procedures:
1. An animal impounded for a violation of this Code may be released to the owner upon compliance with Code requirements. Compliance must be met
within five (5) days. The owner of the animal is responsible for all expenses incurred by an impoundment.
2. The owner of an impounded animal shall have the right to file, within five (5) days after receiving notice, a written request for a hearing with the
Hearing Board to contest the impoundment. If no request for a hearing is received within the allotted time period, the department may humanely
destroy the animal. A hearing may not be requested for the following violations: running at large, disturbing the peace, or unlicensed. (Ord. 1356, 9-
5-2018)
D. Disposition: Any impounded animal shall be held for a minimum of five (5) working days. After five (5) working days have passed the animal becomes
the property of the City or its designee if the owner has not contacted the department. The City will determine the manner in which the animal will be
attended to. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
5-4-13: ABATEMENT:
A. Public Nuisance: Any animal that constitutes a public nuisance, or constitutes a hazard to the public health or safety, or as defined within this section,
may be abated.
B. Notice Of Abatement: In the event an animal constitutes a public nuisance as set forth above or if set forth elsewhere in this Code, the department may
issue notice of abatement to the owner of said animal. Such notice shall contain the dates and types of previous events constituting a basis for the
animal being a public nuisance. Such animal shall be removed from the City, or if not already impounded, relinquished to the City or its designee within
three (3) working days from the date of notification.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 81/303
C. Hearing On Abatement: The owner of an abated animal shall have the right to file, within five (5) days after receiving notice, a written request for a
hearing with the Hearing Board to contest the abatement.
D. Maintaining Public Nuisance: Any person who owns or keeps and permits to run loose at any time within the City an animal declared to be a public
nuisance as set forth in this chapter, and who shall fail, neglect or refuse to abate the nuisance by destroying the animal, or removing the animal from
the City, or by permanently confining the animal, whichever be necessary to the abatement of such nuisance, within twenty four (24) hours after notice
to do so shall be in violation of this Code. (Ord. 1356, 9-5-2018)
5-4-14: INHERENTLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
It shall be a violation of this chapter to possess any "inherently dangerous animal" as heretofore defined. Any such animal may be impounded by the
department and abated in conformance with this chapter. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
5-4-15: CONDITION OF PEN AND PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to keep the premises where animals are kept, free from offensive odors to the extent that such odors are disturbing
to nearby residents. It shall be unlawful to allow the premises where animals are kept to become unclean or a threat to the public health by failing to
diligently and systematically remove all animal feces from the premises. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
5-4-16: LIVESTOCK:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the City to keep or maintain any livestock except in conformity with zoning regulations and with the
following requirements:
A. All excreta from the animal shall be removed daily from any building or shelter in which the animal is kept, or from any yard or enclosure in which the
animal is permitted, and the same shall be buried in the ground or placed in a covered container. If placed in a covered container, subsequent and final
disposal thereof, if made in the City, shall be done by burying the same in the ground.
B. No livestock shall be kept or permitted in any building, shelter, yard or enclosure unless the same shall be at least one hundred fifty feet (150') from any
residence, street or highway in the City. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
5-4-17: IMPOUNDING OF LIVESTOCK:
If any livestock shall be found running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter, an officer may impound and confine the same in a secure place or
other place provided for that purpose and such animal(s) impounded and confined shall not be released until the owner or person entitled to the livestock
comes into compliance with the code and pays all associated fees. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
5-4-18: NOTICE AND SALE OF IMPOUNDED LIVESTOCK:
If the owner of an animal does not pay the charges and lawfully take it away within five (5) days from the time it is taken into custody, the City may sell
such animal at public auction after having given at least five (5) days' notice of the time and place of such sale by publishing said notice in the official
newspaper of the City, as well as serving a copy of said notice upon the owner or possessor, if known, of said animal. Such animal may be redeemed at
any time before the date of sale by payment to the City of any fees, expenses and charges. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
5-4-19: FREEING IMPOUNDED LIVESTOCK PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to break open or in any manner, directly or indirectly, aid or assist in breaking open any pen or enclosure with intent of releasing any
livestock confined therein. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
5-4-20: PET STORES:
A. Licensing:
1. All pet store owners must obtain a pet store license from the City. The license application shall state the name and address of the owner, the location
of the pet store and the types and breeds of the animals to be kept. Pet store licenses shall be nontransferable, and shall be valid for one year from
the date of issuance. The cost for a license shall be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council. This license shall be in addition to the
business license issued by the City.
2. An authorized officer of the department or other person designated by the department or City shall inspect all prospective pet stores prior to granting
a license, and any application for a pet store license must include written approval from the inspecting person stating that the requirements in this
chapter are being met.
3. Any application for a pet store license must include written approval from the City Planning Department showing that the pet store is in compliance
with all requirements, standards and conditions established by the zoning ordinance of the City of Sandpoint.
4. Any application for a pet store license must include the name, address, and telephone number of a licensed veterinarian who will care for any
animals which become sick or injured while at the pet store.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 82/303
B. Requirements: As prescribed by animal husbandry practices, a pet store shall provide:
1. Adequate and species appropriate nutrition in sufficient quantities to meet each individual animal's requirements;
2. Clean fresh water in sufficient quantities to meet each individual animal's requirements; and
3. Disease free sanitary conditions within adequate enclosures.
C. Inspection Of Pet Stores: Pet stores may be inspected by the department at any time and the pet license can be suspended at any time if the facility is
not being maintained in accordance with this Code. The pet store shall have twenty four (24) hours to bring the pet store into compliance before the
license is revoked.
D. Revocation Of License: The Chief of Police may at any time recommend the revocation of any license issued under the terms of the foregoing
subsections and the Chief of Police may suspend such license by notice in writing whenever the licensee has violated the provisions of any law of the
State or ordinance of the City relating to the carrying on of the business named in such license.
E. Appeal: Whenever any license provided for herein is refused or revoked by the Chief of Police or other proper official duly empowered to do so, the
licensee may appeal to the City Council the notice of revocation or license refusal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and delivered to the City Clerk
within five (5) days from the notice of refusal or revocation. The City Clerk shall fix the time of hearing of the appeal within fourteen (14) days, at which
hearing all parties interested shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. The City Council's decision shall be final. (Ord. 1208, 5-20-2009)
5-4-21: FEEDING BIG GAME PROHIBITED:
No person shall knowingly and intentionally feed big game animals. Persons who fail to cease feeding big game animals within seven (7) days of receiving
written notice by a City official through personal delivery or certified mail shall be in violation of this section. (Ord. 1313, 5-20-2015)
5-4-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, is subject to a civil citation fee, which are
payable at the City cashier's office within thirty (30) days of receipt of the civil citation. Each day's continued violation may constitute a separate offense. All
civil citation fees shall be established by resolution adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 1356, 9-5-2018)
Chapter 5
ANIMALS
(Rep. by Ord. 1072, 10-17-2002)
Chapter 6
CURFEW
5-6-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
The Policy of the City is:
A. To protect children's health and welfare which includes their care, guidance and control;
B. Parents, guardians and/or other persons having legal custody are responsible for providing for the physical custody and control of the child and to
determine where and with whom the child shall live and to provide the child with care, education and discipline;
C. A child who is unaccompanied by an adult having custodial rights or an adult person designated by a person having custodial rights and who is found to
be on the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, places, buildings, place of amusement, eating places,
vacant lots and other locations unsupervised by such adult having the lawful authority to be at such place between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. is at a greater risk for injury, becoming a victim of a crime, being involved in criminal activity, being a danger to
persons or property or otherwise being subject to danger. (Ord. 940, 2-22-1994)
5-6-2: CHILD ON THE STREET AT NIGHT:
It is unlawful for any child being an individual who is under the age of eighteen (18) years of age to be upon any street, highway, road, alley, park,
playground or other public places or buildings, or places of amusement, eating establishments, vacant lots and/or any other place without being
accompanied by an adult having custodial rights or an adult person designated by the adult having custodial rights or an adult person designated by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 83/303
adult having custodial rights of said child between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day; provided,
that the provisions of this Section shall not apply in the following instances:
A. When the child is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of said
minor;
B. When the child is returning directly home from a school activity, school entertainment, school recreational activity or school dance;
C. When the child is either going to, or going from his or her place of residence to or from his or her place of lawful employment and/or is working at the
child's place of employment;
D. When the child is attending or travelling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of
assembly or free exercise of religion;
E. When the child is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel with interstate travel through the City;
F. A minor who is married or who is on active duty in the Armed Services of the United States. (Ord. 940, 2-22-1994)
5-6-3: PERMITTING CHILD TO VIOLATE CURFEW:
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of a child or any adult person designated by the person having legal
custody of a child under the age of eighteen (18) years to permit and/or allow said child to be upon any public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, places, buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or other locations without having designated an
adult person or said parent, guardian or other legal custodian to be with and supervising said child between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day, except in the circumstances set forth in subsections 5-6-2A through F of this Chapter. (Ord. 940, 2-22-
1994)
5-6-4: VIOLATION:
A violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is a misdemeanor and punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to the laws of the State. (Ord. 940, 2-22-
1994)
Chapter 7
FALSE ALARMS
5-7-1: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVE:
A. This chapter is enacted for the purpose of increasing the efficiency of emergency service providers within the city. It provides that the city may collect
fees for emergency responses to false alarms as established by the city council by ordinance. This chapter provides specific regulations for alarm
companies and alarm users. This chapter is to encourage owners and fire and security alarm businesses to properly use and maintain the operational
effectiveness of fire and security alarm systems in order to improve the reliability of fire and security alarm systems and reduce or eliminate false fire
and security alarms and nuisance fire and security alarms.
B. This chapter governs fire and security alarm systems intended to summon fire and law enforcement department personnel, and requires registration,
assessment of fees for excessive false fire and security alarms and nuisance fire and/or security alarms, and provides procedures for repeat offenders.
(Ord. 1243, 8-18-2010)
5-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings:
ADOPTED CODE(S): Code adopted by the jurisdiction and in the absence of adopted code, the National Fire Protection Association national fire alarm
code 72 (NFPA 72) and the National Fire Protection Association life safety code 101 (NFPA 101), the National Fire Protection Association standard for the
installation of sprinkler systems (NFPA 13, 13D and 13R).
ALARM SYSTEM: A device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency
method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition
and intended to summon fire or police response. Alarm system does not include an alarm installed in a vehicle or on someone's person unless the vehicle
or the personal alarm is permanently located at a site.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: The fire and/or police chief or their designated representative.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm dispatch request to a law enforcement or fire agency, when the responding enforcement officer finds no evidence of a fire,
criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site.
FEE: The assessment of a monetary charge payable to the city of Sandpoint authorized pursuant to this chapter, to defray the expenses of responding to a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 84/303
false fire or security alarm or nuisance fire or security alarm.
FIRE AND SECURITY ALARM BUSINESS: Any person or business engaged in installing, monitoring or maintaining a fire or security alarm in structures
within the city of Sandpoint.
MONITORED SYSTEM: The process by which a fire or security alarm business receives signals from a fire or security alarm system and notifies the
appropriate emergency forces.
NUISANCE FIRE OR SECURITY ALARM: The activation of any fire and/or security alarm system, which results in a response by the fire or police
department, caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, lack of proper maintenance or any other response for which the fire or police
department personnel are unable to determine the apparent cause of the alarm activation.
OWNER: Any person who owns the premises in which a fire or security alarm system is installed or the person or persons who lease, operate, occupy or
manage the premises.
PREMISES: Any building, structure or combination of buildings and structures which serve as dwelling units such as single-family, multi-family or any other
area within a building, structure or combination thereof which is used for any purpose, wherein a fire or security alarm system is installed. (Ord. 1243, 8-
18-2010)
5-7-3: FIRE SYSTEMS; INSPECTION, TESTING AND MAINTENANCE:
The owner and/or occupant shall ensure that all fire alarm systems are inspected and tested at least once per year in accordance with adopted code.
The owner and/or occupant shall ensure that all fire alarm systems are periodically maintained per manufacturer specifications and adopted codes. (Ord.
1243, 8-18-2010)
5-7-4: FIRE ALARM ACTIVATION; RESPONSE:
A. The owner shall be responsible for the activation of a fire alarm system.
B. A response to the activation of a fire alarm system shall result when any officer or member of the fire department is dispatched to the premises where
the fire alarm system has been activated.
1. At the time of response, the enforcement official shall contact Bonner County 911 dispatch or the building/business owner, occupant or the
designated representative and shall require such person to respond to the premises.
2. In the event the fire alarm system is a monitored system, it is the responsibility of the company monitoring the fire alarm system to notify
building/business owner, occupant or the designated representative at the request of the enforcement official.
3. In the event the household fire alarm system is a monitored system, it is the responsibility of the fire alarm business to offer the owner/occupant the
option to verify the fire alarm signal before dispatch, as allowed by adopted code.
4. In the event the household fire alarm system is a monitored system, it is the responsibility of the fire alarm business to forward cancellation of a fire
alarm signal to the Bonner County 911 dispatch center, who will in turn notify the responding fire department unit of the cancellation notification.
C. The officer or member of the fire department who responded to said premises shall serve the owner/occupant or the designated representative with a
fire alarm activation report. (Ord. 1243, 8-18-2010)
5-7-5: NUISANCE FIRE ALARMS:
In the event the activation of a fire alarm system is deemed by the enforcement official to be a nuisance fire alarm, the owner shall be served with a fire
alarm activation report by an officer or member of the fire department, indicating that the activation was deemed to be the result of a nuisance fire alarm.
A. This shall require the owner to return a completed report of service/repair within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the fire alarm activation report to verify, to
the reasonable satisfaction of the enforcement official, that:
1. The fire alarm system has actually been examined by a qualified fire alarm technician; and
2. A bona fide attempt has been made to identify and correct any defect of design, installation or operation of the fire alarm system which was
identifiable as the cause of the nuisance fire alarm.
B. Failure to return a report of service/repair within said fifteen (15) day period, which is reasonably satisfactory to the enforcement official, shall result in
assessment against the owner/occupant or the designated representative of a fee pursuant to the fees established by resolution of the city council for
the nuisance fire alarm. (Ord. 1243, 8-18-2010)
5-7-6: SERVICE FEES:
A. All fees collected as a result of fire emergency response categories established by the city council by resolution shall be utilized for capital
improvements within the fire department as requested by the fire chief and approved by the city council. Examples of these capital improvements
include, but are not limited to: apparatus replacement programs, building and grounds purchases and improvements and other capital equipment
purchases.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 85/303
B. All fees collected as a result of security alarm response categories established by the city council by resolution shall be utilized for capital improvements
within the police department as requested by the police chief and approved by city council. Examples of these capital improvements include, but are
not limited to: equipment and fleet equipment replacement programs, building and grounds purchases and improvements and other capital equipment
purchases.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any newly installed alarm system for a period of forty five (45) days from the date of installation, but shall
apply from and after the expiration of forty five (45) days. (Ord. 1243, 8-18-2010)
5-7-7: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF ALARM BUSINESSES AND USERS:
A. Duties Of Security Alarm User:
1. User shall maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms, including periodic maintenance and
cleaning of the alarm system. The alarm user shall also make every reasonable effort to respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm
system location within thirty (30) minutes when notified by the police department or alarm company to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system. The
representative will provide access for the police department to the premises or provide alternative security for the premises.
2. User may advise the police department that no representative will be responding to the alarm site, however, failure of an alarm user or
representative thereof to respond to an alarm site may result in no further police intervention at the site and for the occurrence due to the failure of a
representative to respond.
3. User shall not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
4. User will properly train their employees in the correct operation of the alarm system and will provide them with an operating sheet summarizing the
proper use of the alarm system, as well as the security system operating manual.
B. Duties Of Security Alarm Installation Company:
1. The security alarm installation company shall provide written and oral instructions to each of its alarm users in the proper use and operation of their
security alarm systems. Such instructions will specifically include all instructions necessary to turn the security alarm system on and off and to avoid
false alarms.
2. Upon enactment of this chapter, security alarm installation companies shall use only ANSI/SIA CP-01 listed alarm control panels on all new
installations and panel replacements or upgrades.
3. Security alarm installation companies shall not use automatic voice dialers.
4. Every alarm installation company shall provide the enforcement official with a customer list in a format acceptable to the enforcement official, upon
request, to assist the enforcement official with creating the law enforcement's tracking data. This requirement is contingent upon state or local law
that protects this customer information as confidential.
C. Duties Of Security Alarm Monitoring Company:
1. Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the enforcement official;
2. Verify every alarm signal, except a duress or holdup security alarm activation, before initiating a security alarm dispatch request;
3. Communicate security alarm dispatch request to the municipality in a manner and form determined by the enforcement official;
4. Communicate cancellations to the municipality in a manner and form determined by the enforcement official;
5. Ensure that all security alarm users of alarm systems equipped with a duress, holdup or panic alarm are given adequate training as to the proper use
of the duress, holdup or panic alarm;
6. Communicate any available information (north, south, front, back, floor, etc.) about the location on all alarm signals related to the security alarm
dispatch request;
7. Communicate nature of alarm (i.e., burglary, robbery, panic, duress, silent, audible, interior or perimeter);
8. After a security alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the law enforcement agency if the security alarm monitoring company knows that the alarm
user or the responder is on the way to the alarm site;
9. Attempt to contact the alarm user or responder within twenty four (24) hours via mail, fax, telephone or other electronic means when a security alarm
dispatch request is made; and
10. Upon the effective date hereof, security alarm monitoring companies must maintain for a period of at least one year from the date of the alarm
dispatch request, records relating to alarm dispatch requests. Records must include the name, address and telephone number of the alarm user, the
alarm system zone(s) activated, the time of alarm dispatch request and evidence of an attempt to verify. The enforcement official may request copies
of such records for individually named alarm users. If the request is made within sixty (60) days of an alarm dispatch request, the security alarm
monitoring company shall furnish requested records within three (3) business days of receiving the request. If the records are requested between
sixty (60) days to one year after an alarm dispatch request, the security alarm monitoring company shall furnish the requested records within thirty
(30) days of receiving the request.
11. Every alarm monitoring company shall provide the enforcement official with a customer list in a format acceptable to the enforcement official, upon
request, to assist the enforcement official with creating the law enforcement's tracking data. This requirement is contingent upon state or local law
that protects this customer information as confidential.
12. Alarm monitoring companies shall not use automatic voice dialers. (Ord. 1243, 8-18-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 86/303
5-7-8: FEE SCHEDULE:
All fees for false alarms shall be established by resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1243, 8-18-2010)
5-7-9: FEE APPEAL PROCESS:
A. Written Appeal: An aggrieved person may appeal the police or fire department's assessment of a fee to the enforcement official. The aggrieved person
shall file a written appeal to the enforcement official by stating the reasons for the appeal within ten (10) working days after receipt of notice of fee.
Upon verbal contact with the aggrieved person, the enforcement official may waive the written appeal and conduct the matter informally.
B. Enforcement Official Decision: If the enforcement official denies the appeal of the fee, the enforcement official shall send written notice of the action and
statement of the right to an appeal. The notice shall include the appropriate time frames and procedures to file an appeal of the enforcement official's
decision.
C. Appeal Of Enforcement Official Decision: Upon receipt of the enforcement official's denial, the aggrieved person may appeal the decision by filing a
written request for a review, setting forth the reasons for the appeal within ten (10) working days of the date of the notice from the enforcement official.
Such written request shall be filed with the city clerk.
D. Hearing Conducted By City Council: The city council shall conduct a formal hearing and consider evidence presented by any interested person(s). The
city council shall make a decision on the basis of the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing. The city council must render a written
decision within five (5) working days after the appeal hearing is held. The city council may grant or deny the appeal. (Ord. 1274, 7-18-2012)
E. Special Rule For Public Schools, Government Institutions, Medical Facilities:
1. The fees for false alarms are waived for an alarm system at any public or private elementary or secondary school, government institution, or medical
facility. (Ord. 1243, 8-18-2010)
Title 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
6-1-1: IDAHO MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS ADOPTED:
A. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Governing Body of the City to aid and assist, by whatever means possible, for the utmost consistency in
traffic regulation among and between agencies of Idaho having such jurisdiction. Toward that end, adoption of the Idaho Motor Vehicle Laws by the
cities of Idaho is a necessary means of assuring maximum uniformity within the State.
B. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the use of all streets and public thoroughfares of the City that certain
code, identified as the Idaho Motor Vehicle Laws, more particularly title 49, Idaho Code, and as the same may hereafter be revised by the Idaho
Legislature. (Ord. 401, 1-11-1971; amd. 1983 Code)
6-1-2: DESIGNATION OF SPEED LIMITS:
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, and except in those instances where another speed is specified, it shall be prima facie lawful for the driver of a
vehicle to drive the same on the streets of the City at a speed not exceeding the following:
A. Twenty five (25) miles per hour in all business districts.
B. Twenty five (25) miles per hour in all residential districts. (1983 Code)
C. Twenty (20) miles per hour when passing any designated hospital zone or when passing any designated school zone, when said school is in session.
(Ord. 833, 9-15-1986)
6-1-3: TURNING MOVEMENTS RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any driver of any vehicle to turn said vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and
shall not upon any street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with any other traffic. Any person found in
violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 720, 5-19-1980; amd. 1983 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 87/303
6-1-4: PARKING REGULATIONS:
6-1-4-1: PROHIBITED PARKING:
A. Idling Motor Vehicle: No driver of a motor vehicle shall leave the vehicle unattended upon any street or public place while running and unsecured.
B. Double Parking: Double parking shall not be permitted on any of the streets within the City unless the vehicle qualifies for an exemption.
C. Parking On Curbing: No vehicle shall be parked or stand on the sidewalk or on any portion of the curbing along any of the streets of the City.
D. Commercial Vehicle: No commercial vehicle over twenty two feet (22') in length shall be parked overnight on a street in any residentially zoned area of
the City.
E. All Night Parking: It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day on a street or
highway in areas where overnight parking is prohibited. A map of the Downtown Limited Parking Zone may be obtained from City Hall or on the City's
website.
F. Parking Of Trucks In Downtown Limited Parking Zone: Parking of trucks longer than twenty two feet (22') and/or truck trailers is hereby prohibited on
streets or public parking areas within the Downtown Limited Parking Zone. Recreational vehicles are not included in this limitation and may legally park
within the Downtown Limited Parking Zone.
G. Parking Limit: The area designated as the "Downtown Limited Parking Zone" is regulated by two (2), three (3) and four (4) hour parking limits on the
streets and a twenty four (24) hour limit within the City parking lots. The boundaries of the Downtown Limited Parking Zone shall be defined by
resolution adopted by the City Council. Monthly parking permits may be purchased at Sandpoint City Hall or online at the City's website. (Ord. 1352, 6-
6-2018)
6-1-4-2: COMPLIANCE WITH PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. Owner's Responsibility: The owner of every motor vehicle is deemed ultimately responsible for compliance with parking regulations of the City. It shall
be unlawful for the driver or owner of a vehicle to disobey:
1. Signage regulating the time or manner of parking;
2. Code requirements regarding the kind of vehicle permitted to park at any place; or
3. Any other parking restriction given by any sign, signal, stripe or line, erected or placed on the public streets or in public parking lots as authorized by
the City.
B. Regulation By City Council: The location, duration, terms and conditions of specially regulated parking areas upon the public streets or within public
parking lots may be established by resolution of the City Council. The provisions of special parking regulations shall be communicated by signage or by
pavement markings which provide notice to vehicle operators.
C. Stopping, Standing And Parking: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or at the
direction of a public safety officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1. On a sidewalk;
2. In front of a public or private driveway;
3. Within an intersection;
4. On a crosswalk;
5. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection, unless otherwise indicated;
6. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless
the traffic authority indicates a different length by signs or markings;
7. On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
8. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway;
9. In an alley so as to hinder or block traffic;
10. In front of a mailbox in a manner that would prevent the distribution of mail by the United States Postal Service. Postal carriers must be able to
drive into and out of the delivery area without backing up;
11. In a parking space designated for handicapped parking except for a vehicle that is momentarily in the space for the purpose of allowing a
handicapped person to enter or leave the vehicle, unless the vehicle is displaying a special license of the handicapped, or official handicapped card
issued by the State, or an official temporary handicapped card issued by the State or another state;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 88/303
12. Upon any officially marked bicycle lane, bicycle path, footpath or other separate right-of-way specifically set aside for use by pedestrians or
nonmotorized vehicles except at an intersection or when entering or leaving a roadway at a driveway, private road or alley. This section shall not
apply to authorized emergency vehicles meeting the conditions specified in title 49 of the Idaho Code, or authorized maintenance and construction
vehicles while actually engaged in work upon a roadway or nonmotorized right-of-way; or City employees;
13. At any place where traffic control devices regulating stopping, standing, or parking are placed at the direction of the City Council by duly passed
resolution, to regulate the flow of traffic or to ensure the safety of motorists or pedestrians;
14. Facing against the flow of traffic;
15. Where prohibited by signs or painted red curbs;
16. With the vehicle's wheels more than eighteen inches (18") from the curb. (Ord. 1352, 6-6-2018)
6-1-4-3: PARKING AFTER SNOW HAS FALLEN:
A. Downtown Limited Parking Zone: Upon an accumulation of two inches (2") to four inches (4") of snow, at the discretion of the Public Works Director or
Streets Supervisor, snow plows will plow the snow from the curb line to the center of the roadway where it will be removed and hauled away. After
snow has been plowed from the curb line, depositing snow from sidewalks onto the roadway is prohibited. Depositing snow from parking areas and
alleyways onto the street is prohibited at all times. Parking is prohibited on the streets and in the City's three (3) downtown parking lots from 2:00 A.M. -
6:00 A.M. from November 1st through March 1st, unless posted otherwise.
B. Residential Streets: Upon an accumulation of two inches (2") to four inches (4") of snow, at the discretion of the Public Works Director or Streets
Supervisor, snow plows will plow residential streets. Snow will be plowed to each curb line.
C. Snow Removal Policy: The complete snow removal policy, together with the snow removal map, may be obtained from City Hall or online at the City's
website. (Ord. 1352, 6-6-2018)
6-1-4-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The following exemptions shall be made to the preceding three (3) sections:
A. Public safety vehicles while in the performance of official duties;
B. Business owners and contractors (parking trucks and equipment for construction) parked at locations for which they have been granted an
encroachment permit by the Public Works Department;
C. Delivery vehicles of any length may double park to actively load and unload when no alternative is available. (Ord. 1352, 6-6-2018)
6-1-4-5: PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL OPERATIONS:
See section 6-1-4-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 1177, 7-18-2007)
6-1-4-6: VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION AND IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Creation Of Scofflaw List: Parking services shall prepare the scofflaw list consisting of vehicle license plates and vehicle owners owning vehicles with
six (6) or more parking tickets unpaid more than forty five (45) days after their issuance. The scofflaw list shall be updated weekly or more often as
needed to remain current.
B. Fee To Cover Administrative Costs: There is a fee imposed upon the owner of every vehicle on the scofflaw list whose vehicle is immobilized or
impounded hereunder in an amount set by resolution of the City Council to cover the additional administrative costs of immobilization and/or
impoundment.
C. Notice:
1. Parking services shall give notice by first class mail to the last known registered owner of the vehicle, as disclosed by the vehicle license number and
as provided by the Idaho Department of Motor Vehicles or equivalent vehicle licensing agency of the State in which the vehicle is registered for each
vehicle on the scofflaw list, stating that the vehicle is on the scofflaw list; and
a. The date and the nature of each ticket overdue and the amount due on each;
b. The total amount currently due;
c. A specific deadline for response, no less than ten (10) days after the date of mailing;
d. That the owner shall, by said deadline, respond to the notice. Response shall be by paying the total amount due, scheduling a hearing with the
City Council, or by arranging a payment schedule with the City's contracted collection agency for payment of the total amount due; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 89/303
e. That if the vehicle owner fails to respond within the prescribed time period, any vehicle with the listed vehicle license plate or any other vehicle of
that owner will be subject to immediate immobilization or impoundment, payment of the fees imposed under subsection B of this section and
payment of the costs of immobilization, towing and storage.
2. The notice required by this subsection C is sufficient if mailed to the address provided by the Idaho Department of Motor Vehicles; provided,
however, that if parking services, after exercising due diligence, fails to discover any mailing address, then notice is sufficient if it is posted on the
vehicle, or personally served on the vehicle owner or driver, or provided by any other means reasonably calculated to provide notice to vehicle owner
or driver.
3. If the vehicle owner or an agent of the owner pays the fines and fees, including the amount(s) specified in subsection B of this section, and all towing
and storage charges, if any, or schedules a hearing with the City Council, or arranges a payment plan through the City's contracted collection
agency, parking services shall remove the vehicle from the scofflaw list. If any parking ticket not included on the scofflaw list for which the owner is
liable becomes overdue before the owner or agent appears to pay or sets a hearing with the City Council, such subsequent tickets shall also be paid
or bond shall be posted therefor before the vehicle is removed from the scofflaw list.
4. The owner of a vehicle that is subject to the procedures of this section is entitled to a hearing by the City Council to contest the validity of the
immobilization, the impoundment and/or the amount of towing and storage charges.
5. Failure to appear for a scheduled hearing or to remain current and in good standing on any arranged payment plan with the City's contracted
collection agency will result in the vehicle returning to the scofflaw list and being subject to immediate immobilization.
D. Immobilization:
1. If the owner of a vehicle to whom notice has been sent fails to respond to the notice within the deadline therein specified by paying all fines, fees,
towing, storage and administrative charges then due, including, but not limited to, the amount(s) specified in subsection B of this section, or posting a
bond to cover such fines, fees and charges such that the vehicle can be removed from the scofflaw list, then, at the discretion of a commissioned
City officer, the vehicle may be immobilized by installing on the vehicle a device known as a "boot", which clamps and locks onto a wheel of the
vehicle and impedes movement of the vehicle.
2. The person installing the boot shall leave under the windshield wiper or otherwise attach to such vehicle a notice advising the owner that:
a. The vehicle has been immobilized by the City of Sandpoint for failure to pay six (6) or more uncontested parking tickets within forty five (45) days
of their issuance;
b. That release of the boot may be obtained by paying the fines, fees and civil penalties due;
c. That unless such payments are made within two (2) business days of the date of the notice, the vehicle will be impounded; and
d. That it is unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove the boot, to damage the boot, or to move the vehicle with the boot attached.
3. No parking restriction otherwise applicable to the vehicle applies while the vehicle is immobilized by a boot installed under the provisions of this
section.
4. Before the vehicle may be released from immobilization, the vehicle owner or an agent of the owner shall:
a. Pay all fines and fees and charges then due, or
b. Post a bond to cover such fines, fees, and charges, or
c. Arrange any combination of payment and bond to cover the total due.
Upon payment, the vehicle shall be removed from the scofflaw list, and the boot shall promptly be removed from the vehicle. If any parking ticket
not included on the scofflaw list for which the owner is liable becomes overdue before the owner or agent pays, the subsequent tickets shall also
be paid before the vehicle may be removed from the scofflaw list or released from immobilization.
E. Impoundment:
1. At the discretion of a commissioned City officer, the following vehicles may be impounded:
a. A vehicle that was immobilized pursuant to subsection D of this section and the vehicle's owner failed to pay all fines, fees, and administrative
charges or post a bond to cover such fines, fees and charges within two (2) business days of the date the vehicle was immobilized; or
b. As otherwise authorized by the Idaho Motor Vehicle Laws as adopted by reference in section 6-1-1 of this chapter.
2. If a vehicle has been impounded as provided herein, before the vehicle may be released from impound, the vehicle owner or an agent of the owner
shall pay all fines and fees then owing, and all towing and vehicle storage charges. Upon such payment, the vehicle and owner shall be removed
from the scofflaw list. If any parking ticket not included on the scofflaw list for which the owner is liable becomes overdue before the owner or agent
pays, such subsequent tickets shall also be paid before the vehicle may be removed from the scofflaw list or released from impoundment. (Ord.
1328, 7-6-2016)
6-1-4-7: FEES FOR VIOLATIONS OF PARKING REGULATIONS:
Fees for violations of parking regulations shall be set by resolution adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 968, 3-20-1995)
6-1-4-8: CIVIL PENALTY:
The operator or registered owner of each motor vehicle found to be parked in violation of this chapter and upon notice of violation as herein set forth shall
pay a fee as set by resolution adopted by the City Council. Upon nonpayment of said fee, any registered owner or operator of a vehicle shall be liable and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 90/303
responsible for payment of all fees, costs and attorney fees incurred in the collection of such fees as a civil penalty for which the City shall be entitled to
recover civil judgment from a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon entry of judgment, the City shall have each, every, and all rights of enforcement of that
judgment as provided to any judgment holder by the provision of Idaho Code. (Ord. 968, 3-20-1995)
6-1-4-9: IMPOUND VEHICLES:
A. Any officer, upon discovery of a vehicle reported as stolen and not recovered, or any vehicle involved in any extraordinary circumstances, may take the
vehicle into custody and cause it to be taken to and stored in a suitable place, or may cause the vehicle to be placed in the custody of a tow truck
operator, all expenses of towing and storage to be those of the vehicle owner.
B. "Extraordinary circumstances" means any situation where an emergency exists or public safety is endangered, and any situation in which a vehicle: 1)
is blocking or impeding traffic; 2) is causing a hazard; 3) has the potential of impeding any emergency vehicles; 4) is impeding any snow removal or
other road maintenance operation; or 5) is not registered, or displays a license plate registration tag which has been expired for a period in excess of
thirty (30) days. (Ord. 968, 3-20-1995)
6-1-4-10: TEMPORARY NO PARKING ZONES; BARRICADES AND SIGNS; AUTHORITY; TOWING:
The City may establish temporary no parking zones to prevent the parking of vehicles on any street or portion of such street. The City may do so either by
placing appropriate signs or placing barricades or public safety officers at such places. It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle at such time and at
such designated places. Illegally parked vehicles may be removed and stored at the owners cost and expense. (Ord. 1352, 6-6-2018)
6-1-5: ONE-WAY STREETS DESIGNATED:
South Huron Avenue and Lakeview Boulevard are public streets within the City and that portion of South Huron Avenue and Lakeview Boulevard between
Antone Avenue and Euclid Avenue is hereby designated a one-way street only. The direction of travel on the above described portion of South Huron
Avenue and Lakeview Boulevard shall proceed in one-way directional traffic only from Antone Street to Euclid Avenue.
Portions of Pine Street and Main Street are hereby designated as one-way streets. Those portions designated for one-way and direction of travel shall be
as follows:
Eastbound on Pine Street from Fifth Avenue to Fourth Avenue.
Eastbound on Main Street from Fifth Avenue to Third Avenue.
Westbound on Main Street from Sixth Avenue to Boyer Avenue. (Ord. 1352, 6-6-2018)
6-1-6: "BIKE" PATHS OR TRAILS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any area designated as a "bike" path or trail. Such areas are restricted for bicycles and
pedestrian travel only. (1983 Code)
6-1-7: CARELESS DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in a careless manner or to drive carelessly as hereinafter defined and set forth over or along
any public street, alley, or public right-of-way within the City. For the purpose of this section and its enforcement to "operate in a careless manner or drive
carelessly" shall be construed to mean the operation of a motor vehicle without that degree of care commonly exercised by a reasonable and prudent
driver under like or similar circumstances and the same shall include, but not be limited to, the following specific acts of careless operation:
A. Starting or operating a motor vehicle in such manner as to cause the wheels to spin with sufficient force to throw gravel or other road surface material
from under such wheels so as to endanger or be likely to endanger persons or property.
B. Starting, stopping or operating a motor vehicle in such manner as to leave rubber marks on the roadway.
C. Failure to reduce speed to appropriate speed below twenty five (25) miles per hour when driving in a residential district where children can be seen
playing or are known to be playing.
D. Operating a motor vehicle in such manner as indicates the driver thereof is not in complete control thereof at all times.
E. Operating a motor vehicle when the physical and mental condition of the driver thereof is such that he cannot maintain safe and complete control of
such vehicle.
F. Failing to pay attention to the duties pertinent to the safe operation of any motor vehicle.
G. Failure to reduce speed to reasonable and prudent speed when roadway is icy, slick or wet or when other weather or road conditions require a
reduction in speed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 91/303
Any person found in violation of this section, upon conviction, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 721, 5-19-1980; amd. 1983 Code)
6-1-8: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person riding upon a bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle to attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a
roadway. (1958 Code)
6-1-9: RAILROAD TRAINS BLOCKING STREETS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such manner as to
prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to trains or
cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. (1958 Code)
6-1-10: PARADES AND PROCESSIONS1:
(Rep. by Ord. 1052, 3-21-2001)
6-1-11: BUSINESS DISTRICT DEFINED:
As used in this chapter, all those areas within the City limits currently, or as hereafter may be within a commercial or industrial zone. (Ord. 1336, 11-2-
2016)
6-1-12: TRUCK ROUTE VIOLATIONS:
6-1-12-1: OVERWEIGHT COMMERCIAL TRUCKS:
It shall be unlawful for any commercially operated truck having a gross weight capacity of more than twenty three thousand (23,000) GVW to deviate from
designated truck routes within the City. (Ord. 1352, 6-6-2018)
6-1-12-2: EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be an exception from this requirement when the truck is:
A. Making a delivery or pick up to a location not on a truck route; or
B. Providing services at a location not on a truck route. (Ord. 1352, 6-6-2018)
6-1-12-3: PENALTY:
Any violation of this section 6-1-12 shall be punishable as an infraction, with penalties and fines, as provided in Idaho Code section 18-113A. (Ord. 1352,
6-6-2018)
6-1-13: AIRCRAFT TRAVEL ON CITY OF SANDPOINT STREETS:
6-1-13-1: PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any aircraft to taxi or be taxied, travel on, be driven or be towed on public streets within the City. (Ord. 1352, 6-6-2018)
6-1-13-2: EXCEPTION:
It shall be an exception from this violation when:
A. The aircraft's owner and/or operator has obtained and is in compliance with a valid airport transport permit from the City of Sandpoint. (Ord. 1352, 6-6-
2018)
6-1-13-3: PENALTY:
Any violation of this section 6-1-13, including noncompliance with the permit, shall be punishable as an infraction, with penalties and fines, as provided in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 92/303
Idaho Code section 18-113A. (Ord. 1352, 6-6-2018)
6-1-14: AIR COMPRESSION BRAKES:
A. The use of air compression brakes, otherwise known as "jake brakes", by any truck operator/driver within the City of Sandpoint is hereby prohibited and
shall be unlawful except under circumstances where the use of air compression brakes is necessary to prevent an accident or injury to persons or
property. (Ord. 1100, 1-21-2004)
B. The penalty for the use of unmuffled air compression brakes within the City limits of the City of Sandpoint shall be an infraction with penalties and fines,
as provided in Idaho Code section 18-113A. (Ord. 1352, 6-6-2018)
6-1-15: MOTORIZED SCOOTERS, KARTS AND HUMAN TRANSPORTERS:
The use of gas or electric powered motorized scooters, karts, and human transporters on City property is hereby regulated as follows:
A. May be used on streets, roads, alleys and other public rights-of-way if the gas or electric powered motorized scooter, kart, or human transporter is
licensed as a vehicle by the State of Idaho and the driver is a licensed driver by the State of Idaho (or any other state).
B. Use is prohibited on sidewalks, bike paths, bike lanes, parks, town square and other City property unless authorized and permitted by the City Council
with signs erected by the City to give notice of such allowed use.
C. The use of such equipment on private property with the permission of the owner is permitted provided that the noise from such machine does not
disturb other persons, in which case such use will constitute a nuisance.
D. This section shall not be construed to apply to motorized wheelchairs operated by a handicapped individual. (Ord. 1110, 4-21-2004)
E. Any violation of this section shall be an infraction with penalties and fines, as provided in Idaho Code section 18-113A. (Ord. 1352, 6-6-2018)
Chapter 2
NONMETERED PARKING REGULATIONS
6-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the NONMETERED PARKING REGULATION CHAPTER. (Ord. 824, 4-21-1986)
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
ROADWAY: That portion of a street between the regularly established curb lines.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent property lines.
STREET: Every way set apart for public travel except alleyways, bridle paths, bicycle paths and footpaths.
VEHICLE: A conveyance propelled by motor power. (Ord. 824, 4-21-1986)
6-2-3: DOWNTOWN LIMITED PARKING ZONE:
The "Downtown Limited Parking Zone" shall mean nonmetered zones within which the parking of vehicles shall be allowed, controlled, regulated and
inspected by marking or recording methods. The Downtown Limited Parking Zone established for the purposes of this chapter and the areas where
limitations apply shall be described by resolution adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 1177, 7-18-2007)
6-2-4: SIGNS:
The City of Sandpoint has the responsibility for installing traffic control signs in the Downtown Limited Parking Zone established by resolution of the
Governing Body, for the purpose of giving notification of the maximum time for parking and other traffic and parking regulations in the Downtown Limited
Parking Zone. (Ord. 1177, 7-18-2007)
6-2-5: TIME LIMIT:
The maximum time limit permitted for parking in the downtown parking zones shall be two (2) hours, three (3) hours or four (4) hours per the parking signs
on the streets, and up to twenty four (24) hours in the three (3) City parking lots. The free City parking lots are designated as the ITD parking lot - West of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 93/303
5th Avenue, the downtown City parking lot - on 3rd Avenue between Church and Oak Streets; and the Sand Creek parking lot - off Bridge Street across
Sand Creek from downtown. (Ord. 1352, 6-6-2018)
6-2-6: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, or to permit any vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by, such person to be parked at a location in the
Downtown Limited Parking Zone, including the City parking lots, in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any Municipal signs restricting parking.
No person shall remove, obstruct, and/or in any manner destroy the parking marks upon the tires of cars, which marks have been placed by person(s)
authorized by City to keep track of the length of time vehicles are parked. The first violation shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). A new or subsequent violation may be charged as a misdemeanor with the maximum penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 1309, 12-3-2014)
6-2-7: RECORD OF VIOLATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, under the direction of the Governing Body, to keep account of all violations of this section. He shall cause to be
kept an account of and report each vehicle occupying a parking location in the Downtown Limited Parking Zone that is or has been parked in violation of
any of the provisions of this section, the date and hour of such violation, the make and the state license number of such vehicle and any other facts, a
knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. (Ord. 1177, 7-18-2007)
6-2-8: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
The Chief of Police shall cause to be attached to such vehicle a notice stating that it has been parked in violation of this chapter and instructing the owner
or operator to report to the City Treasurer or his duly authorized deputy and pay in full satisfaction of such violation a fee set by resolution adopted by the
City Council. (Ord. 824, 4-21-1986)
6-2-9: EXEMPTIONS; HANDICAPPED PARKING:
Those vehicles bearing valid and current license plates and bearing the official handicapped insignia and symbol on the license plate shall be exempted
from the time restrictions as provided in Idaho Code 49-213. Those vehicles bearing valid and current license plates and designated "DV" only are entitled
to park within a space for a period not to exceed the maximum two (2) hour time limit. Nothing herein shall authorize, except, exempt or permit any vehicle
to park in a "no parking zone" or other restricted parking areas. (Ord. 824, 4-21-1986)
6-2-10: RESPONSIBILITY OF REGISTERED OWNER:
Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered shall be responsible for any violation of this chapter for over parking or unlawful parking caused by the
parking of said vehicle in violation hereof. It shall be no defense that the vehicle was parked illegally or over parked by another unless proof is presented
that said vehicle had been stolen and had not been returned to the registered owner by the date of the violation. (Ord. 824, 4-21-1986)
6-2-11: OVER PARKING FEES:
Over parking fees shall be set by resolution adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 969, 3-20-1995)
6-2-12: CIVIL PENALTY:
The operator or registered owner of each motor vehicle found to be overparked in violation of this chapter and upon notice of violation as herein set forth
shall pay a parking fee as set by resolution adopted by the City Council. Upon nonpayment of said parking fee, any registered owner or operator of a
vehicle shall be liable and responsible for payment of all fees, costs and attorney fees incurred in the collection of such fees as a civil penalty for which the
City shall be entitled to recover civil judgment from a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon entry of judgment, the City shall have each, every, and all rights
of enforcement of that judgment as provided to any judgment holder by the provision of Idaho Code. (Ord. 969, 3-20-1995)
6-2-13: CRIMINAL PENALTY:
Any parking violation that is unpaid or contested, or where more than three (3) violations occur in any one month, may be prosecuted as an infraction with
a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). Such penalty shall be in addition to any civil penalty imposed. (Ord. 1151, 6-21-2006)
Chapter 3
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 94/303
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE OR OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY: An automobile or personal property which remains upon the street or other public
property for a period of time longer than forty eight (48) hours, the owner of which cannot be located or the owner refuses to remove the same.
STOLEN MOTOR VEHICLE OR OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY: That property which the Police Department has reasonable grounds to believe to be
stolen.
UNIDENTIFIED MOTOR VEHICLE OR OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY: Such motor vehicles or other personal property where ownership thereof cannot
be ascertained. (Revised Code 1958)
6-3-2: REMOVAL OF UNIDENTIFIED, STOLEN, WRECKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES; CHARGES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or any person in charge of a motor vehicle or other personal property to leave or abandon the same upon the streets
or public places.
B. The Police Department is hereby authorized, in addition to any penalty that may be provided therefor, to remove an unidentified, stolen, wrecked or
abandoned motor vehicle or other personal property as herein defined, found upon any public thoroughfare or other property of the City and shall keep
the same in its custody and control at such place as may be designated by said Police Department until redeemed by the owner; and all such
unidentified, stolen, wrecked or abandoned motor vehicles or other personal property which now is in the possession of the Police Department shall be
subject to the actual cost of removal or tow-in from the public place and the storage charge as long as the same is in possession and custody. (Revised
Code 1958)
6-3-3: REMOVAL OF VEHICLE FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY:
If at any time, a vehicle is parked upon private property without the consent of the owner of such property, the Police Department is hereby authorized to
remove said vehicle therefrom and to cause the same to be stored, provided the owner of such private property has first signed a complaint against the
owner or operator of said vehicle.
The City shall have a lien for all necessary costs of removing and storing such vehicle and said vehicle may be held by the City until such lien is paid.
(Revised Code 1958)
6-3-4: ENFORCEMENT OF LIEN ON PROPERTIES IMPOUNDED:
All motor vehicles and other personal property impounded or heretofore impounded by the Police Department and unredeemed by the owner thereof for a
period of sixty (60) days shall thereafter be subject to sale by the Chief of Police to the highest bidder for cash as hereinafter provided, and the proceeds of
said sale shall be applied to the removal and storage charges accumulated against each article, which shall be deposited with the Treasurer and credited
with him and shall be kept in a separate fund for a period of one year from the date of receipt and if at the end of said year the former owner of said
property has not made satisfactory proof of claim, then the balance of said proceeds of sale shall be credited to the General Fund of the City. (Revised
Code 1958)
6-3-5: PROOF OF OWNERSHIP; APPEAL; REDEMPTION AFTER SALE:
Any person claiming to be the owner of any impounded property shall make written application therefor to the Police Department and shall furnish such
additional proof as may be required to establish said ownership. If he shall present to said Department the proof of his ownership of said impounded
property prior to the date of actual sale thereof, then the property itself shall be delivered to said owner under these conditions; but if said property has
been sold, then said Department shall endorse its findings of ownership with a copy of the written application which application and findings shall be
addressed to the Clerk and if presented within one year after said sale, then such balance of the proceeds of the sale, after deductions, shall be paid to
said owner. Any appeal from the removal, storage and publication costs, if any, assessed by the Police Department shall be in the same manner as
provided by law. (Revised Code 1958)
Chapter 4
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
CARRIAGE: Any horse or other animal drawn cart, wagon, vehicle or attached apparatus used for the purpose of transporting persons for compensation.
LICENSING AUTHORITY: The city council or its designee, herein referred to as the city.
LIMOUSINE: Any luxury motor vehicle driven by a chauffeur used for the purpose of transporting persons for hire.
OPERATION: The conducting of a general taxicab, limousine, pedicab or carriage business including, but not limited to, owning the business, contracting
or leasing the business or an individual vehicle.
OPERATOR OR DRIVER: An individual, including a taxicab or limousine owner, authorized to operate, drive, or staff a taxicab or limousine upon and
through the streets, avenues and alleys of the city.
PEDICAB: Any human powered vehicle that is able to be pedaled without any motor assistance, used for the purpose of transporting persons. A motor
assist may be permitted so long as it does not replace or become the primary source of power in moving the unit and is seven hundred fifty (750) watts or
less, is one horsepower or less, and cannot exceed twenty (20) miles per hour.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 95/303
TAXICAB: Any motor vehicle used for the purpose of transporting persons for hire, providing the "taxicab", as herein stated and defined, shall not include
school buses or other motor vehicles used exclusively for the transportation of children to and from school, nor a motor bus with a seating capacity of over
seven (7) passengers operated on a regular schedule over regularly designated streets, nor companies operating for the purpose of carrying United States
mail or other United States property.
TAXICAB, LIMOUSINE, PEDICAB OR CARRIAGE OWNER: The person, firm, copartner, corporation, individual or association securing a license to
operate a taxicab(s), limousine(s), pedicab(s) or carriage(s) upon and through the streets, avenues and alleys of the city. (Ord. 1215, 7-17-2009)
6-4-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
A. Application For Taxicab, Limousine, Carriage, Or Pedicab Business License: No person shall engage in the business of operating a limousine, taxicab
or taxicabs, carriage or pedicab within the corporate limits of the city without first complying with all of the provisions of this chapter. Verified
applications for a license for taxicabs and limousines shall be made by owner thereof upon forms to be furnished by the city clerk. Such application
shall contain the full name and address of the owner, the make, model, motor and factory number of the motor vehicle and the Idaho license number, if
applicable, for the current year. All rules and regulations in this chapter pertaining to taxicabs shall likewise pertain to limousine, carriage and pedicab
services unless otherwise stated. (Ord. 1215, 7-17-2009)
B. Authority To License And Control: The city council or its designee, hereinafter the "city" is hereby vested with complete authority to issue licenses for the
operation of taxicabs and to alter, revoke or amend or suspend the said licenses in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and to regulate and
limit the method of operation of taxicabs in accordance with this chapter, and to regulate taxicab operators, and is further vested with complete and full
authority and responsibility to carry into effect all of the provisions of this chapter relative to the operation of taxicabs. The city reserves the right to do a
complete background check on all owners and operators. The city shall have the authority to implement the requirements and restrictions of this
chapter. Any license now issued, and which may be hereafter issued to engage in the business of operating taxicabs on or over the streets and public
ways, shall mean and be construed to be only a license or privilege to use the streets and public ways for the business of operating taxicabs thereon.
The council or its designee may, where appropriate, reduce the conditions or limits established in this chapter if the license applicant is only operating a
pedicab or carriage; otherwise, all requirements for a taxicab may apply. (Ord. 1271, 6-20-2012)
C. Applicant; Conditions: No person shall be issued a license to engage in the business of owning and maintaining a taxicab, nor shall the owner authorize
any person to operate a taxicab when that person:
1. Does not possess a valid U.S. driver's license;
2. Is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
3. Is not a bona fide owner of such business, if applying for taxicab owner license;
4. Has been convicted of a felony involving injury or threatened injury to another person or who is a registered sex offender;
5. Has been, within three (3) years prior to the date of making application for such license, convicted of, paid any fine, been placed on probation,
received a deferred sentence, received any withheld judgment, suffered the forfeiture of a bond for failure to appear or completed any sentence for
confinement for any felony or any misdemeanor or infraction which involves a moving traffic violation, except that the city may in its discretion waive
the disqualification provided in this subsection upon finding that the nature of the crime committed by the applicant and the extent of the rehabilitation
of the applicant does not pose a threat to the safety and health of the taxi passengers;
6. Has ever been convicted of, or pled guilty to, a felony case of driving under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs;
7. Has, at the time of such application, an outstanding warrant;
8. Has had a similar license revoked by the city or any other city of this state or of the United States. (Ord. 1215, 7-17-2009)
D. Mayor And Council To Approve Application; Renewal: Before the city clerk shall issue a license for any taxicab, the application must first be presented
to the city council for approval and upon such approval and the payment of the necessary fees and compliance with all other sections of this chapter,
the city clerk shall issue a license in such form as may be prescribed by the city clerk. The clerk is authorized to renew such licenses annually so long
as the applicant complies with all provisions of this section. (Ord. 1271, 6-20-2012)
E. License Card: Each taxicab shall carry a card issued by the clerk verifying the license. Each card shall contain the name of the licensee, the date of its
issuance, the date of its expiration, the official license number of the motor vehicle and the make and model thereof. (Ord. 1215, 7-17-2009)
6-4-3: AUTHORIZED OPERATORS/DRIVERS:
Before any owner/licensee authorizes a person to drive a taxicab, the owner/licensee shall submit the completed application for taxicab driver form
containing required information on the driver to the chief of police. All drivers must comply with the following standards and rules:
A. Applicant Conditions: All requirements of subsection 6-4-2C of this chapter.
B. Mandatory Drug Testing: Every person authorized to drive a taxicab under this chapter who is involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of
any person, or damage to the property of any one person in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) while providing taxicab service shall submit to
one or more tests as may be required to determine the amount of alcohol, narcotics, and prescription and nonprescription drugs present in such
person. Any such required test(s) shall be at such authorized person's own expense.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 96/303
C. Revocation; Denial: If any required test shows the presence of illegal drugs, alcohol in excess of the legal limit established in Idaho Code title 18,
chapter 80, prescription drugs used other than as prescribed, or evidence of intoxicants, such person's authorization to drive a taxicab shall be
immediately revoked. Refusal to submit to any test required shall result in the immediate revocation of the authorization to drive a taxicab. Following
revocation under this subsection, no authorization to drive a taxicab shall be granted to that person until three (3) years immediately following the last
violation of this subsection.
D. Dangerous Driving: No authorization to drive a taxicab shall be granted to any person where satisfactory proof is submitted that such person operates
motor vehicles in an unskillful, dangerous or reckless manner, or who repeatedly violates the laws of the city relating to traffic or this chapter.
E. Medical Certificate: Every two (2) years each taxicab driver shall submit with the application a medical certificate from a licensed physician specifically
stating that the applicant has good hearing, vision, and general health such that the person has no known physical conditions or disabilities which
would impair the safe operation of a taxicab. The city's medical certificate form shall be completed and returned with the application for taxicab driver
form.
F. Renewal: Authorization to drive a taxicab shall not be given to a person who, at the time of application for renewal of authorization issued hereunder
would not be eligible or qualified for such authorization upon a first application, and a driver must continue to have and maintain all the qualifications. A
renewal application will also include an annual background check and medical certification every two (2) years.
G. Owner Notification: The chief of police shall promptly notify the owner if he is aware a driver is not qualified to drive; however, the owner remains
responsible to monitor drivers and ensure they meet the requirements of this chapter.
H. License Issuance, Transfer, Display: Authorized taxicab drivers will be issued an individual taxicab driver's license authorizing them to operate a taxicab
under any taxicab company's license within the city of Sandpoint. The taxi driver may transfer this license to another taxicab company after review of
the city of Sandpoint police department. A taxicab driver's license shall be displayed to the public or a law enforcement officer upon request. (Ord.
1161, 11-15-2006)
6-4-4: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Before any license is issued for any taxicab, the owners thereof shall be required to file with the city clerk a certified copy of a policy of insurance executed
by an insurance company authorized to do business within the state insuring the public against any loss or damage which may result to any person or
persons from the operation of said taxicab, provided the limited amount of liability in such policy of insurance specified shall be as follows:
A. Property damage: Not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) except for carriages and pedicabs, which shall be not less than twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00).
B. Public liability: Minimum five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per incident except for carriages and pedicabs, which shall be not less than one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
C. Provide for notice to the city of nonrenewal or cancellation of insurance coverage.
D. The license to operate such taxicab business shall expire of itself or terminate upon the cancellation of said insurance for failure to pay premiums or for
any other reason and no license shall be granted or be effective unless the taxicab for which said license is requested has been fully covered with
insurance as hereinabove specified. (Ord. 1215, 7-17-2009)
6-4-5: LICENSE FEES AND CARD:
Owners of taxicabs licensed hereunder shall pay to the city clerk an annual license fee set by resolution adopted by the city council. Taxicab drivers shall
pay to the city clerk an annual background check fee set by resolution adopted by the city council. Such license shall expire on the last day of each year
and must be renewed before the first day of the following year. Proof of the license provided for herein shall be plainly posted in said taxicab in such a
manner that the same may be readily readable and legible to the passenger or passengers therein. It shall be printed and posted in such a manner and
placed in said taxicab as shall be approved by the chief of police. It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to operate without such proof of license being so
posted. (Ord. 1161, 11-15-2006)
6-4-6: TRANSFER OF LICENSES:
Taxicab business owners' licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable subject to the consent and approval of the city council;
provided, however, that no license may be issued to another or to any other person until such licensee or person has applied for a license and has been
found to be qualified to obtain such license under the provisions of this chapter; provided, further, that upon the approval of the transfer of any license as
herein provided, the city clerk shall charge and collect a fee set by resolution for transferring said license and issue a new license as provided for in this
chapter. (Ord. 1161, 11-15-2006)
6-4-7: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
In addition to other suspensions and revocations provided for in this chapter, the following procedures shall govern the suspension or revocation of
licenses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 97/303
A. Any license granted under this chapter may be suspended at any time by the chief of police for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any
other ordinance of the city, state or federal law, or if such vehicle shall or has been used for any immoral, illegal, disorderly or improper purpose.
B. Any licensed owner or licensed operator of a taxicab vehicle within Sandpoint who violates any provision of the Idaho Code or this code, in addition to:
1) the criminal or civil penalties prescribed by law for such violation, and 2) the suspension and revocation provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to
a temporary suspension of their taxicab license for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days.
C. Notice of a temporary suspension may be personally served which suspension shall be effective upon such service. However, notice shall also be
deemed properly served if sent by U.S. postal service certified mail to the address on file in the city clerk's office that was provided by the licensee.
Such temporary suspension shall then be effective at one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. on the third day following the date written notice is
mailed to the licensed owner or licensed operator. A licensee's failure to accept, acknowledge, or receive notification of a temporary suspension shall
not invalidate the temporary suspension, provided notice was served as provided in this subsection. Notice of a temporary suspension shall include
grounds for the temporary suspension, and shall include a statement that informs the licensee of their right to appeal the temporary suspension. A
license may be temporarily suspended for good cause even though no criminal charge or infraction is filed. Any operation of a taxicab during the period
of a temporary suspension shall be deemed a separate offense for each day of such operation. (Ord. 1191, 6-18-2008)
D. Any licensed owner or licensed operator of a taxicab within the city of Sandpoint whose license is temporarily suspended pursuant to this section may
appeal the temporary suspension to the city council by filing a written request with the city clerk's office within fifteen (15) working days of the start of
the temporary suspension. Upon appeal, a temporary suspension shall be stayed pending a determination by the city council, unless a separate finding
is made by the chief of police that continued operation under the applicant's license would endanger the public, with the reasons for such finding being
clearly stated. In the event an appeal of a suspension is denied by the city council, the suspension period shall commence at one minute after twelve
o'clock (12:01) A.M. on the day immediately following issuance of the denial by the city council. (Ord. 1271, 6-20-2012)
E. The city council may revoke any license issued under this chapter for any cause which would have disqualified the applicant from receiving a license
upon a first application. Further, if the city shall receive a complaint of deficiency or violation which, after investigation, proves to be valid, the licensee
shall be served with a warning notice and citation providing five (5) working days to rectify. If the deficiency or violation is not corrected within said five
(5) working days, the license shall be revoked for the remainder of the year. (Ord. 1274, 7-18-2012)
6-4-8: VEHICLE INSPECTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate and use or permit or allow the operation and use of any vehicle as a taxicab upon the streets of the city
unless such vehicle has been inspected and approved. All vehicles shall be kept in good and proper mechanical order and of sanitary and good
appearance, inside and outside. All taxicabs operated by one taxicab company shall be easily distinguishable from taxicabs operated by other companies.
Each taxicab shall have a lighted sign to indicate that the vehicle is in service or out of service. All vehicles (carriages and pedicabs excluded) shall be
equipped with a taximeter which automatically registers the amount of the fare; such taximeter shall be installed so the taximeter and the amount of fare
shall be plainly visible to the passengers riding in the taxicab. There shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each taxicab a rate card or sticker, of not
less than four inches by six inches (4" x 6") in size, stating the rates of the taxicab, or rate policy of the pedicab or carriage. Inspection of the mechanical
safety and sanitary condition of each vehicle shall be made by an ASE certified mechanic designated by the city council or by the police chief for that
purpose. Mechanical inspections shall certify the vehicle is equipped with, but not be limited to, properly working brakes (pedicabs must have 2 sets of
operational brakes: 1 located on the front wheel and the other located on the back axle), lights, turn signals, tires, horn or bell, muffler, rear vision mirrors,
seat belts, and windshield wipers in good condition. Windshields shall not have any defect which obstructs or impedes the view of the driver. Further,
pedicabs shall only have a single frame; bike trailers or similar devices will not be permitted. Carriages must have appropriate braking systems and lights
satisfactory to the city's designee. The mechanical inspection shall be reviewed by the chief of police. The chief of police shall inspect each taxicab
concerning its sanitary condition. All taxicabs shall be so inspected on or before January 1 of each year. (Ord. 1215, 7-17-2009)
6-4-9: OPERATING RULES:
A. The driver of any motor vehicle used within the city to transport passengers for hire shall be required to bring such vehicle to a complete stop before
driving across any railroad crossing within the city.
B. No smoking shall be permitted in a taxicab, pedicab or carriage at any time.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a taxicab to carry more passengers than the rated seating capacity of said motor vehicle as given by the
manufacturer of said vehicle and not more than one person shall occupy the front seat with the driver at the same time while the taxicab is in operation.
D. All occupants shall wear seat belts (except in carriages and pedicabs, which must be equipped with seat belts that may be worn at the occupants'
discretion).
E. It shall be unlawful for any person driving a taxicab, pedicab, carriage or limousine to use a handheld cellphone while operating the vehicle, when
vehicle is in motion.
F. Taxicab, pedicab, carriage and limousine companies and drivers are subject to all applicable federal, state and local laws.
G. Horse or animal drawn carriages shall be equipped with a manure catching device which will capture and retain animal manure. All manure will be
removed from the capture device as soon as is practical and stored in a covered metal container provided by the carriage operator. The carriage
operator will be responsible for the disposal of animal manure at an approved location outside the city limits.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 98/303
H. All pedicabs and carriages operating at night must use headlights. (Ord. 1215, 7-17-2009)
6-4-10: PENALTY:
In addition to being subject to license revocation or suspension, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 1161, 11-15-2006)
6-4-11: PEDICABS AND CARRIAGES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any pedicab or carriage on the following streets (except for crossing the streets):
Highway 2; and
Highway 95 north of Larch Street. (Ord. 1215, 7-17-2009)
Chapter 5
HUMAN POWERED VEHICLES
6-5-1: DEFINITION:
A "human powered vehicle" is a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, scooter or other toy vehicle operated by human power excluding perambulators or
wheelchairs or other like vehicles being used by handicapped or infirm persons. (Ord. 861, 5-16-1988)
6-5-2: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, operate, or cause to be operated any human powered vehicle on the sidewalks except to cross a sidewalk when
entering or exiting an alleyway, a private drive or a crosswalk within the following described areas:
The south side of the sidewalk right of way on Alder to the south side of the sidewalk right of way on Pine;
From the west side of the sidewalk right of way on Fifth Avenue to the west edge of Sand Creek; and
The sidewalk of Bridge Street. (Ord. 861, 5-16-1988)
6-5-3: RIDING ON STREETS PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1298, 3-19-2014)
6-5-4: RIDING AT CITY PARKS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, operate or cause to be operated any human powered vehicle at Jeff Jones Town Square or at any of the
following areas at the city parks: the tennis courts, the basketball courts when posted, the picnic shelters, decks, docks, piers, stages, the sidewalks when
posted, and the boat ramps. (Ord. 1113, 6-16-2004)
6-5-5: SKATEBOARD RAMPS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to set up, operate or use skateboard ramps on any public property. (Ord. 861, 5-16-1988)
6-5-6: HUMAN POWERED VEHICLE DEMONSTRATIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the mayor and/or the city council from allowing bicycle, skateboard or other human powered vehicle exhibits or
demonstrations at designated locations by prior approved permit. (Ord. 861, 5-16-1988)
6-5-7: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter or any part of this chapter shall constitute an infraction which shall be punishable pursuant to Idaho Code 49-3406. (Ord. 861,
5-16-1988)
Chapter 6
SPECIAL EVENTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 99/303
6-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
APPLICANT: Any person applying for a "permit" as defined herein. The true applicant for any such permit shall be the sponsoring entity whether such
sponsoring entity is an individual person, a corporation, a partnership or other legal entity of any type.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The Chief of Police of the City of Sandpoint or the Chief's authorized designee.
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY: An occupying of City property conducted or sponsored by any person at which a product or service is offered for sale or rent
with the intent of making a profit, whether or not such profit is for a nonprofit cause.
NONCOMMERCIAL ACTIVITY: An occupying of, or an occurrence or happening on City property at which no product or service is offered for sale or rent.
PARK: Any property owned or leased by the City or governed by permits issued to the City by the Army Corps of Engineers or State of Idaho and
managed as a park or recreational area.
PERMIT: The permit as required by this chapter for a "special event" as defined herein. An approved application will serve as the permit.
PERMITTEE: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind granted a permit for an activity regulated by this
chapter.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, public right-of-way, park, dock, parking lot or other place owned in fee or leased by the City, or
in, on or over which an easement exists in the name of or held by the City, or which exists for the benefit and use of the public.
SIDEWALK: Any area or way set aside or open to the general public for purpose of pedestrian or nonmotorized traffic, whether or not it is paved.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any meeting, dash, demonstration, festival, concert, march, marathon, parade, procession, public assembly, race, rally, sporting
tournament not sponsored by the City, gathering, performance, or the activity consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles or a combination thereof within a
public park, outdoor recreation area or facility, a public parking lot, or public right-of-way, such as a street, with an intent of attracting public attention which
has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or occupies any street or other public property managed by
the City of Sandpoint, or defined within the City's Special Event Policy and Procedures.
SPECIAL EVENT COORDINATOR: The City's employee with official duties as designated Special Event Coordinator.
SPONSOR: Each person making application to the City, and thereby becoming responsible for, a special event.
SPORTING EVENT: Any organized competitive recreational physical activity, commercial or noncommercial in nature, including league play, contests or
tournaments.
STREET: Any place or way set aside or open to the general public for primary purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder, parkway, rightof-
way, or median strip thereof. (Ord. 1358, 11-20-2018)
6-6-2: SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, participate in, or conduct any "special event" as defined by this chapter unless a permit has been issued by the Special Event
Coordinator for the date and location involved. The Special Event Permit Application, permit process and all other procedures required for a special event
are in the Special Event Policy and Procedures adopted by City Council by resolution. (Ord. 1358, 11-20-2018)
6-6-3: EXCEPTIONS TO PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
A. This chapter shall not apply to the following:
1. Community block watch events;
2. Funeral processions;
3. Government agencies acting within the scope of their function;
4. Students going to and from classes or participating in educational activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision
of the proper school authorities;
5. Activities not substantially interfering with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or occupying any street or other public
property managed by the City of Sandpoint;
6. Activities which involve only pedestrians standing on sidewalks. Such activity must not inhibit the use of the sidewalk by other persons. Driveways,
building entryways and crosswalk access shall be kept clear at all times.
B. Other activities sponsored by the City of Sandpoint in its Municipal capacity. (Ord. 1358, 11-20-2018)
6-6-4: APPLICATION AND PROPER NOTICE:
A person seeking a special event permit shall obtain an application form and file a completed application with the Special Event Coordinator on forms
provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 100/303
An application for a permit shall be filed with the Special Event Coordinator as soon as the applicant knows sufficient information to complete an
application and at least twenty one (21) days and not more than one year before a special event is proposed to commence.
This chapter is subject to amendment or replacement at any time, and any application for a special event permit shall be issued pursuant to the ordinance
in effect at the time of the application, but conduct during the special event shall be governed by standards legally required at the time the event occurs.
(Ord. 1358, 11-20-2018)
6-6-5: APPLICATION FEE:
Except as set forth in this section a nonrefundable application fee set by resolution of the City Council to cover the expenses incidental to processing the
application for the special event permit shall be paid at the time of filing of the special event application. This fee may be subsequently amended by
resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1358, 11-20-2018)
6-6-6: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
A. Statement Of Purpose: Standards of issuance for a special event permit are set forth in the City of Sandpoint Special Events Policy and Procedures
adopted by City Council. (Ord. 1358, 11-20-2018)
6-6-7: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit conditions within the Special Event Policy and Procedures, any special conditions required by the City
upon issuance of the permit and with all Federal, State and local laws. (Ord. 1358, 11-20-2018)
6-6-8: TIME, PLACE, AND MANNER RESTRICTIONS:
Prohibitions and regulations that apply to activities requiring a permit are referenced in the Special Event Policy and Procedures.
The terms and conditions of a permit (including providing insurance) shall not infringe upon rights of petition, assembly, or free expression protected by the
First Amendment of the United States Constitution and/or the Idaho Constitution. If an applicant asserts in writing that a term or condition proposed by the
Special Event Coordinator or Chief of Police infringes upon a constitutional right, the Special Event Coordinator or Chief of Police shall have the burden of
showing that the proposed term or condition is a reasonable time, place and manner restriction. (Ord. 1358, 11-20-2018)
6-6-9: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or who, having obtained a permit hereunder, fails to comply with the
conditions set forth in the approved permit is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as set forth by this Code with a
maximum fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) and/or imprisonment for up to one hundred eighty (180) days for each violation. (Ord. 1358, 11-20-2018)
6-6-10: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the Special Event Coordinator's denial of a permit or imposition of conditions to the City Council. The denied
applicant must make any appeal within forty eight (48) hours after receipt of the denial from the Special Event Coordinator by filing a written notice of
appeal with the Special Event Coordinator setting out the reasons therefor in writing. The City Council will hear the appeal at a regular or special meeting
and reach a determination prior to the planned date and time of the special event. (Ord. 1358, 11-20-2018)
6-6-11: EMERGENCY CANCELLATION/TERMINATION:
Notwithstanding issuance of a permit pursuant to provisions of this chapter, the Chief of Police is authorized to revoke a special event permit if he/she
determines, based upon competent evidence, that the conduct of the special event would bring about violence which would, with reasonable certainty,
result in injury to the public or to public safety personnel or which would result in damage to private property. Any such cancellation shall be communicated
to the sponsor/applicant as soon as possible after such determination has been made. (Ord. 1358, 11-20-2018)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREET AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY STANDARDS
7-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF STREET AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY STANDARDS:
There exists manuals, standards and specifications for uniform street construction, repair, maintenance, and traffic control published by the Local Highway
Technical Assistance Council (LHTAC), Idaho Transportation Department (ITD), and the National Transportation and Highway Safety Department, as listed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 101/303
in City Resolution 00-22. These manuals, standards, and specifications are hereby adopted by reference as the street and public rights-of-way standards
of the City. (Ord. 1038, 5-17-2000)
7-1-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of any person contemplating any improvement within the public right of way and streets of the City to secure a permit from the Public
Works Department prior to commencement of any street construction, maintenance, repair or improvements. Permit and permit fees shall be established
by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1038, 5-17-2000)
Chapter 2
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
7-2-1: PLACEMENT OF UTILITY POLES:
A. All poles hereafter set in the city shall be set within the curb line as established by the city and any person now having poles set in any of the streets or
alleys of the city, should any of said streets or alleys be widened, vacated, paved or changed, shall remove their poles therefrom and to the proper lines
upon notice from the public works director to do so. (Ord. 27, 9-17-1907; amd. 1983 Code; Ord. 1318, 10-21-2015)
B. This section is intended to apply to all persons now having franchises granted to them by the city, or who may hereafter procure such franchises, or who
may be operating or carrying on any business within the city requiring use of such poles.
C. The right to amend, alter or repeal this section is hereby reserved.
D. Any person violating this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and costs of
prosecution, or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by both. (Ord. 27, 9-17-1907; amd. 1983 Code)
7-2-2: PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY OBSTRUCTIONS; ENCROACHMENT PERMITS:
A. Public Right Of Way Obstructions Prohibited: Except as provided in subsections B, D, E and F of this section, no public street, sidewalk or right of way
shall be utilized at any time for the sale or storage of any goods, wares or merchandise of any kind. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be found guilty of an infraction and punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day such
violation continues shall be a separate violation.
B. Encroachment Permits For Sidewalks:
1. An applicant who owns or is leasing property adjacent to and contiguous with the public right of way in a commercial zone within the city limits may
encroach upon a public sidewalk, street or right of way by first obtaining an encroachment permit from the public works department of the city.
2. The public works department's determination of the appropriate nature and extent of such encroachment shall be based on the public health, safety
and welfare as affected by the conditions relating to each individual application and shall be based on the provisions of subsections C, D, E and F of
this section. All applications shall be made to the public works department for processing, evaluation, determination and granting or denial.
3. Such encroachment permit may be granted and issued by the public works department.
a. Temporary encroachment permits may be issued for encroachments which may be in place during the dates and times specified by the public
works department on the encroachment permit.
b. Permanent encroachment permits may be issued for the installation or placing of permanent improvements and encroachments into the public
right of way. In all cases of a leaseholder applying for a permit for a permanent encroachment, such applicant shall contemporaneously with the
filing of the application, submit to such officer a written, acknowledged consent for the same from all owners of record of the leased property.
c. All permits issued shall be issued to the applicant only but shall be binding upon the owner or owners of the subject real property. If the applicant is
a lessee, the permit may be transferred to the lessee's successors, heirs, legal representatives and assigns.
d. Applicants granted a permit shall, in writing, on behalf of the applicant and the applicant's successors, heirs, legal representatives and assigns,
indemnify and hold harmless the city from any liability for personal injury, property damage or otherwise that may arise from such encroachment
and shall be solely liable and responsible for any damages, claims of damage, legal liability or claim of liability from any person, persons, business,
partnership, corporation or any other entity or person injured, harmed or claiming injury or harm from such encroachment.
4. Fees shall be charged to each applicant for each permit pursuant to a schedule established by resolution adopted by the city council.
5. Permits shall not be available as a matter of right and may be refused or revoked with or without cause. Every permit granted and issued under the
authority and provisions of this section may be terminated and revoked, after notice and hearing by the city council, upon its determination of
violation or abuse of said permit, or any other reason or justifiable cause, or may be terminated as specified in subsections E and F of this section.
C. Pedestrian Configuration In Commercial And Downtown Areas: These configurations shall be defined by three (3) main zones between the property line
and the curb face.
1. The building frontage zone:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 102/303
a. This zone applies when a building front or similar surface is within two feet (2') of the property line; the zone extends a minimum of two feet (2')
from such a vertical surface, and shall generally be kept clear of obstructions for building entry and window shopping, and where greater than
three feet (3') wide may include seating to enhance the adjoining business.
b. No items placed in this zone may encroach into the pedestrian travel zone, nor shall the intended use of an item in this zone encroach into the
pedestrian travel zone.
c. Minimum clear height is eight feet (8') above the right of way.
2. The pedestrian travel zone:
a. This zone has a minimum width of five feet (5'), beginning at least two feet (2') from a building front. The width may be decreased by means of a
written variance from the city engineer for construction sites, street maintenance, or utility work. At the time a permit is issued which restricts the
pedestrian travel zone to less than five feet (5') for more than seven (7) days' duration, the city will notify the Downtown Sandpoint Business
Association.
b. This zone shall be free of all impediments, including signs, utility poles, seating, tree grate openings, bicycles parked in a bike rack, trash cans,
merchandise displays, excessive slope (more than 2 percent cross slope and 8.3 percent in the direction of travel), overhanging objects less than
eight feet (8') above the surface, or any similar obstructions.
3. The features and planting zone:
a. This zone begins at the street side of the pedestrian travel zone and extends to the curb; it must be at least one foot (1') wide next to diagonal
parking areas to allow for the overhang of vehicles and will not exist if the pedestrian travel zone abuts the curb.
b. This zone may contain impediments like street trees and grates, utility poles, street signs, seating, bicycle parking, and trash cans.
D. Awnings, Canopies, Marquees And Other Overhead Obstructions:
1. Construction shall comply with applicable building codes. The minimum vertical clearance from the pedestrian surface for any overhead obstruction
including an awning valance shall be eight feet (8').
2. Awnings, canopies or marquees along First Avenue, Fifth Avenue, Cedar Street and Pine Street may require an encroachment permit from the state
of Idaho.
3. Signs attached to or printed on awnings, canopies, or marquees require a sign permit and approval from the city of Sandpoint. Signs separate from
an awning, canopy, or marquee do not require an encroachment permit (except as noted in subsection D2 of this section) but do require a sign
permit and approval from the city of Sandpoint. (Ord. 1159, 11-15-2006)
E. Sidewalk Displays: The owner or manager of a business upon abutting property making retail sales to the public may display upon the public sidewalk
goods or wares that are being offered for sale inside the business. Sales of merchandise or goods displayed must occur on the abutting privately
owned property. Displays shall be removed during those hours that the business is closed. If the display is in place before sunrise or after sunset, the
display must be lighted and readily visible to passing pedestrians.
1. Any location of a sidewalk display shall not reduce or obstruct the pedestrian travel zone to less than five feet (5') of sidewalk width if the display is
located in either the building frontage zone or the planting and features zone, and shall not reduce or obstruct the pedestrian travel zone to less than
six feet (6') if the display is located in both the building frontage zone and the planting and features zone. Displays must maintain a minimum
distance of two feet (2') from the face of the curb. Placement of displays shall be subject to any applicable standards of the Americans with
disabilities act, and shall not obstruct the entrance of a building, vehicular traffic or parking, or the use of any crosswalk, wheelchair ramp, bus or taxi
zone.
2. The display may not contain liquor, tobacco, firearms, munitions, or any item which a minor is prohibited from purchasing by law, or any item
restricted by the fire code from direct access or handling by the public.
3. Merchandise vending machines including food and beverages are prohibited, with the exception of newspaper vending machines. Those machines
may be coin operated, shall be securely fastened in place in the building frontage zone abutting the property line and may be left in place during
nonbusiness hours provided that they are readily visible, day or night, to passing pedestrians on the sidewalk.
4. Street furniture, including flowerpots, bicycle racks, benches, trash cans, and similar items shall, along with the area occupied by the street
furniture's intended use, be located entirely in either the building frontage zone or the features and planting zone. Such street furniture shall not
obstruct the pedestrian travel zone. A minimum distance of two feet (2') from the face of the curb must be kept free of furniture. Street furniture shall
be securely fastened in place if it is left in place during nonbusiness hours. Such furniture shall be readily visible, day and night, to passing
pedestrians on the sidewalk, and must be designed and installed to ensure public safety.
5. A permit for sidewalk displays is not a requirement for events for the Sandpoint Downtown Business Association, permitted public gatherings, the
farmers' market or other events if determined to be in the city's interest according to the city engineer and/or chief of police. Notwithstanding all
events permitted or otherwise shall maintain minimum pedestrian travel zones in compliance with ADA regulations and with all other parts of the
statute.
6. A valid certificate of liability insurance naming the city of Sandpoint as additional insured in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) and a signed hold harmless agreement are required prior to issuing an encroachment permit for a sidewalk display. The city of
Sandpoint assumes no responsibility for the items on display, irrespective of whether the loss occurs through accident, collision, vandalism, theft or
otherwise.
7. The display must be removed any time the public works director, chief of police, fire chief or their designee determines that a clear sidewalk is
needed and requests removal for use of travel or transportation, street cleaning or maintenance, street utility work, crowd control, a parade, or an
emergency.
F. Sidewalk Cafes: A permit application shall be made by the owner or occupant of the abutting property to operate a cafe or restaurant upon the sidewalk
adjacent to the main business location. The application shall include a seating and pedestrian routing plan with dimensions and the anticipated periods
of use during the year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 103/303
1. Any sidewalk cafe location shall be temporary in nature and designed so that the entire cafe can be easily removed. Such cafe shall be separated
from the pedestrian travel zone by a barrier which is comprised of railings and/or planters which shall not block visibility above thirty six inches (36"),
shall not begin more than four inches (4") above the sidewalk, and shall not reduce or obstruct the pedestrian travel zone to less than five feet (5') of
sidewalk width and shall not obstruct any crosswalk, wheelchair ramp, loading area, vehicular traffic or parking. Any required modifications to
sidewalk, curb, gutter or roadway shall be made at the expense of the cafe owner. Barrier entrances shall be perpendicular to pedestrian travel flow.
Such barrier shall provide a minimum thirty six inch (36") opening for access and egress with no door, gate or other device to obstruct entering and
exiting; provided, however, this opening width shall be determined on a case by case basis by the building department for compliance with the
international building code.
2. The sidewalk cafe shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws including those regulations of the local health district except for the
consumption of alcohol as noted in subsection F6 of this section.
3. Because sidewalk cafes are an extension of the restaurant, smoking shall be prohibited. The permittee shall maintain a clean sidewalk for
pedestrians and provide trash disposal receptacles for patrons.
4. A valid certificate of liability insurance naming the city of Sandpoint as additional insured in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) and a signed hold harmless agreement shall be provided by the applicant prior to issuing an encroachment permit for a sidewalk cafe.
5. An order for removal of the sidewalk cafe and all appurtenances may be issued only after at least one written warning to the permittee. Upon
issuance of an order of removal, the permittee shall remove the sidewalk cafe and all appurtenances within twenty four (24) hours. Otherwise, the
sidewalk cafe and all appurtenances may be immediately removed in the event the public works director, chief of police, or fire chief determines that
a clear sidewalk is needed for use of travel or transportation, street cleaning or maintenance, street utility work, a crowd control event or parade or in
the event of an emergency, or an unsafe situation or unlawful activity.
6. Alcohol may be served in a sidewalk cafe if the adjoining restaurant is licensed to serve alcohol. (Ord. 1205, 5-20-2009)
7-2-3: REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE:
A. Every owner, tenant or occupant of any private or public premises or building, and the owner or proprietor, lessee, or person entitled to the possession
of any vacant lot or block within the limits of the city shall, during the winter season and during the time the snow shall remain on the ground, clear the
sidewalks abutting on such premises by nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of snow and ice, and shall keep them conveniently free therefrom during the day. At all
other times said persons shall keep such sidewalks clear and free from all dirt, filth, or other obstructions so as to allow citizens the use of said
sidewalks in an easy and commodious manner.
Unless otherwise provided, snow removed from sidewalks or parking areas in any area of the city shall not be thrown, shoveled or placed in the streets
or gutters of the city. In areas of the city where snow is regularly picked up and hauled from the streets, only snow removed from the sidewalks within
the right of way will be permitted to be placed in the street or gutters.
Snow removed from any property, residential or commercial, shall not be placed on the property of another property owner without the permission of
said property owner nor shall snow be thrown, shoveled, plowed or placed so as to block the view of drivers at street intersections.
Every person neglecting or refusing to comply with the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of an infraction, and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined in an amount not exceeding the amount allowed by Idaho Code for infractions and costs of prosecution. (Ord. 1266, 3-21-2012)
7-2-4: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE; TREES AND SHRUBS:
A. 1. It shall be the responsibility and liability of every owner of real property in the city to maintain that portion of real property lying between the property
owner's property line and the nearest edge of the street curb, in the event there is no curb, the nearest edge of the street, in a safe, uncluttered,
nonobstructed condition, to trim, prune, and care for the trees and/or shrubbery located upon the same, and to remove weeds and mow any grass
located upon the same.
2. It shall be the responsibility and liability of every owner of real property in the city to maintain that portion of the real property lying between the
property owner's property line and the center of any adjacent alley in a safe, uncluttered, nonobstructed condition, to remove weeds and to mow any
grass located upon the same.
B. The limbs of any tree which overhang the sidewalk or public right of way shall be trimmed to a height not less than seven feet (7') above the ground.
(Ord. 1056, 7-18-2001)
C. 1. Further, adjacent property owners shall not plant any tree or shrub within the public right of way prohibited by the city. Trees specifically prohibited
include box elder, cottonwood, poplar, willow, mountain ash, American elm, fruit trees (except ornamental types), nut trees, ailanthus, and Oregon or
big leafed maple. Further, permission must be received from the city prior to the cutting of any trees located within the public right of way.
2. Permission to remove dead or diseased trees must be requested from the public works director.
3. Permission to remove all other trees must be obtained from the city council. (Ord. 1271, 6-20-2012)
D. Further, every such adjacent property owner shall be responsible for the cost of maintenance of such property between the property line of the property
owner and the nearest edge of the street where there is no curb, or street curb where there is a curb and the center of the adjacent alley. If any such
adjacent property owner shall fail to maintain such property or the trees and shrubs located thereon in violation hereof, such property owner shall be
responsible and liable for the cost of any maintenance provided by, ordered by or contracted for by the city after ten (10) days following written notice to
the property owner of the existing violation of this section. In the event the city incurs costs for the maintenance of the above described property the
property owner in addition to any other remedy allowed by law, shall be subject to a special assessment and such special assessment shall be
collected as provided in Idaho Code section 50-1008. (Ord. 1056, 7-18-2001)
7-2-5: SIDEWALK OR CURB CUTS, PERMIT REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 104/303
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, or in any way demolish, any curb or sidewalk within the city for any purpose whatsoever without first securing a
permit from the public works director so to do. Said person shall make application to the said director, giving the location of the proposed work to be done
on the curb or sidewalk and the purpose for which the same is to be used. If the director grants the request, he may issue a permit for the work to be done
but such cutting or demolition shall not cover over fifty percent (50%) of the property frontage of the applicant. Provided, however, that if more than fifty
percent (50%) of the property frontage is to be cut, the said application shall be submitted to the city council for their approval. (Ord., 9-23-1949; amd.
1983 Code; Ord. 1318, 10-21-2015)
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense and shall be fined in the sum of not more than three hundred dollars
($300.00) and the costs of prosecution. (Ord., 9-23-1949; amd. 1983 Code)
Chapter 3
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
7-3-1: PROPERTY OWNERS RESPONSIBLE:
A. The property owners of the city shall be responsible for the construction and repair of all sidewalks and curbs abutting upon their respective properties,
and on corner lots such responsibility shall include the sidewalks and curbs adjacent to each street.
B. The city council may, whenever it is deemed necessary or convenient by an order duly made and entered in its minutes, order the construction of a
sidewalk or curb on any street of the city, and it may in like manner order the alteration or repair of any sidewalk or curb now or hereafter constructed.
C. Notwithstanding the responsibility of the property owner, the city reserves the right to install, repair or replace any sidewalk or curb within the city. (Ord.
1205, 5-20-2009)
7-3-2: ORDER FOR CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIRS:
A. Whenever the construction or repair of any sidewalk or curb is ordered, the order therefor shall state the material of which the same shall be
constructed or repaired and the date on or before which the same shall be completed, and in case of new sidewalks or curbs to be constructed, the
order shall contain complete specifications thereof as to width, grade, length and position.
B. If replacement of one or more sidewalk alley crossings and accessible corner ramps is ordered pursuant to this section, or a property owner desires to
repair sidewalks adjacent to his property, the city public works department shall obtain a proposal from the contractor doing the work for alley crossings
and accessible ramps. If the proposal is acceptable to the city engineer, the contractor shall install the alley crossings and accessible ramps and the
city shall reimburse the contractor for the costs based on the proposal. If the proposal is not acceptable to the city engineer, the city shall engage a
different contractor to install the alley crossings and accessible corner ramps.
C. Whenever any sidewalk is ordered constructed or repaired, the city clerk shall prepare a notice to be served upon the owner or owners of the property
abutting upon the sidewalk to be constructed or repaired, directing such owner or owners to construct or repair such sidewalk within the time set forth in
the notice and report the completion to the public works director. Such notice shall be served by the chief of police or any other designee of the city by
delivering a written copy thereof to the owner or owners of the abutting property or his agent if such owner or agent can be found within the city, but if
not to be found within the city, then if his place of residence be known, by mailing a copy of the notice to such owner at his place of residence. If such
owner or agent cannot be found within the city, and his place of residence is not known, such notice shall be served by the publication of a copy thereof
for two (2) successive weeks in some newspaper published within the city, the last publication of which must be at least twenty (20) days before the
expiration of the time mentioned in the notice for the completion of the construction or repair of the sidewalk therein mentioned. (Ord. 1231, 5-19-2010)
7-3-3: COUNCIL TO ADVERTISE FOR BIDS:
If, after the expiration of personal service, mailing or first publication of first notice, any sidewalk, sidewalks and/or curb ordered to be constructed or
repaired is not completed according to the order therefor, the city council shall proceed to advertise for sealed bids for the construction or repair thereof by
publication in one issue of a newspaper of general circulation in the city, stating in such notice the particular piece or pieces of sidewalk to be constructed
or repaired and referring to the original order for such construction or repair for the specifications thereof, and proceed to let the contract for such
construction or repair to the lowest bidder, unless in the judgment of the city council such bid is too high; provided, however, that whenever the estimate of
the cost of construction of any piece of sidewalk and/or curb or the repair thereof, does not exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to any one
property owner, the same may be constructed under the direction of the public works director without advertising for bids, but in compliance with Idaho
Code provision 50-341 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 1083, 5-21-2003)
7-3-4: COLLECTION OF COSTS FOR REPAIR OR CONSTRUCTION:
A. After any sidewalk or portion of sidewalk and/or curb has been constructed or repaired as provided in section 7-3-3 of this chapter, the city council shall
declare the owner or owners of the abutting property delinquent and the city clerk shall at once give such delinquent owner or owners notice in the
manner provided for the service of notice for construction or repair, that he is delinquent, stating the amounts and that unless the same is paid, together
with the costs of service, if served by publication, within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, that twenty five percent (25%) will be added to the
amount of the delinquency as a penalty.
B. At the expiration of the time set forth in the notice served, provided the same has been served, mailed or published at least twenty (20) days previously,
the city council shall proceed to add twenty five percent (25%) to the amount of such delinquency as a penalty and assess the actual cost of sidewalks
and/or curbs constructed or repaired together with the charges for publication, if any, and publication against the property abutting thereon, and the city
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 105/303
clerk shall forthwith certify the action of the council, together with a description of the property, with the assessment and the amount thereof to the
county auditor, who shall place the amount of such delinquency together with the penalty and costs of publication on the current tax roll. If such
property is not liable for other taxes on such roll, he shall enter the name of the delinquent owner for the amount of such delinquent sidewalk tax,
together with the penalty and costs of publication, on the tax roll as an individual item. The same shall be collected at the time and in the manner
provided by law for the collection of other real estate taxes and the amount so collected turned over to the city treasurer the same as other city taxes.
(Ord. 1083, 5-21-2003)
7-3-5: EXTENSION OF TIME:
(Rep. by Ord. 1083, 5-21-2003)
7-3-6: SUPERVISION OF CONSTRUCTION:
All sidewalks and curbs constructed within the corporate limits of the city shall be constructed under the supervision of and subject to the inspection of the
director of public works or the director's designee in conformity with the plans and specifications approved by said director and the lines and grades laid
out on the ground or approved by said director. Stakes set by the director shall be preserved by the owner and the contractor doing the work. Such
specifications of the director shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1083, 5-21-2003)
7-3-7: NONCONFORMITY TO PROVISIONS:
Where sidewalks or curbs have been constructed or repaired without first having obtained a grade and line therefor from the public works director, or
where the same have not been constructed in conformity with the established grade line or not in conformity with the approved plans and specifications or
standards relative to concrete sidewalks and curbs, said sidewalks and curbs shall be rebuilt or repaired at the owner's expense to so conform. (Ord.
1083, 5-21-2003)
7-3-8: ESTABLISHMENT OF LINES AND GRADES:
Persons desiring to construct walks or curbs shall make written application to the city for the establishment of line and grade. This application shall state
the exact location of the proposed construction, the name of the person applying, the name of the firm or individual doing the work and the date on which it
is desired to start construction. The application shall be delivered to the public works director without delay. The director shall establish the desired line and
grade at the earliest possible date, and shall notify the applicant when said work will be completed. (Ord. 1083, 5-21-2003)
7-3-9: NEW CONSTRUCTION OF CURBS, GUTTERS AND DRAINAGE APPURTENANCES:
A. Application Of Provisions: The provisions of this section shall apply to all nonresidential zoning districts, all planned unit developments, all mobile home
zoning districts, all new subdivisions including short plat subdivisions where additional lots are being created, any use requiring a conditional use
permit, any new multi-family residential development with three (3) or more dwelling units, or new construction by one contractor or owner of two (2) or
more contiguous residential lots, installation or paving of any parking lot, and single-family homes including manufactured homes, and duplexes when
there are existing sidewalks on immediately adjoining properties, or when the single-family homes or duplexes have frontage on a street designated by
the city council with a pedestrian priority level of "high" or "medium".
B. Construction Requirements: Hereafter, when building structures are constructed or reconstructed on, or moved to, or alteration is made to any building
on lots within the city where there are no curbs, incomplete curbs or deteriorated curbs on the street frontage, the persons constructing or causing to be
constructed or reconstructed on, or moving, or causing to be moved such structures to, or altering or causing alterations to be made to existing
structures on such lots shall, during the construction, moving, or alteration construct street curbs and gutters, corner wheelchair ramps and one-half
(1/2) of the alley curb, collectively referred to as curbs and gutters. Such curbing, or curbs and gutters shall be constructed and installed along the front
of the lot. If such lot is a corner lot, or has double frontage, such curbing, or curbs and gutters, shall be constructed along the front of the lot and
extended along a radius to the side street and installed along the side street to the rear lot line. Curbs, or curbs and gutters, shall be constructed to
conform to the plans and specifications on file in the office of the city engineer. Construction requirements shall include paving between the existing
street surface and the curbs and gutters with materials consistent with the street surface. No curbing, curbs and gutters, or curb cuts in existing
curbing, shall be constructed without a permit issued by the office of the city engineer and all such work shall be inspected by the city engineer, or the
engineer's duly authorized agent. Such construction shall conform to the grades and other standards established by the city engineer. (Ord. 1187, 1-16-
2008)
C. No Curbing Required: No curbing is required when:
1. The building permit is for an amount less than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) aggregated over three (3) years, or the value of a structure
moved onto the lot together with the amount for which the building permit is issued is less than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) aggregated
over three (3) years; however, if a footing and foundation only building permit is issued, and a subsequent building permit is issued for the structure
that is to be placed on top of that foundation and the combined value of both permits exceeds twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) aggregated
over three (3) years, then for the purposes of this section, both permits shall be considered as one permit and curbs shall be required, subject to any
exceptions further defined herein.
2. A deferral is granted whereby an owner of a single-family residence obligated to construct curb and gutter on his/her property due to proposed
asphalt paving or addition or remodeling costing between twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) and seventy five thousand dollars ($75,000.00)
may request and be granted a deferral of construction of the curb and gutter under the following circumstances:
a. A majority of the other properties on the same block and same side of the street do not have curb and gutter (or do not have an agreement to
provide curb and gutter as provided for herein) and neither adjoining property has existing curb and gutter, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 106/303
b. The owner has signed an agreement to construct required curb and gutter at such time as a majority (based on frontage) of the properties on the
same block and same side of the street either have curb and gutter or have signed similar agreements, or
c. The public works director or an approved capital improvement plan determines the right of way will have improvements within three (3) years that
will provide the required curbing. The property owner shall enter into a deferral agreement until such time the improvements are installed. Deferral
shall expire at the end of three (3) years if improvements are not otherwise installed.
d. The deferral agreement shall provide that once the above criteria are met, if the owner fails to construct the curb and gutter in a timely manner, the
owner shall pay the city all costs to construct the curb and gutter, or shall consent to participate in a local improvement district for construction of
the curb and gutter.
3. Where the adjoining street has not been paved, an owner of a single-family residence shall be granted a deferral until such time as the road is
paved. (Ord. 1205, 5-20-2009)
D. Driveway Approaches:
1. Driveway approaches shall conform to the number width and material as designated herein or in a separate approach policy.
2. Driveway approaches shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete, be steel reinforced and have a minimum thickness of six inches (6").
3. On asphalt streets without curb and gutter, asphalt driveways shall be allowed until such time as curb and gutter are required.
E. Gutters And Other Drainage Facilities: The term curb shall also include necessary gutters and other drainage facilities. (Ord. 1187, 1-16-2008)
7-3-10: NEW CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS; IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Application: The provisions of this section shall apply to all nonresidential zoning districts and uses, all planned unit developments, all mobile home
zoning districts, all new subdivisions including short plat subdivisions where additional lots are being created, any use requiring a conditional use
permit, any new multi-family residential development with three (3) or more dwelling units, or new construction by one contractor or owner of two (2) or
more contiguous residential lots, installation or paving of any parking lot, and single-family homes including manufactured homes, and duplexes when
there are existing sidewalks on immediately adjoining properties, or when the single-family homes or duplexes have frontage on a street designated by
the city council with a pedestrian priority level of "high" or "medium". Whenever construction or repair to the sidewalk is ordered by the city, the order
shall state the construction material and specify the portion of sidewalk to be constructed or repaired and the date on which it must be completed. The
city engineer or city engineer's designee may allow the property owner up to three hundred sixty five (365) days after the date of the notice to complete
the work.
B. Sidewalk Construction Required: Hereafter when building structures are constructed or reconstructed on or moved to or alterations are made to existing
structures on lots, where there are no sidewalks, the persons constructing or reconstructing, or causing such construction, or moving, or causing to be
moved such structures, or altering or causing to be altered such existing structures on the lots, shall, during the construction, moving or alteration of
structures, construct sidewalks the entire frontage of a lot along any street including wheelchair ramps at corners and extending along one-half (1/2) of
any alley frontage. Notwithstanding the above, when the building permit is requested by a tenant, the owner of the affected property shall be the party
responsible for the required sidewalk improvements. Sidewalks shall conform to the plans and specifications on file in the office of the city engineer or
as set out by ordinance. No sidewalks shall be constructed in the city right of way without a permit issued by the city. The city engineer, or the
engineer's duly authorized agent shall inspect all such work. The following additional conditions shall be enforced where applicable:
1. In the event sidewalks already exist and are substandard either as to size, deterioration or other criteria approved by the city, by resolution of the city
council the sidewalks shall be reconstructed to meet the standards of the city.
2. In the event property on which a structure is to be constructed, reconstructed or altered does not front directly on a public right of way, pedestrian
access from the building to the right of way will be provided in accordance with city standards as required by the public works director.
3. When fifty percent (50%) of the sidewalks (based on frontage) on the same block and same side of the street either exist, or the owners have agreed
to construct the sidewalks pursuant to this section, the owners of the remaining properties on that same block and same side of the street, excepting
single-family residences, shall be required to construct sidewalks in all areas.
C. Sidewalks Required; Deferrals:
1. Cost Threshold: No sidewalks are required when the building permit(s) is for an amount less than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
aggregated over three (3) years, or the value of a structure moved onto the lot together with the amount for which the building permit is issued is less
than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) aggregated over three (3) years; however, if a footing and foundation only building permit is issued,
and a subsequent building permit is issued for the structure that is to be placed on top of that foundation and the combined value of both permits
exceeds twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) aggregated over three (3) years, then for the purposes of this section both permits shall be
considered as one permit and sidewalks shall be required, subject to any exceptions further defined herein.
2. Deferral: The owner of a single-family residence obligated to construct sidewalks on his/her property due to improvements costing between twenty
five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) and seventy five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) may request and be granted a deferral of construction of the
sidewalk contingent upon payment of a nonrefundable application fee (set by resolution). Deferrals shall be granted under the following
circumstances:
a. If a majority of other properties (based on frontage) on the same block and same side of the street do not have sidewalks; and if a majority of other
properties (based on frontage) on the same block and same side of the street do not have an agreement to provide sidewalks pursuant to this
section, or
b. Neither adjoining property has existing sidewalks on the same street; and
c. The section of sidewalk to be installed is less than one hundred feet (100') in length; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 107/303
d. The total length is one hundred feet (100') or less when combined with any adjacent sidewalk deferral, or
e. Deferral for all property owners may be granted if the public works director or an adopted capital improvement plan determines the right of way will
have improvements within three (3) years that will provide the required sidewalk. The property owner shall enter into a deferral agreement until
such time as the improvements are installed. Deferral shall expire at the end of three (3) years if improvements are not installed.
f. The deferral agreement shall provide that once the above criteria are met, if the owner fails to construct the sidewalk in a timely manner, the owner
shall either pay the city all costs to construct the sidewalk in a timely manner, or shall consent to participate in a local improvement district for
construction of the sidewalk.
D. Sidewalk Repair Or Replacement: Where existing sidewalks are deteriorated to the extent that pedestrian safety is a concern, the building official may
order repair or replacement of such sidewalks by the property owner. Where no danger exists, the property owner will be given at least one year's
written notice to comply with the order to repair or replace sidewalks. (Ord. 1216, 7-15-2009)
7-3-11: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this chapter, where no other penalty is set forth, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
three hundred dollars ($300.00) for any one offense, or by imprisonment in jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. This penalty shall not preclude the city from utilizing any other remedy that may be allowed by law to enforce the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 1083, 5-21-2003)
Chapter 4
NUMBERING BUILDINGS
7-4-1: NUMBERING REQUIRED:
All buildings, shops, stores, residences and places of business situated upon platted lands, subdivided into blocks and lots within the corporate limits of the
City shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions and requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 30, 4-7-1908; 1983 Code)
7-4-2: BASE LINES:
A. The base line for the purpose of numbering such buildings shall be Pine Street for streets and avenues running north and south, and First Avenue for
streets and avenues running east and west and the intersection of Pine Street and First Avenue shall be the numbering center of the City.
B. Every twenty five feet (25') of street frontage shall be represented by a number commencing at 101 at the base line, and proceeding consecutively for
the block, and beginning with 201 in the second block, 301 in the third block, and continuing in like manner until all the blocks are numbered. Such
numbering shall also continue alternately from one side of the street to the other, odd numbers shall be upon the left side and even numbers on the
right side proceeding from the central numbering point.
C. For convenience of designation, that portion of streets and avenues running north and south and lying north of Pine Street shall be known as north
(naming the street or avenue) street (or avenue); those portions of the same streets or avenues lying south of Pine Street shall be known as south
(naming the street or avenue) street (or avenue). (Ord. 30, 4-7-1908; 1983 Code)
Chapter 5
CITY BEACHES
7-5-1: SANDPOINT CITY BEACH DESIGNATED:
The City owns and operates a parcel of real property within the City lying east of the Burlington Northern Railway right-of-way and adjacent and adjoining
Lake Pend Oreille, Sandpoint, Bonner County, Idaho, hereinafter referred to as the Sandpoint City Beach. Said property consists of beach front, lawn area,
recreational facilities and parking lot. (Ord. 1359, 11-20-2018)
7-5-2: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall apply to and govern the use of all of the City property described as the Sandpoint City Beach beginning at the entrance gate to the
beach and encompassing all of the City property described as the Sandpoint City Beach. (Ord. 1359, 11-20-2018)
7-5-3: BEACH RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. No dogs shall be allowed on the Sandpoint City Beach property out of any vehicle whether on or off a leash, tether or tie at any time, except as follows:
1. Service dogs under constant control of their owner; and
2. Dogs utilized by the City for the purpose of controlling waterfowl.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 108/303
B. No person shall be allowed or permitted to camp overnight on the Sandpoint City Beach property in recreational vehicle, motor vehicle or any other type
of facility, contrivance, tent, camper, trailer or other vehicle and no persons shall be allowed to camp overnight on said beach property. Any such
overnight camping is specifically prohibited1.
C. No vehicular traffic shall be allowed on the Sandpoint City Beach property, including the parking lot and driveways, between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. and four o'clock (4:00) A.M. The hours may be changed at the discretion of the Chief of Police.
D. It shall be and is unlawful and prohibited for any seaplane or any aircraft capable of traveling and operating on the water surface, to be operated, driven,
flown, beached, landed, pulled up upon, attached to, or operated from any property of the City known as the Sandpoint City Beach, except as follows:
1. Not more than three (3) such aircraft operated on a noncommercial basis shall be allowed to moor, on a first come, first served basis, for not more
than five (5) consecutive days, nor for more than twenty (20) days in any calendar year, in the designated seaplane moorage area at the City beach
boat basin, being the area west of the City beach boat ramps to the east side of the Burlington Northern Railroad trestle, on the north bank of Sand
Creek.
2. Any such aircraft shall taxi one-fourth (1/4) mile out from the City beach shoreline before executing any takeoff, and any such aircraft shall not land
closer than one-fourth (1/4) mile out from the City beach shoreline.
3. Any such aircraft moored at such boat basin shall be moored solely at the risk of the owner(s) thereof.
E. No boat of any type, description, size, make or model shall be docked or parked overnight on the property owned by the City known as the Sandpoint
City Beach, with the exception of the boat basin. Any boat found docked, parked or placed on the City beach, beach property or boat basin in violation
of the provisions hereof, shall be subject to being removed, impounded and stored for violation of this chapter at the owner's sole responsibility, liability,
and cost. Special event permits may be approved by application to the Special Event Coordinator as designated in the City's Special Event Policy and
Procedures.
Any boat placed, docked or parked at the City beach, City beach property or boat basin after proper authority and approval, shall be at the risk of the
owner(s) thereof.
F. Camping overnight (excluding weekends) at the City beach may be approved by the Mayor for nonprofit organizations, subject to the conditions within
the Special Event Policy and Procedures. (Ord. 1359, 11-20-2018)
7-5-4: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be liable for a fine not exceeding three
hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 1359, 11-20-2018)
7-5-5: SANDPOINT PARKS CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND:
A. Fund Established: There is hereby established within the City a Capital Improvement Fund which shall be known and cited as "the Sandpoint Parks
Capital Improvement Fund". The source of the money for such fund shall be all fees generated by public or private use of any public park or beach in
the City. All such fees, including, but not limited to, concession fees, use fees and donations, shall be deposited in such fund only. The fund shall not be
subject to the provisions of section 50-1014 of the Idaho Code which provides that the City Council of the City may transfer an unexpended balance in
one fund to the credit of another fund.
B. Purposes: The purposes for which "the Sandpoint Parks Capital Improvement Fund" may be used are as follows:
1. The acquisition of land for public parks or beaches.
2. The construction of public facilities for parks or beaches.
3. The improvement of Sandpoint's public parks or beaches.
C. Expenditure Of Funds: None of such funds shall be expended unless specifically appropriated by the City Council pursuant to sections 50-1001 through
50-1003, both inclusive, of the Idaho Code. (Ord. 1359, 11-20-2018)
Chapter 6
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM
7-6-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM CHAPTER. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-2: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 109/303
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the equitable distribution of fees and charges of water users of the Sandpoint domestic water system pursuant
to Idaho Code sections 50-1032 and 50-1033; to provide for the collection of such fees and charges; to provide that fees and charges may be adopted by
resolution of the mayor and city council; provided, that three (3) copies of such resolutions be kept on file with the city clerk for the use and inspection of
the public; to provide for due process hearings prior to termination of water service for delinquency in payment of water service fees; and to provide that
rules and regulations applicable to the water department of the city may be adopted by resolution of the mayor and city council provided that three (3)
copies of such resolution be kept on file with the city clerk for the use and inspection of the public. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ADJUSTED TOTAL COST TO PRODUCE WATER (ATC): The quotient of the quantity of total water produced during a fiscal year divided by the total
adjusted cost of producing such quantity during such fiscal year.
CITY: The city of Sandpoint or its authorized representative.
DOMESTIC WATER SYSTEM: All mains, pipes, and structures through which domestic water is distributed, including pumping stations, treatment plants,
reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for domestic
use and the administration thereof.
MAIN EXTENSION: Refers to all proposed extensions of the domestic water system to serve undeveloped areas within the existing corporate limits, newly
annexed areas, or areas outside the corporate limits of the city.
MAY: "May" is permissive (see definition of "Shall").
METER SIZE FACTOR: See the Sandpoint rules and regulations and main extension policies and procedures for the city of Sandpoint water department
for a measurement of the relative capacity of different meter sizes, as determined by the Sandpoint rules and regulations.
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM PLAN: Preliminary maps, plans, and outlines for extension of the domestic water system as adopted by the city.
OCCUPANT: Refers to the tenant, developer, leaseholder, or other person who occupies the property of an owner that is served by the domestic water
system.
OWNER: Refers to the property owner whose property is served by the domestic water system.
SERVICE CONNECTION: Refers to that portion of a water service line that runs from its connection with the water main to and including the curb stop
and/or valve box and meter that is installed in the service line. It shall be installed within the limits of the right of way or utility easement if feasible and,
after installation pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, it shall be owned and maintained by the city.
SHALL: "Shall" is mandatory (see definition of "May").
WATER MAIN: Any pipeline owned by the city for the purposes of transportation and/or distribution of water to serve more than one water user.
WATER USER: Any person, individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, owner, or occupant who is served by domestic water from the
city's domestic water system. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985; amd. Ord. 1008, 5-20-1998)
7-6-4: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all water users and property owners within the corporate city limits and any water users and owners outside of
the corporate city limits receiving water service from the city's domestic water system.
All users and owners within the service area described in the municipal water plan of the domestic water system are obligated to pay their proportionate
share of the assessments, fees, and charges established in this chapter. All water users and owners who have been and are connected to the city's
domestic water system who have not previously been charged are obligated to pay that proportionate share established during such period of usage
provided that the demonstrable evidence is present to substantiate such usage. However, such evidence cannot predate January 1, 1976.
The owner, to the extent permitted by law, and occupant of any such premises using the domestic water system shall be jointly and severally liable for all
fees and charges due for services received from the city's domestic water system. Such charges shall become a lien upon and against the property
against which the charge or fee is levied to the extent permitted by the laws of the state of Idaho and the ordinances of the city that may be collected in a
manner permitted or hereafter permitted by law. (Ord. 1065, 11-21-2001)
7-6-5: METER SIZE FACTOR DESIGNATION:
There is hereby established a method for determining the meter size factor designation for water users of the domestic water system of the city to be used
in establishing water service fees and new user facility fees which are, as nearly as possible, proportionate to the use of all water users of the domestic
water system. The meter size factor (hereinafter "MSF") shall be determined by resolution of the city council.
Beginning May 1, 1998, any existing unmetered water users of the water system shall have their rates determined and/or modified by using a meter size
factor. The meter size factor rate shall be set by resolution and located in the water department rules and regulations. (Ord. 1008, 5-20-1998)
7-6-6: NEW USER FACILITY FEE:
There is hereby established a new user facility fee, which fee is as nearly as possible proportionate to the investment of all water users of the domestic
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 110/303
water system in the operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the existing domestic water system facilities.
The new user facility fee (hereinafter "NUFF") shall be set by resolution adopted by the City Council. Three (3) copies of the resolution shall be kept on file
with the City Clerk for the use and inspection of the public. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
The NUFF per meter size factor may be updated yearly. (Ord. 1008, 5-20-1998)
Each such updated NUFF shall be set by separate resolution adopted by the City Council, and shall account for the increased value of domestic water
system components, in place as of September 17, 1979, due to inflation, the depreciated value of domestic water system components, and projected
increased costs of operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the domestic water system. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-7: RESERVE FUND FOR DOMESTIC WATER SYSTEM FACILITY REPLACEMENT:
There is hereby created a reserve fund dedicated to replacement of the City's existing domestic water system components. Funds derived from the charge
of the NUFF and the user facility fee element of the water service fee shall be placed in this dedicated reserve fund. The money, so reserved, may be
utilized to replace pumps, valves, and mechanical equipment, electrical components, existing water mains, fire hydrants, buildings utilized by the Water
Department for storage, operation and maintenance, and administration of the domestic water system; replacement of existing construction associated
with the City's water intake pumping system, diversion dam, domestic water treatment plants, and, installation of water meters.
The money from said reserve fund is not to be utilized for regular operation and maintenance of the domestic water system. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-8: PAYMENT OF NEW USER FACILITY FEE:
A. Payment of the NUFF shall be made to the office of the City Treasurer at the time, and in the percentages or amounts, prescribed by resolution adopted
by the City Council. Three (3) copies of the resolution shall be kept on file with the City Clerk for the use and inspection of the public.
B. Such payment provisions may be amended yearly by separate resolution adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-9: WATER AND SEWER HOOK-UP FEES:
There is hereby created and established water and sewer hook-up fees.
A. At the time any premises is connected to any part of the City water distribution or sanitary sewer system the owner thereof shall be charged a hook-up
fee for such connection. The hook-up fee shall reflect the cost incurred to extend the water or sewer system to the property including costs incurred
through a local improvement district.
B. When any premises connected to a part of the City water or sewer system paid the cost of such extension previously through assessments and a local
improvement district, there shall be no hook-up fee charged.
C. All hook-up fees shall be fixed by resolution rather than ordinance.
D. The cost of construction, installation and extension shall be ascertained by the Director of Public Works of the City at the time of the completion of such
project and final computation of the costs through the local improvement district and shall be maintained on file with the City Clerk, Director of Finance
and Director of Public Works at the City.
E. All such costs and hook-up fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council of the City of Sandpoint for each project and not by ordinance.
F. When any water or wastewater system extension in the City is made in such a manner as to provide service to owners of land which did not participate
in the initial costs thereof through participation in the local improvement district, the owner of such nonparticipating parcel or parcels of property shall
pay the established hook-up fee plus an administrative fee equal to ten percent (10%) of the original LID cost and the CPI increase for each year after
the passage of the LID ordinance to the City and shall not receive such service until verification of payment has been made by the Director of Public
Works and Director of Finance.
G. The hookup fees described herein and established hereby are in addition to any other new user facility fee or any other fee established by the city.
H. Those landowners who have participated proportionately in the installation, extension or construction of such water or sewer services by participation in
the local improvement district shall be exempt from such hookup fees.
I. The notice of existence of this section and any resolution establishing water or sewer hookup fees for any individual project shall be recorded with the
clerk/recorder of Bonner County, Idaho.
J. If any section, paragraph, sentence or provision hereof or the application thereof to any particular circumstance shall be declared or deemed invalid or
unenforceable, the same shall not affect the remainder hereof which shall continue in full force and effect and applicable to all circumstances to which it
may apply. (Ord. 966, 2-21-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 111/303
7-6-9-1: WATER AND SEWER HOOKUP FEES; DEVELOPER COSTS:
A. At the time any premises is connected to any part of the city water distribution or sanitary sewer system the owner thereof shall be charged a hookup
fee for such connection. The hookup fee shall reflect the cost incurred to extend the water or sewer system to the property including costs incurred
privately financed by private individuals or developers extending the line.
B. When any water or wastewater system extension of the city is made in such a manner as to provide service to owners of land which did not participate
in the initial cost thereof and such water or sewer system extension is deemed by the city council to be an extraordinary expense paid by a private
party or developer, the developer making the extension may, prior to making improvements, seek an agreement with the city requiring that the owner of
such nonparticipating parcel or parcels of property benefiting from the extension shall reimburse and pay to the private party, developer or successor in
interest thereof compensation as defined and established in the agreement for each such subsequent hookup.
C. The cost of any qualifying construction, installation and extension shall be ascertained by the director of public works of the city at the time of the
completion of such project and acceptance of private developers' or contractors' facilities and shall be maintained on file with the city clerk, director of
finance and director of public works at the city.
D. The developer shall not be entitled to reimbursement for any costs attributable to service to the developer's own properties nor for the front footage of
the developer's own property as established at the time of extension or installation. All right to reimbursement shall cease ten (10) years after
completion of such extension and/or installation project.
E. Such hookup fees shall be established by resolution of the city council of the city of Sandpoint for each project accepted.
F. When the nonparticipating benefited landowners seek a building permit or seek to hook up to the water or sewer services subject to such agreement,
they shall pay the city such determined hookup fee. The director of public works shall transmit said funds to the developer less a ten percent (10%)
administrative fee.
G. The total reimbursement to the contractor shall not exceed ninety percent (90%) of the approved cost of construction and installation as determined by
the director of public works.
H. The developer, or successor, shall at all times provide a current mailing address to the director of public works to accomplish such reimbursements. If
the eligible developer or successor cannot be located by certified mail within six (6) months, said fees shall be maintained in the respective water or
sewer enterprise funds.
I. The hookup fees described herein and established hereby are in addition to any other new user facility fee or any other fee established by the city prior
to this section.
J. Any resolution establishing water or sewer hookup fees for any individual project shall be recorded with the clerk/recorder of Bonner County, Idaho.
(Ord. 1156, 10-18-2006)
7-6-10: WATER SERVICE FEES:
There is hereby established a system of periodic service charges and fees for the use of and for services rendered by the domestic water system of the
city, which charges and fees shall be as nearly as possible proportionate to the services rendered by such domestic water system. The rates, charges, and
fees provided by this chapter are hereby levied and assessed against a water user or owner having any water service connection with the domestic water
system of the city. It is determined that the cost of operation, maintenance, and upkeep of the domestic water system, the payment of water revenue
bonds issued to fund capital improvements to the domestic water system as authorized in ordinance 613 of the city, the establishment of a reserve fund as
required by the farmers home administration in conjunction with the payment of water revenue bonds issued by the city, administration of the city water
department and the establishment of a reserve fund for replacement of water equipment, is entirely dependent upon charging and collecting fees from all
water users and the owners of the premises using water from the domestic water system.
All water users and owners who derive benefit from the domestic water system shall, in return for benefits, pay monthly user charges set by resolution
adopted by the city council. The total monthly user charge shall be the sum of monthly charges for the administrative fee, a surcharge for service outside
the city limits, a surcharge for metered accounts, and a user facility fee. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
A. Administration Fees: A monthly service charge shall be made and collected for each account administered by the city. Such rates will be determined
yearly and updated in the water department rules and regulations. (Ord. 1008, 5-20-1998)
B. User Facility Fee: A monthly service charge shall be made and collected, depending upon the classification of the water user as metered, nonmetered,
or water association, for operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the domestic water system facilities. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985; amd. Ord.
1008, 5-20-1998)
1. The nonmetered rate shall be a fee set by resolution adopted by the city council per meter size factor.
2. The metered rate shall be set by resolution in the water department rules and regulations.
3. The monthly fee to provide water to the water associations served at the effective date of this chapter by the domestic water system of the city shall
be set forth in the water department rules and regulations. (Ord. 1008, 5-20-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 112/303
C. Senior Citizens' Rates:
1. It is hereby established by the city council and mayor, a senior citizens reduced utility bill program, hereinafter referred to as SCRUB, providing for a
forty percent (40%) discount to eligible persons thereby reducing the monthly utility rates for city services. To be eligible for said discounts, applicant
must be over the age of sixty five (65) years. Proof of age shall be required of all persons. Only one person in the household need be over the age of
sixty five (65) years if all income requirements are met jointly. The SCRUB program discount shall be available only for the personal residence of the
person applying. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985; amd. Ord. 1008, 5-20-1998)
2. The income requirements per year allowed for eligibility for this program shall be set by resolution adopted by the city council. Total income shall
include the combined total of all the income for all members of the household including social security, retirement, and income from any and all other
sources. (Ord. 827, 6-16-1986; amd. Ord. 1008, 5-20-1998)
3. To establish eligibility and to be entitled to the SCRUB program discount, each applicant shall sign an affidavit of certification that he meets the
above set forth requirements as to age and income and said statement, affidavit of certification shall be sworn to by the applicant. Said application
shall be submitted to the city clerk for approval. Annually in May a new application and certification shall be completed by applicant. If not completed
by May 30, the applicant shall be removed from the SCRUB rolls and will not be returned to the roll until a subsequent application is submitted and
approved. There shall be no rebates for the period when the applications were not approved.
4. Any person who shall sign and subscribe to an affidavit or certification which contains false, untrue, incomplete or misleading information or data,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or incarceration in the
county jail for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days or both. Furthermore, any person wilfully making a false statement or providing untrue or false
information on said application, affidavit or certification shall be removed from the SCRUB rolls permanently and shall not be eligible for
reinstatement. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985; amd. Ord. 1008, 5-20-1998)
7-6-11: MAIN EXTENSION PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES:
All applicants for water main extension shall pay the permit and inspection fee at the time of making application. Such fee is necessary for administration
of and inspection of main extensions, including, but not limited to, oversized waterlines, valves, fittings, fire hydrants, water meters, service connections,
and appurtenances. Said fee shall be set by resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-12: DISCONNECTION FEES:
All water users or owners who request or have disconnection or field location of services shall pay a disconnection fee set by resolution adopted by the city
council.
Request for disconnection at other than office hours which are from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M., Monday through Friday, shall
require the payment of an after hour surcharge fee in addition to the disconnection fee which shall be set by resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord.
818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-13: DEPOSIT:
All applicants for water service shall deposit with the office of the city treasurer, an amount to be set by resolution and approved by the city council. Such
deposit shall be made at the time of making of application for water service and shall be an amount separate from and in addition to all other fees and
charges required by this chapter.
The cash deposit is given by the applicant for water service as a guarantee of payment of water service fees, permit and inspection fees, and/or
disconnection fees. The cash deposit or the balance thereof remaining after the closing bill has been settled shall be returned to the user at the time of
discontinuance of service, or to an owner within twelve (12) months unless the deposit has been impaired in that period. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-14: ADJUSTMENT OF FEES:
The city may adjust the main extension permit and inspection fee, the disconnection fee, the service connection fee, the water service fee, or the deposit
from time to time to provide for funds as outlined in this chapter. All such rate changes shall be adjusted following the adoption of a rate resolution adopted
by the city council. Three (3) copies of the current rate resolution shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk for use and examination of and by the
public. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-15: PAYMENT OF USER CHARGES:
Monthly water service fee charges shall be due and payable to the city on or before the twenty fifth day of the month in which the bill is due. Failure to pay
the same, as prescribed, shall subject each user or owner to a service charge as set by resolution adopted by the city council in addition to the amount
due. (Ord. 1114, 6-16-2004)
7-6-16: DELINQUENCY; NOTICE:
If a bill is not paid before the twenty fifth day of the month in which the bill is due, the same shall become delinquent. Water users shall be notified of this
delinquency and if the entire bill is not paid in full, within fifteen (15) days after service of this notification on the water user, the right to water use shall
cease and terminate unless the water user requests a pretermination hearing. Should the water user not request a pretermination hearing, or if an adverse
decision is rendered against the water user as a result of the pretermination hearing, the city may require the water user to pay the delinquent bill
attributable to his use plus the reconnection fee as authorized under the approved rate schedule as a condition to reconnecting the water service again.
The city in its delinquency notice to all water users shall inform, in writing, all water users of their right to a pretermination hearing, with such hearing to be
held with the due process protection described below, and that the city will not discontinue water service prior to a fair and impartial hearing after timely
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 113/303
and adequate notice and an opportunity to confront witnesses, to personally appear with retained counsel, to be judged on facts introduced at the hearing
and otherwise be heard and defend the claim made by the city. If a pretermination hearing is requested by the water user, the city council shall have the
responsibility of holding pretermination hearings and shall make a record of any said hearing. The city council shall render its decision in writing, giving the
reason for its termination in the form of findings and conclusions. If the decision is adverse to the water user, the city council shall inform the water user
that its determination is the final administrative proceeding and that, by exercising the right to a pretermination hearing, the water user has exhausted his
administrative remedies and further that the water user may contest the decision of the city council at the pretermination hearing by filing appropriate
proceedings and litigation in the district court having competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985; amd. Ord. 1114, 6-16-2004)
Provided, however, that the city shall not intentionally deny or discontinue water service to any water user because of a delinquent bill on that premises
which is attributable to a prior water user; provided further, that the city shall not intentionally deny water service to any water user, for whatever reason,
without informing the water user of a right of a hearing to the city council on the issue on whether the city can initially deny water services. In the case of
an initial denial of water services, the city is not required to provide water service pending a hearing; however, a hearing upon request of the water user
initially denied water service shall be held as expeditiously as possible and shall be held in the same manner and in accordance with the procedures of the
pretermination hearing set forth above. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-17: WATER SYSTEM FUNDS:
All fees and charges received and collected under the authority of this chapter, with the exception of the NUFF and the user facility fee element of the
water service fee, shall be deposited and credited to a fund to be designated as the water system fund. The accounts of said fund shall show:
A. All receipts and expenditures for the maintenance, operation, upkeep, repair and administration of the domestic water system.
B. Any payment into a sinking fund established for the purpose of paying the principal on the water indebtedness of the city which shall from time to time
be outstanding.
C. Any payment into a reserve fund established for the purposes of maintaining a reserve account as required by the farmers home administration in
conjunction with the purchase of revenue bonds.
D. Any payment into a sinking fund established for the purpose of providing sufficient monies to replace water department equipment.
As provided by law, when budgeted and appropriated, the funds and credits to the account of the water system fund shall be available for the payment
of requirements for the maintenance, operation, repairs, upkeep, and administration of the domestic water system of the city; and to the extent legally
available for payment into a sinking fund established for the payment of the principal of and interest on any water bond indebtedness of the city which
shall from time to time be outstanding. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-18: METERED WATER USERS:
All commercial domestic water users and all residential domestic water users located within the corporate city limits and all domestic water users located
outside of the corporate city limits shall have a shutoff and regular or remote water meter as appropriate on each water service line connected to the city's
domestic water system. (Ord. 1304, 9-3-2014)
7-6-19: AGREEMENT TO ANNEXATION:
All applicants for water service, new service connection and/or water main extension whose request for service is to property located within unincorporated
portions of Bonner County and whose application for water service is accepted by the city shall waive all rights of objection to annexation within the
corporate city limits effective as of the date of application. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-20: RULES AND REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO THE WATER DEPARTMENT:
As the rules and regulations of the city water department are extensive and will be changed from time to time, and it is deemed advisable by the mayor
and city council that such rules and regulations be adopted and amended by resolution rather than by ordinance, it is hereby declared by the mayor and
city council that:
A. The rules and regulations applicable to the water department of the city may be adopted by resolution of the mayor and city council.
B. Three (3) copies of such resolution adopting such rules and regulations shall be kept on file with the city clerk for the use and inspection of the public.
(Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-21: WATER SERVICE AREAS:
A. Water Service Areas Designated: The city hereby establishes a water service area pursuant to and in conformity with the boundaries indicated on that
certain map of the city and surrounding area, said map hereby being denominated "city of Sandpoint water service area", incorporated by reference,
and kept on file in the office of the city clerk.
The city shall grant water hookups only to that property lying within the boundary lines as it appears on the above referenced map.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 114/303
B. Water Service Outside Designated Areas:
1. All water service lying outside of the boundaries of the water service area as indicated on the map as of August 18, 1977, shall be deemed to be
prior existing, nonconforming water uses protected under the grandfather clause definition.
2. No water hookups by the city shall be approved for property lying outside of the above designated, described, and depicted boundary line. (Ord. 818,
9-16-1985)
7-6-22: DENIAL OF WATER SERVICE UPON INITIAL APPLICATION:
The city may deny an initial application for water service for good cause. Such instances may include, but not be limited to, unresolved prior debt or
dispute, or history of violation of items listed in section 7-6-26 of this chapter. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-23: INVOLUNTARY TERMINATION OF WATER SERVICE:
Involuntary termination of water service may occur if:
A. The customer's bill is not paid by the twenty fifth day of the month in which the bill is due. If a bill is not paid by said day, the customer shall be sent a
notice of delinquency which provides that the customer has an additional fifteen (15) days in which either to pay the bill or ask for a pretermination
hearing before the city council. If, in this fifteen (15) day period, the bill is not paid and no written request for hearing is received, water service will be
terminated within forty eight (48) hours without further notice. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985; amd. Ord. 1114, 6-16-2004)
B. Other abuses of water service privileges occur, such as, but not limited to, tampering with service pipes, meters, seals or other city facilities; use of
equipment which adversely affects the city's service to other users; wasting water, and giving false information in application for water service, all of
which is more fully set forth in the rules and regulations applicable to the Sandpoint water system duly adopted by resolution and amended from time to
time, and in applicable sections of the revised and amended Sandpoint code.
The city shall strive to ensure fair and impartial service to water users and at the same time protect the city against improper terminations or denials of
service. The following applicable sections establish the city's procedures to safeguard both the city and the customer. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-24: TERMINATION FOR NONPAYMENT OF BILL:
Delinquency notices will be issued on printed forms by the city utility department. The form shall provide notice of the right to a pretermination hearing. If
full payment is not received and if no request for a hearing is received by the city within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing of the notice of delinquency,
water service will be discontinued without further notice. Termination will occur within forty eight (48) hours of the expiration of said fifteen (15) day period.
In issuing notices, the utility department will attempt to ensure the customer receives the notice. The procedure to be followed by the utility department is
to deposit the notice of delinquency in the mail in the same manner as the mailing of the regular billings. If there is reason to believe that the customer is
not receiving billings or notices through the regular mail procedures, the customer will be sent the notice by: a) certified mail, return receipt requested, or b)
served personally through the Sandpoint police department with the police department providing a return of service. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-25: OTHER TERMINATION WITH PRIOR NOTICE REQUIRED:
Water service may be discontinued with prior notice for the following reasons:
A. Use of water for any property or purpose other than that described in the application to the city for water service.
B. Tampering with any service pipe, meter installation, seal or any other facilities of the city.
C. Use of equipment which adversely affects the city's service to other users.
D. Refusal of reasonable access to property for inspection of facilities or for testing, reading, maintaining or removing meters. Reasonable access must
be afforded to a properly identified employee or authorized agent of the city for these purposes.
E. Failure to comply with section I, E.7 and 8, of "Rules And Regulations Of The Sandpoint Water System".
Section I, E.7 provides in part:
A. Owners of buildings with one service connection as of September 17, 1979, will continue to be held responsible for the entire water service charge.
B. Owners may choose to cease being responsible for the entire water bill and elect that occupants of each division be charged for their respective
bills. The owners choosing this option are responsible for making appropriate application to the City and are responsible for the costs involved. If the
owner will not make the necessary plumbing changes and will not take the necessary responsibility for the entire bill, then the City will proceed with a
notice of intent to terminate water service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 115/303
Section I, E.8 provides in part:
Water must not be allowed to run to waste for any purpose, including, but not limited to, imperfect water stops, valves or leaky pipes not under the
jurisdiction of the City, or for summer cooling by roof watering. Service lines and fixtures on the owner's premises are the owner's responsibility and
must be maintained in good repair. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-26: TERMINATION WITH NO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIRED:
Section I, G, of Rules and Regulations of the Sandpoint Water
System provides in part that as a penalty for violation of the following rules and regulations, water service may be discontinued without notice.
A. Permitting any person from another premises to take water from the customer's water service or tap without written permission of the City.
B. Using water from a City fire hydrant without the express written approval of the City Fire Chief and City Water Department.
C. Turning on or turning off water at the City's shut-off, tampering with, interfering with, making repairs, connections or replacements to any City property,
including any water meter or remote recorder on private premises.
D. Placing any obstruction upon or about any hydrant, gate valve box, meter, meter box or other substance so as to prevent free access at all times to the
same.
In case of dispute as to interpretation, the decision of the Mayor and Council is final.
In addition to disconnecting water service without prior notice, subsection G also provides:
1. Water will not be reconnected until the user gives adequate assurance the violation will cease or has ceased.
2. If water was obtained without payment to the City, the City shall estimate the amount and present a bill to the offending user. Water service will not
be provided until the bill is paid.
Although this Section provides for termination without notice, if the City's representative believes circumstances will so permit, the City will give
written notice of the claimed violation and any amount due to the City and advise the user that unless the violation ceases and fees due (if any) are
paid immediately, water service will be disconnected within a specified time. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-27: DENIAL OF INITIAL APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE:
If the City has reasonable cause to deny an initial application for water service, the Utilities Department Supervisor, after review with the Finance Director,
shall notify the applicant in writing, stating the reason for the denial. The notice shall include the following statement:
You have a right to appeal this decision by requesting a hearing before the City Council. Your formal request for hearing should be presented to the City
Clerk.
If a hearing is requested, it shall be conducted in the same manner as the pretermination hearing described in Section 7-6-28 of this Chapter. In all cases
of initial denial of water service, the applicant has no right to water service pending an appeal of the decision to the City Council. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-28: REQUEST FOR PRETERMINATION HEARING:
In each instance where notice to the water user is required prior to termination of water service, the City must give a timely and adequate written notice
that the water user is entitled to a due process hearing. Every effort will be made to ensure the user receives a copy of the notice, with the City retaining
proof of service of the notice. This may be accomplished by sending the notice by certified mail with a return receipt requested or by personal service
through the police department with an appropriate return of service. When a request for pretermination hearing is presented to the city:
A. The request may be given on a prepared form available from the city clerk or through a letter directed to the city. The request must be presented to the
city clerk, or, in the clerk's absence, to the finance director.
B. Upon presentation of the request:
1. The finance director or clerk will endeavor to resolve the problem administratively.
2. If it is determined there is no available administrative resolution of the problem, the clerk will proceed as hereinafter provided.
C. The clerk will schedule the time and date for the pretermination hearing as expeditiously as possible before the city council. It may be scheduled for a
special session, or, with the concurrence of the mayor, at the regular session. If it is not possible to hand the notice of hearing to the water user at the
time the hearing is requested, the notice of hearing shall be sent by registered mail with a return receipt requested or by personal service through the
police department with the return of service.
D. When the clerk sends to the council the notice of the setting of the pretermination hearing, the finance director or the clerk will provide council and the
mayor with a brief history or synopsis of the customer's status and issue leading to the request for hearing, a copy of which will be forwarded to the city
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 116/303
attorney. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-29: PRETERMINATION HEARING:
The actual pretermination hearing shall be conducted before the council in a formal proceeding. Basic hearing standards to be met are:
A. The governing body's decision must be fair and impartial based on the facts presented at the hearing.
B. The person requesting the hearing has the right to call witnesses, give testimony and submit evidence as to any facts of the matter. The city department
involved has the same right.
C. The city shall make a full record of the proceedings by electronic recording and must preserve the tapes and any exhibits submitted for a period of thirty
(30) days.
D. Exhibits submitted for the council's consideration shall be identified as city's exhibit "1", "2", etc.
E. The council's decision must be given in writing, stating the reason for the decision. If the decision is adverse to the water user, the decision shall also
state as follows:
1. The council's decision is the final administrative decision available to the water user at city level.
2. The water user may appeal the decision of the council by filing appropriate proceedings with a court of competent jurisdiction. An appeal must be
commenced within thirty (30) days of the date of the council's written decision.
F. In the event an action is filed in district court, upon proper order of the court, the city clerk shall forward the council's record of its proceedings, the
exhibits, and a certified copy of the council's final decision to the clerk of the district court along with a letter of transmittal and obtain an appropriate
receipt for the city's records. If the court orders a transcript of the electronically recorded tapes to be prepared by the city, the cost of preparation of said
transcript shall be at the same rate charged by the official reporter for the district court and the fee for the transcript is due and payable upon
presentation to the requesting party. (Ord. 818, 9-16-1985)
7-6-30: HYDRANT USE:
A. All persons not employed by the city of Sandpoint and acting in their official capacity or not engaged in actual firefighting shall obtain a permit from the
city of Sandpoint prior to connecting to or withdrawing water from water hydrants on the Sandpoint water system.
B. The city council of Sandpoint is hereby authorized to adopt by resolution a policy containing such rules and regulations as may from time to time be
deemed necessary to regulate the use of Sandpoint water system water hydrants within the boundary of the Sandpoint water service area.
C. Any rules and regulations adopted by the city council may include fees for the service provided and shall require that a permit is necessary to connect
to and withdraw water from the Sandpoint water system.
1. At the time of application for a permit allowing connection to and withdrawal of water from a water hydrant on the Sandpoint water system the
applicant shall be provided a copy of the then current hydrant use policy. At the time of actual issuance of the permit the applicant shall sign a
statement that may be contained on the permit that the applicant has read the hydrant use policy, agrees to its terms and that applicant understands
that failure to comply with the hydrant use policy may constitute a misdemeanor offense or grounds for denial of future permits or revocation of the
current permit.
2. It shall be grounds to deny a permit or to revoke an existing permit to any person who connects to, or removes water from a water hydrant on the
Sandpoint water system without a valid permit or after having received a valid permit does not follow the requirements of the then current water
hydrant use policy rules and regulations.
a. The denial shall apply to those persons acting as agents of the person whose application is denied or permit revoked.
3. In the event that an applicant or permittee is denied future permits or a current permit is revoked the applicant or permittee after notice of the city's
action or intended action may request a hearing before the city council and at such hearing it shall be the burden of the applicant or permittee to
show cause why the permit should be granted or not revoked as the case may be.
D. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to connect to or withdraw water from a water hydrant on the Sandpoint water system without first having
obtained a permit from the city of Sandpoint permitting the connection and withdrawal of water.
E. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to connect to or obtain water from a water hydrant on the Sandpoint water system and fail to comply with the
then current water hydrant use rules and regulations.
F. Any person convicted of a violation of any subsection of this section including any provision of the hydrant use policy rules and regulations adopted by
resolution pursuant to this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) for any one offense, or by imprisonment in
jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 117/303
G. It is the policy of the city of Sandpoint that protection of the public potable water supply is paramount as is the protection of the Sandpoint water system
infrastructure. Therefore, it is the policy of the city of Sandpoint that any city employee who observes the unauthorized use of the Sandpoint water
system water hydrants, shall be deemed to be working in the course and scope of their employment and is authorized to take such reasonable steps as
are necessary to report the unauthorized use and to assist in the prosecution of criminal charges for unauthorized use or improper hydrant use
occurring outside the city limits of Sandpoint. (Ord. 1063, 11-21-2001)
Chapter 7
MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM
7-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1017, 11-18-1998)
7-7-2: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVE:
It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to and for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and
inhabitants of the city, as well as to protect publicly owned treatment works (POTW) personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the
course of their employment and for the purpose of controlling the use and for providing an equitable distribution of the costs and expenses of maintenance,
operation, upkeep, and repair and replacement of the entire sewage treatment system which includes the pump stations, sewage treatment facilities, and
sludge disposal facilities of the city, to charge and collect service charges or fees upon all lots, lands, property and premises served or benefited by the
sewage system of the city, which system and facilities consist generally of all pipelines, conduits, manholes, cleanouts, sewer mains, intercepting sewers,
outfall sewers, lift stations, pumps, structures, mechanical equipment and facilities for the treatment and disposal of sewage or sewage byproducts.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system which will interfere with the normal operation of the system or the use and disposal
of the resulting municipal sludge;
B. Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system which do not receive adequate treatment in the POTW, and which will pass
through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
C. Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW;
D. Ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable
statutes and regulations;
E. Protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of public works shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the director may be delegated by the director to other city personnel.
This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. This chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring,
compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for
the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
This chapter provides for the regulation of discharges into the city wastewater system through the enforcement of administrative regulations. (Ord.
1188, 2-20-2008)
7-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
A. Terms Defined: Unless the context explicitly indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT: The clean water act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), as amended.
APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARD: For any specified pollutant, general discharge prohibitions, the city's specific limitations on discharge,
state standards, or the categorical pretreatment standards (when effective), whichever standard is most stringent.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: EPA region 10.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE: If the user is a corporation:
1. The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or
2. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management
decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations and initiating and directing other comprehensive measures to assure long term environmental compliance with environmental
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 118/303
laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for
control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures;
3. If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively;
4. If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee;
5. The individuals described in subsections 1 through 3 of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge
originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city.
BOD5 (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BOARDING HOUSE: Any building or portion thereof which includes separate bedrooms for rent and common kitchen and/or bathroom facilities.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste, and other sanitary
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (5') outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to a point of connection with the public sewer or other places of disposal.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance
with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1317) which applies to a specific category of users and which appears in 40 CFR chapter I,
subchapter N, parts 405-471.
CATEGORICAL USER: A user regulated by one of EPA's categorical pretreatment standards.
CENTIGRADE (C): The centigrade scale for measuring temperature, on which, at standard atmospheric pressure, the boiling point of water is at one
hundred degrees (100°) and the freezing point is zero degrees (0°) on its scale.
CITY: The city of Sandpoint, Bonner County, Idaho, or its authorized or designated agent, representative, or deputy thereto.
COLOR: The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance
is equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface and subsurface runoff and sewage.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time.
CONTRACTOR: Any person, firm, or corporation performing excavation, trenching, line connections, or other work affecting the sewer system, for
hire; including, but not limited to, any person, firm or corporation licensed as a public works contractor.
CONTROL AUTHORITY: The city of Sandpoint.
COOLING WATER/NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material,
intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. Cooling water may be generated from any use, such as air conditioning, heat exchangers,
cooling or refrigeration to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DEVELOPER: Person, firm, joint venture, partnership or corporation which is the owner of land and is subdividing the land for resale and which
seeks to have the subdivided land served by the city.
DISCHARGER - INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGER: Any nonresidential user who discharges an effluent into a POTW by means of pipes, conduits,
pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and
appliances appurtenant thereto.
DOMESTIC USER (RESIDENTIAL USER): Any person who contributes, causes, or allows the contribution of wastewater into the city POTW that is
of a similar volume and/or chemical makeup to that of a residential dwelling unit. Discharges from a residential dwelling unit typically include up to
one hundred (100) gallons per capita per day, 0.2 pounds of BOD per capita per day, and 0.17 pounds of TSS per capita per day.
ER (EQUIVALENT RESIDENT): A sewer user who has discharged six thousand (6,000) gallons of sewerage during any month of a calendar year.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The U.S. environmental protection agency or, where appropriate, the director of the region 10
office of water, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE: For a categorical industrial user, an "existing source" is any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which
commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is
thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the act.
EXISTING USER: For noncategorical users an "existing user" is defined as any user which is discharging wastewater prior to the effective date
hereof.
FAHRENHEIT (F): The Fahrenheit scale for measuring temperature, on which, under standard atmospheric pressure, the boiling point of water is at
two hundred twelve degrees (212°) and the freezing point is at thirty two degrees (32°) above the zero of its scale.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 119/303
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale
of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.
IWA: Industrial waste acceptance.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of
the act.
The discharge into the POTW is normally by means of pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water
intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The solid, liquid or gaseous wastes resulting from any industrial manufacturing, trade, or business processes or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources.
INFILTRATION: Groundwater which enters the sewer system through cracks, holes, offset joints, crushed pipe, leaking manholes, etc.
INFLOW: Stormwater or surface water which enters the sewer system through holes, cracks, openings, etc.
INSPECTOR: The public works director or his duly authorized deputy.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, either: 1) inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations; 2) inhibits or disrupts its sludge processes, use or disposal; or 3) is a cause of a violation of the city's
NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or
permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the clean water act; the solid waste disposal act (SWDA),
including title II commonly referred to as the resource conservation and recovery act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA; the clean air act; the toxic substances control act; and the marine protection,
research, and sanctuaries act.
LATERAL: See definition of Private Sewer Lateral.
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT: The maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time,
determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling
event.
MAY: Is permissive (see definition of Shall).
MODIFIED CONNECTION: Involves an increase in number of ERs or an increase in demand on the system.
MODIFIED USER: Involves modification of producing facilities, physical modification to sanitary sewer lines or an increase in demand on the system.
MOTEL AND HOTEL: A building or group of buildings on the same premises either detached or in connected rows; containing sleeping or dwelling
units, with or without kitchen facilities in the individual units, and designed for, or occupied with an ordinary rental period not exceeding two (2)
weeks.
MULTI-UNIT DWELLING: A building containing a unit or combination of units with individual bath and kitchen facilities. This definition includes, but is
not limited to, apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes, and triplexes. A seasonal multi-unit dwelling is an individual unit of a multi-unit
dwelling which is occupied on an intermittent basis and is not utilized as a primary residence.
NPDES: National pollutant discharge elimination system permit program of the USEPA.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water.
NEW SOURCE DISCHARGER: 1. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the
construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307C of the act which will be applicable to
such sources if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
a. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
b. The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at
an existing source; or
c. The production of wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as existing source should be considered.
2. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection 1b or 1c of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces,
or adds to existing process or production equipment.
3. Construction of a new source as defined herein has commenced if the owner or operator has:
a. Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site construction program:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 120/303
(1) Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
(2) Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary
for placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
b. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation.
NEW USER: A user that is not subject to federal categorical standards, and who applies to the city for a new building permit or any person who
occupies an existing building and plans to discharge wastewater to the city's collection system after the effective date hereof. Any person that buys
an existing facility that is discharging nondomestic wastewater will be considered an "existing user" if no significant changes are made in the
manufacturing operation.
NEW USER FACILITY FEE (NUFF): The new user facility fee and service connection fees collected shall be related to the operation, maintenance,
and replacement cost of the treatment plant, collection system, and infiltration/inflow correction.
O&M: Operation and maintenance.
OTHER WASTES: Decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar, chemicals and all other substances except
sewage and industrial wastes.
POTW: Publicly owned treatment works.
PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERMITTEE: A person or user issued a wastewater discharge permit.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity,
or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assignees. This definition includes all federal, state, or local governmental entities.
pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units.
POLLUTANT: Any substance discharged into a POTW or its collection system.
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to (or in lieu of) introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological process; by process changes; or by other means (except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment
standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: Prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits established by the city/POTW.
PRIVATE SEWER LATERAL: The privately owned sewer pipe which connects points of use such as drains and toilets from a house or business to
the sewer main in the public right of way. It is the responsibility of the private owner to maintain the lateral in good working order from the connection
at the main to their house or business.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS: Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 7-
7-5 of this chapter.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in
any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by public authority.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The person designated by the city of Sandpoint to supervise the operation of the POTW and who is charged with
certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter or a duly authorized representative.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): Defined by section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the city. This definition
includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid
nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the city.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING: Includes only the following types of buildings and structures: single-family residences, duplexes, triplexes, apartment
houses, motels, hotels, trailer courts, and multi-unit dwellings.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The point at which the building sewer connects to the public sewer main.
SEWAGE: Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 121/303
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
SEWER: Any pipe, conduit, ditch or other device used to collect and transport sewage or stormwater from the generating source.
SEWER LATERAL: See definition of Private Sewer Lateral.
SEWER USER OR USER: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, or corporation, or group who has connected to the sewerage system.
SEWERAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
SHALL: Is mandatory (see definition of May).
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGER: 1. A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
2. A user that:
a. Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of processed wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); or
b. Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of
the POTW treatment plant; or
c. Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating
any pretreatment standard or requirement.
d. Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection 2b of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW's operation or for violating any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from a user and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6) determine that such user should not be
considered a significant industrial user.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE: A building designed for and used exclusively for residence purposes by one family. This definition shall include a
single trailer not located in a trailer court.
SLUG LOAD: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the discharge standards of this chapter, or any discharge
of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION: A classification pursuant to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" issued by the United States
office of management and budget.
STORM DRAIN OR STORM SEWER: A sewer which carries storm and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes.
SUPERINTENDENT: The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this chapter or a duly authorized representative.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid,
and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANTS: Those substances listed in the federal priority pollutant list and any other pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic
in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the environmental protection agency of the United States of America under section 307 of the act,
as the same may be amended.
TRAILER COURT OR MOBILE HOME PARK: Any area or site or land upon which two (2) or more trailers are placed and maintained for dwelling
purposes, either on a permanent or semipermanent basis.
TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT: The discharge from the POTW into waters of the United States.
UPSET: An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance due to factors beyond the
reasonable control of the discharger, and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment
facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation thereof.
USER: A source of indirect discharge. The source shall not include "domestic user" as defined herein.
WASTEWATER: Liquid and water carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT (INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT, OR DISCHARGE PERMIT): An authorization or
equivalent control document issued by the city to users discharging wastewater to the POTW. The permit may contain appropriate pretreatment
standards and requirements as set forth in this chapter.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal
sewage and industrial waste.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
Any other term not herein defined shall be defined pursuant to the "Glossary - Water And Sewage Control Engineering", APHA, ASCE, and WPCF,
latest edition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 122/303
B. Abbreviations: The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ASPP Accidental spill prevention plan
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of federal regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. environmental protection agency
ER Equivalent resident
gpd Gallons per day
l Liter
LEL Lower explosive limit
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
NUFF New user facility fee
O&M Operation and maintenance
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource conservation and recovery act
SIC Standard industrial classifications
SWDA Solid waste disposal act (42 USC 6901 et seq.)
TSS Total suspended solids
USC United States Code
(Ord. 1199, 4-15-2009)
7-7-4: OWNERSHIP AND OPERATION OF FACILITIES:
A. City Facilities: All sewer mains and trunk sewers located in public right of way or dedicated easements to the city for such purposes shall be public
sewers. These sewers shall be owned, operated and maintained by the city. Service lines and service taps shall be installed, owned and maintained by
customers. Construction to install or repair a service line and/or tap within any public right of way may be performed by the city, or the city's authorized
representative, at the customer's expense. New sewers shall become public sewers upon formal acceptance by the city.
B. User Connection: Connection, or request for connection, to the public sewer shall constitute a representation that all of the system under the control
and/or ownership of the user is properly vented. User shall provide an authorization for the city to clean the same with high power washing equipment,
and a release whereby the city shall not be liable to the user for any damage caused by such cleaning.
C. Replacement Of Sewer Laterals: Service lines which are determined to be defective, deteriorating, leaking or nonfunctional and the condition is such
that the repairs must be done quickly to avoid further complications and are therefore not eligible for the timetables set forth in the sewer lateral
improvement program shall, upon notice from the city, be replaced by the property owner served by the line. Such lines are hereby declared to be a
health concern and a nuisance. If the owner, after receipt of written notice from the city, fails to replace such lines within thirty (30) days and in a timely
manner, the city may replace or contract for replacement of such lines at the owner's expense. If the failures require immediate attention as determined
by the city, the city shall consider the matter an emergency and effect repairs immediately and bill the property owner for the work. Upon completion of
the work, the owner shall be billed for all costs and expenses of replacement including the costs of notices. If the owner is unable to pay the costs of
replacement within sixty (60) days, the city may contract with the owner to add costs and expenses to the owner's utility billings, to be paid over a
period not to exceed thirty six (36) months. Should the owner fail to pay or contract for payment of such expenses, the city may: 1) file the expenses for
reimbursement with the county, to be collected with property taxes; or 2) utilize available legal remedies to collect the expenses; or 3) terminate utility
services to the property until such expenses are paid. Should the city collect such expenses over time, a reasonable interest rate, to be established by
the city council by resolution, shall be assessed.
D. Sewer Lateral Improvement Program (SLIP): The purpose of this program is to decrease the volume of inflow and infiltration (I&I) which enters the
sewers by repairing or replacing private sewer laterals. The program shall initiate inspections periodically so that the condition of private laterals can be
accurately assessed, and repaired or replaced as necessary.
An owner must have their private sewer lateral inspected by video for defects when any of the following events occur:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 123/303
1. A house or business is to be sold which was constructed more than five (5) years ago, before the sale closes.
2. An owner takes out a building permit for more than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for a house or business which was constructed more
than five (5) years ago.
3. An inspection of a sewer main line is conducted by city sewer crews who identify excessive inflow and infiltration from a private sewer lateral or
identify that private sewer lateral repairs are needed from the city's camera in the main line.
No house or business shall be required to have their lateral inspected more than once every five (5) years.
If the inspecting plumber (or other inspecting party) determines that the lateral is in need of repair, the public works department will review the video
of the lateral inspection and rate it based on a point system using a score sheet which rates the lateral based on several criteria as outlined by
resolution of the Sandpoint city council. A sewer lateral receiving a score of one thousand five hundred (1,500) points or more would require repair or
replacement.
Once a lateral has a failed score of one thousand five hundred (1,500) points or more, the property owners will be notified by the public works
department and the lateral must be repaired within a ninety (90) day grace period. If the lateral has not been repaired after ninety (90) days, a charge
of fifty dollars ($50.00) per month will be billed to the owner for noncompliance.
The owner may apply for an extension up to ten (10) months to complete repairs. The extension period will begin at the end of the ninety (90) day
grace period. The fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) per month would continue to accrue during this extension period and will be due in full at the end of the
ten (10) month extension if work has not yet been completed. All penalty fines collected will go into the fund dedicated to inflow and infiltration
reduction on sewer mains.
Customers refusing to pay the bill or have their lateral repaired shall have their water service terminated. (Ord. 1199, 4-15-2009)
7-7-5: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS, PRETREATMENT LIMITATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. General Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through or
interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. Discharge Into Sanitary Sewers: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Any building which had roof runoff
connections to the sanitary sewer system prior to the adoption of this chapter shall, when such building(s) discharging roof runoff is remodeled or
reconstructed by fifty percent (50%) or greater (determined by square footage or value); the building roof runoff to the sanitary sewer shall be
eliminated. No building permit shall be issued until the owner/applicant has posted an appropriate bond securing performance.
C. Storm Sewers: Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
sewers that are specifically designated as storm sewers. Industrial cooling water may be discharged, on approval of the city, to a storm sewer, provided
all applicable state of Idaho, department of health and welfare and environmental protection agency regulatory requirements are satisfied.
D. Specific Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
1. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than
one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
2. Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 (or more than 9), or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
3. Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference (but in no case solids greater
than 0.05 inch(es) in any dimension);
4. Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either
singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;
5. Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which
causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F) (40°C) unless the
approval authority, upon the request of the POTW, approves alternate temperature limits;
6. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through;
7. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
8. Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city;
9. Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or a hazard to life or health, or to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance or repair;
10. Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit. Color (in combination with
turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten
percent (10%) from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life;
11. Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the director in compliance with applicable state or
federal regulations;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 124/303
12. Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the director;
13. Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes or from industrial processes;
14. Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director;
15. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
16. Detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
17. Any liquid, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances,
to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive readings
on an explosion meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading
over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter;
18. Grease, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime,
stone or marble dusts, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt
residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes;
19. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or other disposal system permits;
20. Any wastewater, which in the opinion of the director can cause harm either to the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance, unless allowed under special
agreement by the director (except that no special waiver shall be given from categorical pretreatment standards);
21. The contents of any tank or other vessel owned or used by any person in the business of collecting or pumping sewage, effluent, septic tank waste,
or other wastewater unless said person has first obtained testing and approval as may be generally required by the city and paid all fees assessed
for the privilege of said discharge;
22. Any hazardous wastes as defined in rules published by the state of Idaho or in 40 CFR part 261;
23. Persistent pesticides and/or pesticides regulated by the federal insecticide fungicide rodenticide act (FIFRA);
24. Sewage sludge, except in accordance with the city's NPDES permits, providing that it specifically allows the discharge to surface waters of sewage
sludge pollutants.
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to
the POTW.
E. Discharge Limits: In addition to previous stated discharge limits, no discharger shall discharge any water or wastes containing heavy metals and similar
objectionable or toxic substances to such a degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the point of discharge exceeds the
following daily maximum concentration limits:
Concentration, mg/l
Arsenic 0.13
Cadmium 0.69
Chromium (total) 2.77
Copper 1.91
Cyanide 1.2
Fats, oils and grease:
Mineral based 100
Nonmineral based 250
Lead 0.69
Mercury 0.002
Methylene chloride 0.1
Nickel 3.98
Silver 0.97
Stoddard solvent nondetectible
Tetrachloroethylene (perchloroethylene) nondetectible
1,1,1 - trichloroethylene nondetectible
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 125/303
Zinc 2.61
The city may impose mass limitations on discharges where imposition of mass limitations if deemed appropriate by the city.
The city reserves the right to amend this chapter to provide for more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW where deemed
necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in this chapter.
Special Agreement: The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the
POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard or federal pretreatment requirement. However,
users may request a net/gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.13. They may also request a variance from the
categorical pretreatment standard from the approval authority in accordance with 40 CFR 403.13.
F. Dilution: No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement unless expressly authorized by an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on users which he believes may be using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
G. Violations: If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which exceed or violate the limitations of this
section, the city may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
4. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
section 7-7-11 of this chapter. If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws;
and/or
5. Seek enforcement and legal remedies contained in this chapter for violations of the limitations and provisions of this chapter.
H. Grease, Oil, And Sand Interceptors: Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city,
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
I. Maintenance Of Facilities: Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously
in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
J. Installation Of Improvements: When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole or monitoring facility together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes by the owner and city. Such manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall
be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible and in proper operating condition at all times. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. Monitoring facilities shall have ample room in or near them to allow accurate sampling and
preparation of samples for analysis.
K. Analyses: All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the act and contained in
40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the EPA. Where 40 CFR part 136 does not include sampling
or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, or where EPA determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate
for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical
procedures, including procedures suggested by the city or other parties, approved by the EPA.
L. Correction Of Violations: Any property owner, or sewer user violating the provisions of this section shall, upon notice by the city, immediately install such
pretreatment through separators, traps, and/or chemical, physical, or biochemical processes as will make and assure that the sewage contributed from
such property or premises will meet the requirements of this chapter.
M. Protection From Regulated Materials: Each discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge/slug loads of prohibited or regulated materials
or substances established by this chapter. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge/slug loads of prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the discharger's cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection
shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. Each existing discharger shall complete its
plan and submit same to the city within thirty (30) days after being notified by the city of the requirement to do so. No discharger who discharges to the
POTW after the aforesaid date shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge/slug loads protection procedures
have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the city shall not relieve the discharger from the
responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
Any user required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the
following:
1. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
2. Description of stored chemicals;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 126/303
3. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which
would violate any of the standards of this chapter; and
4. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and
equipment for emergency response.
Dischargers shall notify the city immediately upon the occurrence of a slug load or accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this chapter.
Written notification, which shall be submitted to the city by the discharger within five (5) days, shall include location of discharge, date and time
thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. Any discharger who discharges an accidental spill or slug load of prohibited
materials shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the city on account thereof
under state or federal law.
Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on discharger's premises, advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug load or
accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency notification
procedure.
N. Additional Rules And Regulations: Rules and regulations applicable to the sewer system of the city shall be adopted and amended by resolution of the
mayor and city council. In the event of conflicting or ambiguous language between this chapter and the rules and regulations, this chapter shall take
precedence.
O. Additional Prohibition: Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points designated by the city are prohibited. (Ord. 1188, 2-20-2008)
7-7-6: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS; CONNECTION TO CITY SYSTEM:
No new buildings with plumbing facilities or wastewater drains of any nature shall be constructed within the city unless connected to the city's sewer
system. No existing building with plumbing facilities or wastewater drains of any nature shall remain unconnected to the city's sewer system if the sewer
system is available within two hundred feet (200') of said building, except that the city may permit the owner to install temporary individual disposal
facilities or continue the use of a private disposal system, provided that: (Ord. 934, 10-18-1993)
A. Extension to the city's system would create an unreasonable financial burden.
B. The owner deposits the current new user facility fee and service connection fee with the city.
C. The owner provides written agreement to connect within ten (10) months to the city system when a line is within two hundred feet (200') of his building.
All plans for, and construction of, extensions and connections shall be in accordance with this chapter.
D. A private disposal system is constructed meeting all the following requirements:
1. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private disposal system complying with all
recommendations of the Idaho department of health and welfare, division of environmental quality or the Panhandle health district rules and
regulations.
2. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the director of
public works. The application for each such permit shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed
necessary by the director. A permit and inspection fee set by resolution adopted by the city council shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time the
application is filed.
3. A permit for a private disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the said director. He shall be
allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the director when the work is ready
for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty eight (48) hours of the receipt of
notice by the director.
4. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Idaho department of
health and welfare, division of environmental quality or Panhandle health district rules and regulations.
5. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to
the public sewer in compliance with this chapter; any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and
filled with suitable material.
6. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city.
7. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any public health
officer. (Ord. 1017, 11-18-1998)
7-7-7: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF CITY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVES:
A. Inspection And Sampling: The city shall have the right to enter the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter, and any
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the user is complying with all requirements thereof. Users shall allow
the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of
any additional duties:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 127/303
1. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make
necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city will be permitted to enter without delay
for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
2. The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or
metering of the user's operations.
3. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
user at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
4. Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
B. Safety Rules: While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 7-7-6 of this chapter, the city shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the sewer user.
C. Personnel Shall Enter: The city personnel bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the city holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any
portion of the sewerage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance
with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 1017, 11-18-1998)
7-7-8: SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY:
A. Inclusions In The City: Unless otherwise approved by the city, sewer service will be furnished only to persons whose property is included within and
subject to this chapter and taxation by the city. It shall be incumbent upon the applicant to furnish satisfactory evidence of inclusion whenever such
evidence is requested by the city. Satisfactory evidence shall consist of tax receipts or certification in lieu thereof, received from and signed by the
county treasurer.
B. Service Outside The City: The city may, if it is deemed advantageous to the city, furnish sewer service to properties located outside the boundaries of
the city, but under no circumstances shall the city construct or reimburse costs for sewer mains to service such properties. Charges for furnishing
sewer service outside the city shall be at the discretion of the city. No service shall be furnished to properties outside the city unless the charge therefor
is at least equal to the cost of service for which such property would be responsible if it were a part of the city. Acceptance of service for such
connection to said sewer system shall be evidenced by a development agreement in which the property owner consents to annexation by the city of his
property.
This chapter shall be applicable to all property owners outside the city who are furnished service by the city, and no connection to the city's sewer
mains shall be permitted until the property owner shall have agreed to abide by this chapter; provided, however, that the city, in its discretion, may
charge a higher connection fee and inspection fee for properties not located within the city.
In every case where the city furnishes sewer service to properties outside the city, the city reserves the right to discontinue, or suspend such service
when, in its judgment, it is for the best interest of the city to do so, and such service shall be considered a license, revocable upon due notice. (Ord.
1188, 2-20-2008)
7-7-9: LINE EXTENSION POLICIES:
A. General: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a sanitary sewer main within the jurisdiction of the city without first having made formal
application to the city for approval and having complied with all the regulations of the city.
Plans for development shall be submitted to the city along with the application for service. Said plans shall be approved for compliance with the city's
specifications, and such study for compliance with the city's specifications shall be at the developer's expense. Developers or landowners are required
to furnish free of charge to the city suitable rights of way and/or easements for construction, operation and maintenance of new, existing, or future
sewer systems. Easements shall be thirty feet (30') wide unless approval is given by the public works director for an alternative width. However, under
no circumstances shall an easement be less than sixteen feet (16') in width. All sewer main extensions shall be constructed according to the city's
specifications. The city reserves the right to require the developer to expose any section of sewer to check compliance with the standards. Cost of such
excavation shall be at the expense of the developer. No sewer lines shall be constructed within the city's jurisdiction until final plans and specifications
have been approved by the city and written authorization to proceed has been obtained from the city. No service lines shall be accepted by the city or
placed into operation unless they have been inspected and approved by the said city engineer and written approval obtained. No excavation shall be
started until required city, county, state, or Sandpoint independent highway district permits have been obtained. Developers constructing extensions
shall warrant such work for a period of two (2) years.
B. Procedure For Sewer Main Extension Construction: Under normal conditions the landowner, subdivider, or developer shall construct, at his own
expense, new sewer lines in full compliance with this chapter and the sewer department rules and regulations.
C. Performance And Maintenance Bond: A performance and maintenance bond equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of contract (or construction
cost) shall be required by the city on all sewer main construction.
D. Inspection Fees: All daily inspection fees required by the city, state highway department or other involved entity shall be paid by the owner, subdivider,
or developer.
E. City Ownership: Landowners, subdividers, or developers who have completed construction of sewer lines shall, before these lines are accepted by the
city, fully comply with the sewer department rules and regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 128/303
F. New User Facility Fee (NUFF) And Service Connection Fee: The city shall collect from each new or modified user or new source discharger, prior to
connection, the applicable fees set by resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1188, 2-20-2008)
7-7-10: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
B. The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city. A permit and inspection fee shall be established by city council
resolution for residential, commercial and industrial building sewer permits and shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time the application is filed. In
addition, the owner shall pay the new user facility fee and service connection fee as specified in this chapter. These fees shall be paid upon approval of
plans submitted by owner or at the time the building permit is issued, whichever is earlier.
C. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city
from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
D. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior
lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer
from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
E. Building sewer pipe shall be as specified in sewer department rules and regulations.
F. Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel
to and within three feet (3') of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened.
G. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by
approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer, in conformance with section III of the Sewer Department Rules and Regulations.
H. Methods of construction and inspection shall be as per this Chapter and the Sewer Department Rules and Regulations.
I. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City, highway
district, or other applicable public agency.
J. Provision for the connection of mobile home, travel trailer, or any other mobile unit to the sanitary sewage system may be made by a pipe connected to
the sanitary sewer system in compliance with this Section, and at all times not connected to a mobile unit must be sealed with a well casing, sealing
plug, or comparable device in such manner as to stop any substance or gas from entering or leaving the sanitary sewer system. The actual physical
connection shall not occur until the appropriate fees have been paid and/or the appropriate permit has been issued by the City.
K. No person shall disconnect any sewage connection without first notifying the Public Works Director. After such notification the connection may be
disconnected and sealed in such a manner so as to prevent the passage of any substance, gas or odor into or out of said sewage line. Said patch or
sealing shall not in any way impede the flow of sewage within the sewage line, and shall be of sufficient thickness, strength and design to equal the
sewage line. The Public Works Director shall be notified upon completion of sealing and any excavation for such a sealing shall be left open for
sufficient time for the Public Works Director to inspect the same.
L. All nonresidential sewers shall have an inspection and sampling manhole or structure with an opening of no less than twenty four inches (24") in
diameter and an internal diameter of no less than forty eight inches (48") containing flow measuring, recording and sampling equipment as required by
the City to assure compliance with this Chapter. (Ord. 1017, 11-18-1998)
7-7-11: SEWER USE CHARGE FOR OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT OF THE SEWAGE TREATMENT
WORKS:
A. Purpose: There is hereby established a system of periodic service charges and fees in order to equitably impose upon all users the costs and expenses
of maintenance, operation, replacement and repair of the sewer system and sewage treatment facilities. The said service charges and fees for
purposes of computation shall be determined by resolution of the City Council.
B. Equivalent Residence: One equivalent residence, hereinafter referred to as ER, shall be defined as the sewage flow from one typical single-family
residence. The sewage flow from one typical single-family residence is two hundred (200) gallons of sewage per day, 0.32 pounds of biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD5) per day, and 0.32 pounds of suspended solids (SS) per day which is based on EPA manual, "On-Site Disposal/Septage
Treatment and Disposal", #EPA 625/4-77-ON.
The City may install a measuring device in the sewer service line at any time to determine the amount of wastewater and/or collect wastewater
samples for testing. After measuring and/or sampling, the City may adjust the user charge to conform to actual usage.
Any user feeling aggrieved at the user charge for operation, maintenance, and bond repayment may request that his charge be changed if:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 129/303
1. Flow proportioned BOD5 or SS tests certified by an independent laboratory specializing in wastewater analysis indicate a significant deviation in
BOD5 from the value used by the City in computing the BOD5 charge; and/or
2. Total daily wastewater flow measurements derived from a continuously recording measuring device (i.e., water meter) and certified by an authorized
representative of the City as to their authenticity indicate a significant deviation in wastewater flow charge.
3. The flow measurement and testing methods are approved in detail by the City prior to actual measurement and testing.
All changes in user charges applicable to this Chapter shall be computed by the method outlined herein.
C. Special Provisions For User Fees: The provisions of subsection 7-6-10C of this Title, Senior Citizens' Rate, shall be applicable in calculating the
monthly sewer bill of eligible senior citizens.
D. Minimum Charge: Each sewer user billed separately shall pay a minimum charge per month regardless of actual flow. The minimum charge shall be
one ER as calculated in this Section.
E. Charges For Pretreatment: It is the purpose of this Section to provide for the payment of fees from dischargers to the City's wastewater disposal
system, to compensate the City for the cost of administration of the pretreatment program established herein.
The City may adopt by resolution charges and fees which may include:
1. Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
2. Fees for industrial wastewater discharge permit;
3. Fees for filing appeals;
4. Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; and
5. Fees for sampling and laboratory analysis. (Ord. 1017, 11-18-1998)
7-7-12: NEW USER FACILITY FEES AND SERVICE CONNECTION FEES:
A. Fees: The City shall collect from each potential user, either in advance or at the time the building permit is issued, the applicable new user facility fees
and service connection fees. These fees shall be in addition to other permit fees and sewer line construction costs described in this Chapter.
B. New User Facility Fee: The new user facility fee (NUFF) and service connection fee for new or modified connections to the Sandpoint sewer system
shall be equal to the number of ER times the NUFF and the service connection fee for a single-family residence. In no case shall the NUFF and service
connection fee be less than that for one single-family residence (1 ER). The fee for a single-family residence (1 ER) shall be the sum of: 1) NUFF, and
2) service connection fee, described as follows:
1. The new user facility fee and service connection fee shall be related to the operation, maintenance and replacement cost of the treatment plant,
collection system and infiltration-inflow correction.
2. The new user facility fee and service connection fee shall be set by resolution adopted by the City Council.
3. The NUFF and service connection fees collected shall be placed in a separate capital improvement fund.
4. In instances where an improvement on a property has previously been connected to the sewer system and complied with the connection fee(s) in
force at the time of connection, the above listed fees do not apply. If, however, the connection involves an increase in the number of ERs or an
increase in demand on the system, then the connection is subject to these fees for the increase only.
C. Water And Sewer Hook-Up Fees: For the purpose of this Section there is hereby created and established water and sewer hook-up fees.
1. At the time any premises is connected to any part of the City water distribution or sanitary sewer system the owner thereof shall be charged a hookup
fee for such connection. The hook-up fee shall reflect the cost incurred to extend the water or sewer system to the property including costs
incurred through a local improvement district.
2. When any premises connected to a part of the City water or sewer system paid the cost of such extension previously through assessments and a
local improvement district, there shall be no hook-up fee charged.
3. All hook-up fees shall be fixed by resolution rather than ordinance.
4. The cost of construction, installation and extension shall be ascertained by the Director of Public Works of the City at the time of the completion of
such project and final computation of the costs through the local improvement district and shall be maintained on file with the City Clerk, Director of
Finance and Director of Public Works at the City.
5. All such costs and hook-up fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council of the City for each project and not by ordinance.
6. When any water or wastewater system extension in the City is made in such a manner as to provide service to owners of land which did not
participate in the initial costs thereof through participation in the local improvement district, the owner of such nonparticipating parcel or parcels of
property shall pay the established hook-up fee plus an administrative fee equal to ten percent (10%) of the original LID cost and the CPI increase for
each year after the passage of the LID ordinance to the City and shall not receive such service until verification of payment has been made by the
Director of Public Works and Finance Director.
7. The hook-up fees described herein and established hereby are in addition to any other new user facility fee or any other fee established by the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 130/303
8. Those land owners who have participated proportionately in the installation, extension or construction of such water or sewer services by
participation in the local improvement district shall be exempt from such hook-up fees.
9. The notice of existence of this Section and any resolution establishing water or sewer hook-up fees for any individual project shall be recorded with
the clerk/recorder of Bonner County, Idaho.
10. If any section, paragraph, sentence or provision hereof or the application thereof to any particular circumstance shall be declared or deemed invalid
or unenforceable the same shall not affect the remainder hereof which shall continue in full force and effect and applicable to all circumstances to
which it may apply.
D. Water And Sewer Developer Costs: For the purpose of this Section there is hereby created and established water and sewer developer costs.
1. At the time any premises is connected to any part of the City water distribution or sanitary sewer system the owner thereof shall be charged a hookup
fee for such connection. The hook-up fee shall reflect the cost incurred to extend the water or sewer system to the property including costs
incurred privately financed by private individuals or developers extending the line.
2. When any premises connected to a part of the City water or sewer system paid the cost of such extension by proportionate sharing in the cost
incurred by the developer, there shall be no hook-up fee charge.
3. All hook-up fees shall be fixed by resolution rather than ordinance.
4. The cost of construction, installation and extension shall be ascertained by the Director of Public Works of the City at the time of the completion of
such project and acceptance of a private developers or contractors facilities and shall be maintained on file with the City Clerk, Director of Finance
and Director of Public Works at the City.
5. When any water or wastewater system extension of the City is made in such a manner as to provide service to owners of land which did not
participate in the initial cost thereof and such water or sewer system extension was paid by a private party or developer. The owner of such abutting
nonparticipating parcel or parcels of property shall reimburse and pay to the private party, developer or successor in interest thereof compensation
as defined and established for each such subsequent hookup by the Director of Public Works as hereinabove described.
6. All such costs and hook-up fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council of the City for each project and not by ordinance.
7. When the nonparticipating land owners seek to hook up to the water or sewer services which have been installed, instructed and extended by a
private party or developer, they shall pay the City for such determined hook-up fee and present proof of payment of the same to the Director of Public
Works of the City prior to being permitted any hookup to such water or sewer line. The Director of Public Works shall transmit said funds to the
developer less a ten percent (10%) administrative fee.
8. The total reimbursement to the contractor shall not exceed ninety percent (90%) of the actual cost of construction and installation as determined by
the director of public works.
9. The developer, or successor, shall at all times provide a current mailing address to the director of public works to accomplish such reimbursements.
If the eligible developer or successor cannot be located by certified mail within six (6) months, said fees shall be maintained in the respective water
or sewer enterprise funds.
10. The developer shall not be entitled to reimbursement for any costs attributable to service to the developer's own properties nor for the front footage
of the developer's own property as established at the time of extension or installation. All right to reimbursement shall cease ten (10) years after
completion of such extension and/or installation project.
11. The hook up fees described herein and established hereby are in addition to any other new user facility fee or any other fee established by the city
prior to this section.
12. The notice of existence of this section and any resolution establishing water or sewer hook up fees for any individual project shall be recorded with
the clerk/recorder of Bonner County, Idaho.
13. If any section, paragraph, sentence or provision hereof or the application thereof to any particular circumstance shall be declared or deemed invalid
or unenforceable, the same shall not affect the remainder hereof which shall continue in full force and effect and applicable to all circumstances to
which it may apply. (Ord. 1017, 11-18-1998)
7-7-13: ADMINISTRATION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGES:
A. General: It shall be unlawful to discharge sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes to any sewer within the jurisdiction of the city, and/or to the POTW
without having first complied with the terms of this chapter. All significant industrial dischargers proposing to connect or to discharge sewage, industrial
wastes and other wastes to the POTW shall comply with all terms of this chapter.
B. Wastewater Discharge Disclosure Requirements:
1. Disclosure Declaration; Fee: Significant industrial dischargers shall complete and file with the city, a disclosure declaration in the form prescribed by
the city, and accompanied by the appropriate fee.
Existing significant industrial dischargers shall file disclosure forms within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter unless the same has
already done so, and proposed new dischargers shall file their disclosure forms at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to the POTW.
Categorical users submitting the following information shall have complied with 40 CFR 403.12(b). The city will evaluate the complete disclosure
form and data furnished by the discharger and may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete wastewater
discharge permit application, the director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. Upon determination to issue, the
permit shall be issued within thirty (30) days of full elevation and acceptance of the data furnished. The director may deny any application for a
wastewater discharge permit. The disclosure to be made by the discharger shall be made on written forms provided by the city and shall cover:
a. Identifying Information: The user shall submit the name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners.
b. Permits: The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 131/303
c. Description Of Operations: The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification
of the operations carried out by such industrial user, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or
could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; number and type of employees; hours of operation; each product produced by
type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day) and the
time and duration of discharges. This description should also include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the
POTW from the regulated or manufacturing processes. Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all
sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
d. Flow Measurement:
(1) Categorical User: The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the
POTW from each of the following:
(A) Regulated or manufacturing process streams; and
(B) Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(2) Noncategorical User: The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the
POTW from each of the following:
Total process flow, wastewater treatment plant flow, total plant flow or individual manufacturing process flow as required by the city.
The city may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations.
e. Measurements Of Pollutants:
(1) Categorical User:
(A) The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for each regulated or manufacturing process.
(B) In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, or mass where required by
the categorical pretreatment standard or as required by the city, of regulated pollutants including standards contained in section 7-7-5 of this
chapter, as appropriate, in the discharge from each regulated or manufacturing process. Both daily maximum and average concentration, or
mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical
procedures outlined in subsection F of this section.
(C) The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this
subsection.
(D) Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) for a categorical user covered by a
categorical pretreatment standard, this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted as part of the application.
(2) Noncategorical User:
(A) The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for its wastewater discharge.
(B) In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, or mass where required by
the city, of regulated pollutants contained in section 7-7-5 of this chapter, as appropriate, in the discharge. Both daily maximum and average
concentration, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall conform to
sampling and analytical procedures outlined in subsection F of this section.
(C) The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this
subsection.
(D) Where the city developed alternate concentration or mass limits because of dilution, this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be
submitted as part of the application.
f. Certification: The user shall submit a statement worded as specified in subsection B1c of this section, which has been reviewed by an authorized
representative of the user and certified by a qualified professional as outlined in subsection B1c of this section, indicating whether the applicable
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
g. Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, the user shall submit
the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The user's schedule shall conform with the
requirements of subsection B1i of this section. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established
pursuant to section 7-7-16 of this chapter.
(1) Where the user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined waste stream
formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) at the time the user submits the report required by
this subsection, the information required by subsections B1f and B1g of this section shall pertain to the modified limits.
(2) If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined waste stream formula (40 CFR
403.6(e)), and/or a fundamental different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) after the user submits the report required by subsections B1f and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 132/303
B1g of this section shall be submitted by the user within sixty (60) days after the modified limit is approved.
h. Additional Information: Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the city to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
i. Additional Activities: Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to comply with this chapter, the
discharger shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the discharger will provide such additional pretreatment and/or
implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities.
(1) The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the discharger to comply with the requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to, dates relating to
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction,
executing contract for major construction and all other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter.
(2) Under no circumstances shall the city permit a time increment for any single step directed toward compliance which exceeds nine (9) months.
(3) No later than fourteen (14) days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the discharger shall submit a
progress report to the city, including no less than a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that
milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken
by the discharger to return the construction to the approved schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the city.
j. Disclosure Of Project: Disclosure of such project produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production.
k. Disclosure To Include: Disclosure of the type and amount of raw materials to include chemical utilization average and maximum per day.
2. Signatory And Certification Requirement: All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons
who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.
a. For the purpose of this section, a "responsible officer or manager" means:
(1) A president, vice president, secretary, or treasurer of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation, or
(2) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management
decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations and initiating and directing other comprehensive measures to assure long term environmental compliance with environmental
laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for
control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures. This authorization must be made in writing by the principal executive officer or ranking elected official and submitted to
the approval authority prior to or together with the report being submitted of the user and contain the following certification statement:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a
system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person
or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the
best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.
b. A "duly authorized representative" is an individual designated by the responsible officer, manager, sole proprietor or general partner in writing. The
written authorization must be submitted to the city and also specified by either an individual or a position having the responsibility of the overall
operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field
superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company. If an
authorization in this section is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility,
or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be
submitted to the city prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
C. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit:
1. Issuance Of Permit: The city shall issue to the discharger an industrial wastewater discharge permit (hereinafter, "permit"), which will be based on
information in the disclosure form:
a. Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following:
(1) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years;
(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from the city, and provisions for
furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
(3) Applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, including any special state requirements;
(4) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, submittal of technical reports, compliance schedules, and record keeping requirements. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on
federal, state, and local law;
(5) Requirement for immediate notification to the city where self-monitoring results indicate noncompliance;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 133/303
(6) Requirement to report a bypass or upset of a pretreatment facility;
(7) Requirement to report immediately to the city all discharges, including slug loadings, that could cause problems to the POTW;
(8) Requirement for the SIU who reports noncompliance to repeat the sampling and analysis and submit results to the city within thirty (30) days
after becoming aware of the violation;
(9) A statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule;
(10) Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the POTW to be necessary.
b. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:
(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices designed to
reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges;
(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;
(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit;
(8) Any special agreements the director chooses to continue or develop between the city and user;
(9) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
2. Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification: Modifications to a wastewater discharge permit may be allowed for the following reasons:
a. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local requirements;
b. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater
discharge permit issuance;
c. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
d. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, personnel, or the receiving waters;
e. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
f. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
g. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
h. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
i. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator.
3. Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer: Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the
permittee gives at least one hundred eighty (180) days' notice to the public works director and the city approves the wastewater discharge permit
transfer. The notice to the public works director must include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator which:
a. States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes;
b. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
c. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable as of the date of facility transfer. Provided that
the above occurs and that there were no significant changes to the manufacturing operation or wastewater discharge, the new owner will be
considered an existing user and be covered by the existing limits and requirements in the previous owner's permit.
4. Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation: Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for, but not limited to, the following reasons:
a. Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
b. Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed conditions;
c. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
d. Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
e. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
f. Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 134/303
g. Failure to meet discharge limitations;
h. Failure to pay fines;
i. Failure to pay sewer charges;
j. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
k. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
l. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility;
m. If the city has to invoke its emergency provision as cited in subsection 7-7-17A of this chapter; or
n. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits
issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user.
5. Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance: A user, required to have a wastewater discharge permit, shall apply for wastewater discharge permit
reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge permit application, in accordance with subsection B of this section, a minimum of ninety
(90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. A user, whose existing wastewater discharge permit has expired
and has submitted its reapplication in the time period specified herein, shall be deemed to have an effective wastewater discharge permit until the
city issues or denies the new wastewater discharge permit. A user, whose existing wastewater discharge permit has expired and who failed to submit
its reapplication in the time period specified herein, will be deemed to be discharging without a wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 1188, 2-20-2008)
D. Reporting Requirements For Dischargers:
1. Reports Required: Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance by the discharger with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements set forth in this chapter, federal categorical standards, or in an industrial wastewater discharge permit or, in the case of a new source or
a new user considered by the city to fit the definition of a new significant industrial discharger, within thirty (30) days following commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the POTW by a new discharger, any discharger subject to this chapter shall submit to the city a report indicating the
nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge, and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons.
The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional
operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative,
the user shall submit documentation as required by the city of the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. This statement
shall be signed by an authorized representative of the discharger, and certified by a qualified engineer licensed to practice in the state of Idaho.
2. Contents Of Report: Any significant industrial discharger and new sources and new users considered by the city to fit the definition of significant
industrial discharger subject to a pretreatment standard set forth in this chapter, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the
case of a new discharger, after commencement of the discharge to the city, shall submit to the city during the months of June and December, unless
required more frequently by the city, a report indicating the nature and concentration, of prohibited or regulated substances in the effluent which are
limited by the pretreatment standards hereof. In addition, this report shall include a record of all measured or estimated average and maximum daily
flows during the report period reported in subsection D1 of this section. Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement; provided,
however, where cost or feasibility considerations justify, the city may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable
techniques.
The city, for good cause shown, considering such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, or other extenuating factors, may
authorize the submission of said reports in months other than those specified above.
3. Discharge Report: Reports of discharges shall contain all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and
concentration, or production and mass where required by the city. The frequency of monitoring by the discharger shall be as prescribed by the city,
but in no case shall be less than twice per calendar year. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR part 136 and amendments
thereto.
4. Notification Of Hazardous Waste Dischargers To The City System: Any industrial user discharging hazardous wastes shall notify the city in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.12. Any industrial user who commences discharging after August 23, 1990, shall provide notification in accordance with
403.12(p) no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge of any listed or characteristic hazardous waste(s).
5. Hazardous Wastes: Whenever the EPA publishes new RCRA rules identifying additional hazardous wastes or new characteristics of hazardous
wastes, any affected user must notify the city, EPA, RCRA director, and state hazardous wastes director if any of these wastes are discharged to the
city's treatment system. The notification must occur within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the published regulation. (Ord. 1234, 6-16-2010)
6. Notification Of Significant Production Changes: Any user operating under a wastewater discharge permit incorporating equivalent mass or
concentration limits shall notify the city within two (2) working days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will
significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not providing a notice of such anticipated change will be required to comply with the
existing limits contained in its wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 1274, 7-18-2012)
7. Reports From Unpermitted Users: All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the
public works director may require.
E. Sampling Requirements For Users:
1. Grab Samples: A minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. The
public works director will determine on a case by case basis whether the user will be able to composite the individual grab samples. For all other
pollutants, twenty four (24) hour composite samples must be obtained through flow proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The
city may waive flow proportional composite sampling for any user that demonstrates that flow proportional is infeasible. In such cases, samples may
be obtained through time proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates
that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 135/303
2. Location Of Samples: Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from
the regulated or manufacturing process if no pretreatment exists or as determined by the city and contained in the user's wastewater discharge
permit. For categorical users, if other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows
and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the
applicable categorical pretreatment standards. For other SIUs, for which the city has adjusted its local limits to factor out dilution flows, the user
should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to evaluate compliance with the adjusted pretreatment standard(s).
3. Results: All sample results shall indicate the time, date and place, of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges from the user. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently
than what was required in its wastewater discharge permit, using methodologies in 40 CFR part 136, it must submit all results of sampling and
analysis of the discharge as part of its self-monitoring report.
4. Monitoring Of User's Wastewater: Where the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the city must perform the
repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat analysis.
5. Search Warrants: If the public works director has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection
program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the public works director shall seek issuance of a search and/or seizure warrant from
the magistrate court of Bonner County. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the public works director in the company of a uniformed
police officer of the city.
6. Vandalism: No person shall wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any structure,
appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in
this chapter.
7. Confidential Information: Information and data obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge
permits, and monitoring programs, and from the city inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the user
furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses
related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be
available to the public without restriction. (Ord. 1234, 6-16-2010)
F. Recordkeeping: Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain and make available for inspection and copying all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or POTW, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the city.
G. Hazardous Waste Notification: Any user that is discharging more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes as defined in 40 CFR 261 (listed or
characteristic wastes) in a calendar month or any facility discharging any amount of acutely hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and
261.33(e) is required to provide a onetime notification in writing to the city, to the EPA region 10 office of waste and chemicals management director,
and to the state hazardous waste division. Any existing user exempt from this notification shall comply with the requirements contained herein within
thirty (30) days of becoming aware of a discharge of fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes in a calendar month or any discharge of acutely
hazardous wastes to the city sewer system.
1. The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261;
2. The EPA hazardous waste number; and
3. The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).
4. If an industrial user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of which waste per calendar month to the sewer system, the notification shall
also contain the following information to the extent it is known or readily available to the industrial user:
a. An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes;
b. An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste streams discharged during that calendar month; and
c. An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste streams expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
Whenever the EPA publishes final rules identifying additional hazardous wastes or new characteristics of hazardous waste, a user shall notify the
city of the discharge of such a substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
In the case of any notification made under this subsection, an industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.
H. Reports For Unpermitted Users: All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the
director may require. (Ord. 1188, 2-20-2008)
7-7-14: PRETREATMENT:
Users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all applicable
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 136/303
pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by appropriate statutes, ordinances and regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater shall be properly operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities shall be submitted to the
city for review and must be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The user shall obtain all necessary construction operating permits from
the city. Such pretreatment facilities shall be under the control and direction of a qualified wastewater treatment operator. The review of such plans shall in
no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying its facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this
chapter. Within a reasonable time after the completion of the wastewater treatment facility, the user shall furnish its operations and maintenance
procedures for the city to review. Any subsequent significant changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be
accepted by the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. (Ord. 1017, 11-18-1998)
7-7-15: FEDERAL AND STATE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards: The national categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471
are hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set forth herein and are enforceable under this chapter.
B. State Requirements: State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by all users which are subject to such standards in
any instance in which they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations, or those in this chapter or other applicable ordinance. (Ord.
1188, 2-20-2008)
7-7-16: DEADLINE FOR COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS:
Compliance by existing sources (categorical users) covered by categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three (3) years of the date the standard
is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate standard. The city shall establish a final compliance deadline date for any
existing user not covered by categorical pretreatment standards.
New source dischargers and new significant industrial users are required to comply with applicable pretreatment standards within the shortest feasible
time, not to exceed ninety (90) days from the beginning of discharge. New sources and "new users" shall install and have in operating condition, and shall
"start up" all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge.
Any wastewater discharge permit issued to a categorical user shall not contain a compliance date beyond any deadline date established in EPA's
categorical pretreatment standards. Any other existing user or a categorical user that must comply with a more stringent local limit, which is in
noncompliance with any local limits shall be provided with a compliance schedule placed in an industrial wastewater permit to ensure compliance within
the shortest time feasible. (Ord. 1017, 11-18-1998)
7-7-17: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Emergency Suspension Of Service And Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit: The city may, without advance notice, order the suspension of the
wastewater treatment service and the industrial wastewater discharge permit to a discharger when it appears to the city that an actual or threatened
discharge: 1) presents or threatens an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or substantial danger to the environment, or
2) threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or to violate any pretreatment limits imposed by this chapter. Any discharger notified of the
city's suspension order shall immediately cease all discharges and may thereafter apply for a postsuspension hearing which shall be held as soon as
reasonably practicable under the circumstances attending the emergency suspension. In the event of failure of the discharger to comply with the
suspension order, the city may commence judicial proceedings immediately thereafter to compel the discharger's specific compliance with such order
and/or to recover civil penalties, and the city's costs and reasonable attorney fees for such action in the event the city is the prevailing party. The city
shall reinstate the permit and/or the wastewater pretreatment service upon proof by the discharger of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or
conditions creating the actual or threatened discharge as set forth above.
B. Termination Of Treatment Services: A discharger shall not: 1) fail to factually report accurately the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its
discharge; 2) fail to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or characteristics; 3) refuse reasonable access to the discharger's premises
by representatives of the city for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 4) violate the provisions of this chapter, or any order of the city with respect
thereto. The city may terminate wastewater treatment services to any discharger who violates any of the foregoing prohibitions.
C. Notification Of Violation; Administrative Adjustment: Whenever the city finds that any discharger has violated the prohibitions in subsection B of this
section, the city may cause to be served upon such discharger a written notice (either personally or by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested) stating the nature of the alleged violation. Within fifteen (15) days of the date of receipt of the notice, the discharger shall respond personally
or in writing or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the city, advising of its position with respect to the allegations.
Thereafter, the discharger shall be given the opportunity to meet with a representative of the city to ascertain the veracity of the allegations and
establish a plan for the satisfactory correction of the violations and preclusion of a recurrence thereof.
D. Show Cause Hearing: Where the violation of subsection B of this section is not corrected by timely compliance by means of administration adjustment,
the city may order any discharger which suffers or permits a violation of subsection B of this section to show cause why the proposed service
termination action should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the discharger by personal service, or certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, specifying the time and place of the hearing to be held by the city regarding the violation, the reasons why the enforcement action is
to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the discharger to show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
The notice of the hearing shall be served no less than ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer, or authorized
representative of a discharger. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by the city. The city shall enter appropriate
orders with respect to the alleged violations. Appeal of such orders may be taken by the discharger in accordance with the Idaho administrative
procedures act. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
E. Consent Orders: The public works director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing
an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 137/303
noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders
issued pursuant to subsections F and G of this section and shall be judicially enforceable. Use of a consent order shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
F. Compliance Orders: When the public works director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the public works director may issue an order to the
user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a time specified in the order. If the user does not come into
compliance within the time specified in the order, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including
additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
G. Cease And Desist Orders: When the public works director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely
to recur, the public works director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
1. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
2. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
H. Judicial Proceedings: Following the entry of any order by the city with respect to the violation by a discharger of subsection B of this section, the city
may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate local court and shall be entitled to its costs and reasonable
attorney fees in the event the city is the prevailing party.
I. Significant Noncompliance; Annual Publication: A list of dischargers who were in significant noncompliance during the previous twelve (12) months will
be annually published by the city in the Bonner County Daily Bee newspaper.
J. Significant Noncompliance (SNC): For the purposes of enforcement and reporting IUs in the newspaper, a facility is considered to be in SNC if it meets
one or more of the following criteria:
1. "Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits", defined here as those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of all of the measurements taken
during a rolling six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;
2. "Technical review criteria (TRC) violations", defined here as those in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements taken
during a rolling six (6) month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC
(TRC = 1.4 times the limit for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 times for all other pollutants except pH);
3. Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit, daily maximum or longer term average, that the control authority determines has caused, alone or
in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
4. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's
exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.9(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such discharge;
5. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing, or attaining final compliance;
6. Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
7. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and
8. Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
K. Right Of Appeal: Any discharger or any interested party shall have the right to request in writing an interpretation or ruling by the city public works
department on any matter covered by this chapter and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. In the event that such inquiry is by a discharger and
deals with matters of performance or compliance with this chapter for which enforcement activity relating to an alleged violation is the subject, receipt of
a discharger's request shall not stay enforcement proceedings pending. Appeal of any final judicial order entered pursuant to this chapter may be taken
in accordance with Idaho state law. (Ord. 1188, 2-20-2008)
L. Operating Upsets: Any discharger which experiences an upset in operations which places the discharger in a temporary state of noncompliance with
this chapter shall inform the city thereof within twenty four (24) hours of first awareness of the commencement of the upset. Where such information is
given orally, a written follow up report thereof shall be filed by the discharger with the city within five (5) working days. The report shall specify:
1. Description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact on the discharger's compliance status.
2. Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is
reasonably expected to occur.
3. All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance. (Ord. 1274, 7-18-
2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 138/303
A documented and verified bona fide operating upset shall be an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the city against the
discharger for any noncompliance with this chapter which arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset.
M. Publication Of Users In Significant Noncompliance: The city shall publish annually, in a newspaper(s) of general circulation that provides meaningful
public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW, a list of the uses which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. For the purposes of this provision, an industrial user is in significant
noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
1. "Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits" defined here as those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements
taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l);
2. "Technical review criteria (TRC) violations", defined here as those in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) multiplied by the TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);
3. Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum, longer term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
4. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
5. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
6. Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
7. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
8. Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, which the POTW determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
N. Show Cause Hearing: The director may order (via a certified letter) a user which has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director and show
cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the
proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least fourteen (14) days prior
to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 1188, 2-20-2008)
7-7-18: PENALTIES:
A. Civil Penalties: Any discharger who violates an order of the city, or who fails to comply with: 1) any provision of this chapter, or 2) any regulation, rule or
permit of the city, issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty. The amount of such civil penalty shall be not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each day upon which a violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate violation. In the case of a monthly or other long term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day
during the period of the violation. Such penalties may be recovered by judicial actions and/or, to the extent permissible by state law, by administrative
procedures.
B. Recovery Of Costs Incurred By The City: Any discharger violating any of the provisions of this chapter who discharges or causes a discharge producing
a deposit or obstruction or causes damage to or impairs the city's wastewater disposal system shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or
damage caused by such violation of discharge. The city shall, by order, bill the discharger for the cost incurred by the city for any cleaning, repair or
replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and shall be
enforceable under the provisions of section 7-7-17 of this chapter.
C. Falsifying Information: Any person who negligently makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report and plan
or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or who falsifies, tampers with or negligently renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by imprisonment in a county jail not
exceeding six (6) months, or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both, per violation.
D. General Criminal Penalties: Any user who negligently violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable by
imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both, per violation.
E. Remedies Nonexclusive: The provisions in this section and section 7-7-17 of this chapter are not exclusive remedies. The city reserves the right to take
any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with
the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city reserves the right to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.
Further, the city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ord. 1188, 2-20-2008)
7-7-19: SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 139/303
A. Performance Bonds: The public works director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply
with any provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the public works director
to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
B. Liability Insurance: The public works director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with
any provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
C. Water Supply Severance: Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the
user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
D. Public Nuisances: A violation of any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the public works director. Any person(s)
creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of this code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred
in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.
E. Informant Rewards: The public works director may pay up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for information leading to the discovery of
noncompliance by a user. In the event that the information provided results in an administrative fine or civil penalty levied against the user, the public
works director may disburse up to five percent (5%) of the collected fine or penalty to the informant. However, a single reward payment may not exceed
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
F. Contractor Listing: Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a
contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held by a user found to be
in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the city. (Ord. 1017, 11-18-1998)
7-7-20: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section,
1. "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
2. "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe
property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. Bypass: A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause applicable pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also
is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections C and D of this section.
C. Prior Notice: If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW, at least ten (10) days before the date of the
bypass, if possible.
A user shall submit oral notice to the city of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty four (24) hours from
the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times,
and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written report on a case by case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty four
(24) hours.
D. Bypass Prohibited: Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
1. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
2. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance
during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive
maintenance; and
3. The user submitted notices as required under subsection C of this section.
The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the three (3)
conditions listed in this subsection D.
E. Upset:
1. For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused
by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 140/303
2. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards if the requirements of
subsection E3 of this section are met.
3. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or
other relevant evidence that:
a. An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
b. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
c. The user has submitted the following information to the POTW and treatment plant operator within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the
upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within 5 days):
(1) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
(2) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
(3) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
4. In any enforcement proceedings, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
5. Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards.
6. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with applicable pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
F. Prohibited Discharge Standards: A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the
prohibitions in section 7-7-5 of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference and that either: 1) a local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass-through or interference; or 2) no local limit exists, but the discharge did not
change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in
the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. (Ord. 1017, 11-18-1998)
7-7-21: RIGHT OF REVISION:
The city reserves the right to amend this chapter to provide for more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW where deemed
necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1017, 11-18-1998)
7-7-22: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include:
A. Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including the cost of processing such applications;
B. Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring
reports submitted by users;
C. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;
D. Fees for filing appeals; and
E. Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. (Ord. 1188, 2-20-2008)
Chapter 8
BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
7-8-1: AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, AND SCOPE:
A. Responsibility Of The Public Works Director: The public works director, or his designated agent who is an employee of the city, shall inspect the
plumbing in every building or premises in this city as frequently as in his judgment may be necessary to ensure that such plumbing has been installed
in such a manner as to prevent the possibility of pollution of the water supply of the city by the plumbing. The public works director shall notify or cause
to be notified in writing the owner or authorized agent of the owner of any such building or premises, to correct, within a reasonable time set by the
public works director, any plumbing installed or existing contrary to or in violation of this chapter, and which in his judgment, may permit the pollution or
contamination of the city water supply, or otherwise adversely affect the public health.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 141/303
B. Inspection: The public works director, or his designated agent who is an employee of the city, shall have the right of entry with permission of the owner
into any building during reasonable hours for the purpose of making inspection of the plumbing systems installed in such building or premises provided
that with respect to the inspection of any single-family dwellings, consent to such inspection shall first be obtained from a person of suitable age and
discretion therein or in control thereof.
C. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health of the public by ensuring that the water supply is not contaminated by cross connections or
possible cross connections. Proper installation and annual testing of backflow preventers will be required as outlined in the most recently published
edition of the American Water Works Association (AWWA) "Cross Connection Control Manual: Accepted Procedure And Practice", the safe drinking
water act, and Idaho rules for public drinking water systems. (Ord. 1209, 5-28-2009)
7-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
AGENCY: The city of Sandpoint public works department.
AIRGAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank,
plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle.
APPROVED: Accepted by the agency as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this chapter, or as suitable for the proposed use.
ASSEMBLY: A backflow preventer which is testable. (Compare to the definition of Device.)
AUXILIARY SUPPLY: Any water source or system other than the potable water supply that may be available in the building or premises.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources
other than its intended source. Backsiphonage is one type of backflow.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER: A device, assembly, or means to prevent backflow.
BACKSIPHONAGE: Backflow resulting from negative pressures in the distributing pipes of a potable water supply.
BAROMETRIC LOOP: A loop of pipe rising at least thirty five feet (35'), at its topmost point, above the highest fixture it supplies.
CHECK VALVE: A self-closing device which is designed to permit the flow of fluids in one direction and to close if there is a reversal of flow.
CONTAMINATION: See definition of Pollution.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection between a potable water supply and any waste pipe, soil pipe, sewer, drain, or any unapproved source
or system. Furthermore, it is any potable water supply outlet which is submerged or can be submerged in wastewater and/or any other source of
contamination. See definitions of Backflow and Backsiphonage.
DEVICE: A backflow preventer which is not testable and therefore only suitable for low hazard protection. (Compare to definition of Assembly.) Many
backflow preventers are mistakenly referred to as "devices" and are actually testable "assemblies".
DRAIN: Any pipe that carries wastewater or waterborne wastes in a building drainage system.
FIXTURE, PLUMBING: Installed receptacles, devices, or appliances supplied with water or that receive or discharge liquids or liquid borne wastes.
FLOOD LEVEL RIM: The edge of the receptacle from which water overflows.
HAZARD, HEALTH: Any conditions, devices, or practices in the water supply system and its operation which create, or, in the judgment of the public works
director, may create a danger to the health and well being of the water consumer.
HAZARD, PLUMBING: Any arrangement of plumbing including piping and fixtures whereby a cross connection or possible cross connection is created.
HYDROPNEUMATIC TANK: A pressure vessel in which air pressure acts upon the surface of the water contained within the vessel, pressurizing the water
distribution piping connected to the vessel.
INLET: The open end of the water supply pipe through which the water is discharged into the plumbing fixture.
PLUMBING SYSTEM: Includes the water supply and distribution pipes, plumbing fixtures, and traps; soil, waste, and vent pipes; building drains and
building sewers including their respective connections, devices, and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises; and water treating or water
using equipment.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPAL BACKFLOW PREVENTER: An assembly of differential valves and check valves including a spillage port which will
automatically open to the atmosphere to prevent backflow.
SURGE TANK: The receiving, nonpressure vessel forming part of the airgap separation between a potable and auxiliary supply.
VACUUM: Any pressure less than that exerted by the atmosphere.
VACUUM BREAKER, NONPRESSURE TYPE: A vacuum breaker designed so as not to be subjected to static line pressure.
VACUUM BREAKER, PRESSURE TYPE: A vacuum breaker designed to operate under conditions of static line pressure.
WATER, NONPOTABLE: Water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable potability.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 142/303
WATER, POTABLE: Water free from impurities in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. Its bacteriological and chemical
quality shall conform to the requirements of the federal drinking water standards or to the regulations of the public health authority having jurisdiction
(Idaho department of environmental quality). Refer to Idaho rules for public drinking water systems. (Ord. 1209, 5-28-2009)
7-8-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. General: A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed, and maintained in such manner as to prevent nonpotable liquids, solids, or gases
from being introduced into the potable water supply through cross connections or any other piping connections to the system, thus preventing
contamination. (Ord. 1209, 5-28-2009)
B. Cross Connections Prohibited: Cross connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment containing water or other
substances of unknown or questionable safety are prohibited except when and where, as approved by the authority having jurisdiction, suitable
protection is installed, tested annually, no later than August 1 each year, by a tester who is licensed in the state of Idaho and maintained to ensure
proper operation on a continuing basis. Annual test reports shall be sent to the public works department. (Ord. 1246, 10-20-2010)
C. Interconnections: Interconnection between two (2) or more public water supplies shall be permitted only with the approval of the health authority having
jurisdiction (Idaho department of environmental quality) and the public works director.
D. Individual Water Supply: Cross connections between an individual water supply and a potable public supply shall not be made unless specifically
approved by the health authority having jurisdiction (Idaho department of environmental quality) and the public works director.
E. Connections To Boilers: Potable water connections to boilers shall be made through an airgap or provided with an approved reduced pressure backflow
assembly.
F. Protection Against Backflow And Back Siphonage:
1. Water Outlets: A potable water system shall be protected against backflow and back siphonage by providing and maintaining at each outlet:
a. Airgap: An airgap, as specified in subsection F2 of this section, between the potable water outlet and the flood level rim of the fixture it supplies or
between the outlet and any other source of contamination, or
b. Backflow Preventer: A device, assembly, or means to prevent backflow.
2. Minimum Required Airgap:
a. How Measured: The minimum required airgap shall be measured vertically from the lowest end of a potable water outlet to the flood rim or line of
the fixture or receptacle into which it discharges.
b. Size: The minimum required airgap shall be twice the effective opening of a potable water outlet. In no case shall the minimum required airgap be
less than one inch (1").
3. Approval Of Backflow Preventers: Before any device or assembly for the prevention of backflow or back siphonage is installed, it shall have first
been certified by the University Of Southern California Foundation For Cross Connection Control Research and be listed by the Idaho department of
environmental quality as an approved cross connection control device on their most current list. Preventers installed in a building's potable water
supply distribution system for protection against backflow shall be maintained in good working condition by the person or persons responsible for the
maintenance of the system.
4. Installation Of Backflow Preventers:
a. Installation: In general, devices shall be installed in accordance with the most recent edition of the "Accepted Procedure And Practice In Cross-
Connection Control Manual" as published by the Pacific Northwest section of the American Water Works Association, hereinafter referred to as
"the manual".
b. Preventers Of All Types: Backflow and back siphonage preventers shall be accessibly located preferably in the same room with the fixture they
serve. Installation in utility or service spaces, provided they are readily accessible, is also permitted.
5. Protective Preventers Required: Protective preventers shall be required for those facilities noted in IDAPA 58.01.08 section 552.06.a, b, c, d of the
Idaho regulations for public drinking water systems and/or as noted in the manual and/or as specified by the public works director. The type of
preventer and its location shall be as recommended by the manual and/or the public works director.
6. Connections Not Subject To Back Pressure: Where a water connection is not subject to back pressure, a vacuum breaker shall be installed in an
approved manner.
7. Low Pressure Cutoff Required On Booster Pumps: When a booster pump is used on a water pressure booster system and the possibility exists that
a positive pressure of ten (10) psi or less may occur on the suction side of the pump, there shall be installed a low pressure cutoff on the booster
pump to prevent the creation of a vacuum or negative pressure on the suction side of the pump, thus cutting off water to other outlets. (Ord. 1209, 5-
28-2009)
7-8-4: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. General Requirements: It shall be the responsibility of building and premises owners to install and maintain all backflow preventers and vacuum
breakers within the building or on the premises in good working order and to make no piping or other arrangements for the purpose of bypassing
backflow preventers. All assemblies must be tested upon installation by a tester licensed in the state of Idaho to test backflow assemblies. The test
report must be sent to the public works department. (Ord. 1218, 8-19-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 143/303
B. Backflow Assemblies: All assemblies shall be tested annually, no later than August 1 each year, by a tester who is licensed in the state of Idaho to test
backflow assemblies and maintained to ensure proper operation on a continuing basis. Annual test reports shall be sent to the public works
department. The testing procedures shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions when approved by the public works director. (Ord.
1246, 10-20-2010)
7-8-5: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Notification Of Violation: The public works director or his agent shall notify the owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of the building or premises in
which there is found a violation or suspected violation of this chapter, of such violation. The public works director shall set a reasonable time for the
owner to have the violation removed or corrected. Upon failure of the owner to have the defect corrected by the end of the specified time interval, the
public works director may, if in his judgment an imminent health hazard exists, cause the water service to the building or premises to be terminated,
and/or recommend such additional fines or penalties to be invoked as herein provided.
B. Fines: The owner or authorized agent of the owner responsible for the maintenance of the plumbing systems in the building who knowingly permits a
violation to remain uncorrected after the expiration of time set by the public works director shall, upon conviction thereof by the court, be required to pay
a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each violation. Each day of failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, after the
specified time provided under subsection A of this section, shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 1209, 5-28-2009)
Chapter 9
STREET LIGHTING
7-9-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the STREETLIGHT ORDINANCE. (Ord. 832, 9-15-1986)
7-9-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the payment of the cost of all street lighting within the city by assessing charges to all city utility users; to
provide for the equitable distribution of charges to the city utility users for the illumination of the streetlights; to provide that the fees and charges shall be
set by resolution adopted by the mayor and city council; to provide for the collection of such fees and charges; and to provide for the payment of a deposit.
(Ord. 832, 9-15-1986; amd. Ord. 849, 9-21-1987)
7-9-3: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISION:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to each occupant and operator assessed a charge for collection and disposal of waste materials, each water user
and each sewer user, pursuant to section 4-2-3 of this code and sections 7-6-3, and 7-7-3, respectively of this title. All city utility users shall be obligated to
pay the assessments, fees and charges established by this chapter. (Ord. 832, 9-15-1986; amd. Ord. 849, 9-21-1987)
7-9-4: FEES AND CHARGES:
The cost of illuminating all of the streetlights within the corporate city limits shall be financed by charges assessed to the city utility users. The charges
shall as nearly as possible offset the costs billed to the city by the utility company providing electrical services for such lights. The fees and charges shall
be set and may be adjusted from time to time by resolution adopted by the mayor and city council. Three (3) copies of the current rate resolution shall be
kept on file in the office of the city clerk for use and examination of and by the public. (Ord. 832, 9-15-1986)
7-9-5: BILLINGS:
The costs billed to the city for the electrical services provided for such lights shall be included in the monthly city utility billing; provided, however, that the
costs of lighting to illuminate city owned property shall be paid for by the city. Streetlight charges shall be due and payable as part of the total city utility bill
on or before the twenty fifth day of the month in which the utility bill is due. (Ord. 1114, 6-16-2004)
7-9-6: DEPOSIT:
All applicants for water and sewer service shall also deposit with the office of the city treasurer an amount for streetlights as set by resolution adopted by
the city council. Such deposit shall be made at the time, and in the manner, deposit is made for water service pursuant to chapter 6 of this title and shall be
an amount separate from and in addition to all other fees and charges required by this chapter. (Ord. 832, 9-15-1986)
Chapter 10
PARK REGULATIONS
7-10-1: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 144/303
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Governing Body of the City to promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry and to
enhance the use and enjoyment of the parks within the City limits of the City of Sandpoint. (Ord. 1359, 11-20-2018)
7-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ALL OTHER REQUESTS FOR PARKS: Any request for park use related to programming, contests, Parks and Recreation Department sponsored
tournaments, leagues and amenity reservations.
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY: An occupying of a park conducted or sponsored by any person at which a product or service is offered for sale or rent with the
intent of making a profit, whether or not such profit is for a nonprofit cause.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVES: Those persons listed by the sponsor, whether by name(s) or number(s), who will work, whether for remuneration or
as a volunteer, at a special event or other park activity.
NONCOMMERCIAL ACTIVITY: An occupying of, or an occurrence or happening at, a City park, at which no product or service is offered for sale or rent.
PARK: Any property owned or leased by the City or governed by permits issued to the City by the Army Corps of Engineers or State of Idaho and
managed as a park or recreational area.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any meeting, dash, demonstration, festival, concert, march, marathon, parade, procession, public assembly, race, rally, sporting
tournament not sponsored by the City, gathering, performance, or the activity consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles or a combination thereof within a
public park, outdoor recreation area or facility, a public parking lot, or public right-of-way, such as a street, with an intent of attracting public attention which
has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or occupies any street or other public property managed by
the City of Sandpoint, or defined within the City's Special Event Policy and Procedures.
SPONSOR: Each person making application to the City, and thereby becoming responsible for all other parks requests or as defined within the City's
Special Event Policy and Procedures in a City park. (Ord. 1359, 11-20-2018)
7-10-3: SPECIAL EVENTS AT CITY PARKS:
All requests for special events at City parks are subject to standardized special event procedures as outlined in the City's Special Event Policy and
Procedures. (Ord. 1359, 11-20-2018)
7-10-4: ALL OTHER PARK REQUESTS:
The Parks and Recreation Department may permit and schedule all other park requests (not related to special events) as defined in this chapter at the City
parks. All requests for programming, contests, Parks and Recreation Department sponsored tournaments, leagues and amenity reservations within a City
park must be submitted to the Parks and Recreation Department on a form provided by the City.
Various fees for park requests unrelated to special events shall be established by resolution adopted by the City Council.
Sponsors and participants shall be required to comply with all policies, rules and regulations adopted by the City by ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 1359,
11-20-2018)
7-10-5: RESPONSE TO REQUESTS FOR USE OF CITY PARKS:
The City of Sandpoint Parks and Recreation staff shall respond to requests for programs in parks, by phone or e-mail, within twenty one (21) calendar
days, and to league requests at the next scheduled allocation meeting. Response to special event requests will be handled by the City's designated
Special Event Coordinator. (Ord. 1359, 11-20-2018)
Chapter 11
MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS FOR STREET SANDING MATERIAL
7-11-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any State, County, City or local government or private company that applies anti-skid materials to or
mechanically sweeps or vacuums paved surfaces within the Sandpoint PM-10 Nonattainment Area. This Chapter shall also apply to all suppliers of antiskid
materials to be used by these affected entities. (Ord. 939, 2-22-1994)
7-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
AFFECTED ENTITIES: Any State, County, City or local government or private company that applies anti-skid material to, or mechanically sweeps or
vacuums paved surfaces within the Sandpoint PM-10 Nonattainment Area.
ANTI-SKID MATERIALS: Natural geologic materials, excluding salt and other de-icing chemicals, used to provide increased traction on roadways or paved
areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 145/303
APPROVED LABORATORY: A certified facility capable of performing the specified tests in a competent, professional and unbiased manner in accordance
with ASTM testing procedures.
DEQ: The Idaho Department of Health and Welfare, Division of Environmental Quality.
DURABILITY INDEX: The percent loss of weight as determined using the test method most recently adopted by resolution by the Sandpoint City Council.
HIGH DEGREE OF ANGULARITY: Means that the grains exhibit sharply intersecting, planar faces over their entire surfaces. The most current
recommended test method for this criteria shall be adopted by resolution by the Sandpoint City Council.
PERCENT FINES: Material which is acceptable as defined by standards adopted by resolution of the Sandpoint City Council.
RECYCLED ANTI-SKID MATERIAL: Previously used anti-skid material which has been collected from roadways or paved areas within the Sandpoint PM-
10 Nonattainment Area and is then, after washing, re-used as is or after blending with new anti-skid material.
SEASON: The time period beginning November 1 in one calendar year and concluding on April 30 of the next calendar year. (Ord. 939, 2-22-1994)
7-11-3: ANTI-SKID MATERIAL STANDARDS:
A. All anti-skid materials applied to paved surfaces, whether new or recycled, shall meet or exceed either of the following standards:
1. Less than two percent (2%) fines and less than forty five percent (45%) durability index; or
2. Less than four percent (4%) fines, less than twenty five percent (25%) durability index, and a high degree of angularity exhibited by the majority of
the grains.
B. Contractual Requirements: After the effective date hereof, no affected entity shall execute a contract for the purchase of anti-skid materials unless the
contract includes standards at least as stringent as those set forth herein.
C. User Exemptions: After the effective date hereof, if supplies of anti-skid material which meet the standards set forth herein are physically and
economically unavailable, then affected entities may use existing stockpiles of anti-skid material until April 30, 1994. (Ord. 939, 2-22-1994)
7-11-4: TESTING REQUIREMENTS1:
A. General: DEQ, or the user, may require tests to be performed for any of the following physical characteristics of anti-skid materials:
1. The percent fines;
2. The durability index; and
3. The degree of angularity exhibited by the majority of the grains.
B. Supplier Requirements:
1. Suppliers shall test a representative sample of the anti-skid materials being produced at least once per week during production to determine the
percent fines in the material and record the results of the test.
2. Suppliers shall have an approved laboratory test a representative sample of the anti-skid materials being produced at least once per month during
production to determine the percent fines in the material and maintain the report of the results prepared by the approved laboratory.
3. Suppliers shall have an approved laboratory test a representative sample from each of the pit sources owned or operated by the supplier at least
once during the time period in which the supplier sells anti-skid materials to an affected entity to determine the durability index of the pit material and
maintain the report of the results prepared by the approved laboratory.
4. If a supplier is relying upon subsection 7-11-3A2, at least once per month during production, the supplier, or a qualified representative of the supplier,
shall perform a visual examination of the angularity of the anti-skid material and record the results of the examination.
C. User Requirements:
1. Affected entities shall have an approved laboratory test at least one representative sample of the first two hundred fifty (250) tons of recycled antiskid
materials used by the entity each winter to determine the percent fines and durability index of the material.
2. Affected entities shall have an approved laboratory test at least one representative sample of each five hundred (500) tons of recycled anti-skid
materials used by the entity after the initial two hundred fifty (250) tons to determine the percent fines in the material.
3. Audit Authority: Designees of DEQ may enter the site of any supplier or user of anti-skid material at all reasonable times and upon the presentation
of appropriate credentials for the purpose of obtaining a sample of material to determine if the material meets the applicable standards. (Ord. 939, 2-
22-1994)
7-11-5: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Supplier Reporting Requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 146/303
1. Suppliers relying upon subsection 7-11-3A2 of this Chapter, shall at least once per month during production submit a signed statement to DEQ
certifying that the supplier, or a qualified representative of the supplier, performed a visual examination of the angularity of the anti-skid material
during the preceding month and detailed the results of that visual examination.
2. Prior to or upon delivery of anti-skid material, suppliers shall provide to DEQ and to the affected entities, that use their anti-skid material, a report
documenting that the supplier has met all applicable testing requirements. The supplier shall certify in writing to the affected entity that the anti-skid
materials meet the requirements of subsection 7-11-3A of this Chapter.
3. Prior to or upon delivery of anti-skid material, suppliers shall notify DEQ and the affected entities in writing of the location (UTM coordinates) of the
aggregate pit(s) from which the anti-skid material is produced.
4. The supplier shall maintain the information required under the provisions of subsection 7-11-4B of this Chapter for a period of three (3) years.
B. User Requirements:
1. Affected entities that use recycled anti-skid material shall submit to DEQ copies of the results of testing conducted according to subsection 7-11-4C
of this Chapter no later than thirty (30) days after the tests are conducted.
2. No later than June 30 of each year, affected governmental entities shall submit a report to DEQ containing the following information for the preceding
twelve (12) months:
a. The amount of recycled anti-skid material used;
b. The amount of nonrecycled anti-skid material used;
c. The amount of salt or other de-icing chemicals used;
d. The same information specified in subsection B2a, b and c of this Section for all private companies performing sanding, salting or de-icing services
under a contract with the affected governmental entity.
3. No later than June 30, of each year, private companies that use two hundred fifty (250) tons of anti-skid material or more per season for
nongovernmental applications within the Sandpoint PM-10 Nonattainment Area shall submit a report to DEQ containing information for the preceding
season on the total amount of anti-skid materials (both new and recycled) and salt and other de-icing chemicals used.
C. Sweeper Reporting Requirements: Affected entities shall maintain monthly records to document the information described below. No later than June
30 of each year, each affected governmental entity shall submit a report to DEQ which shall contain the information described below for each priority
roadway.
1. Date of each sweeping operation;
2. Lane miles swept; and
3. Type of equipment used.
D. DEQ Audit Authority: All records, including but not limited to test results, reports and visual examination results, generated or maintained under the
provisions of this Chapter shall be made available for inspection upon request by DEQ. (Ord. 939, 2-22-1994)
7-11-6: SWEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
Beginning the effective date hereof, the Sandpoint Independent Highway District, the City of Sandpoint, Bonner County and the Idaho Transportation
Department or their contractors shall clean paved surfaces within the Sandpoint Nonattainment Area as per the guidelines set forth in the Sandpoint Area
Winter Road Maintenance Plan. The Winter Road Maintenance Plan will develop guidelines for cleaning paved surfaces during the winter season to meet
safety and mobility requirements in addition to improving air quality. The affected governmental entities will develop the plan in conjunction with DEQ. The
plan will be updated and approved annually by DEQ. (Ord. 939, 2-22-1994)
7-11-7: ALTERNATE TEST METHODS AND STANDARDS:
Alternate percent fines and durability index test procedures for percent fines and durability may be approved in writing by DEQ if DEQ determines that the
alternate procedures provide a measure that is equivalent to the test procedures prescribed by this Chapter. (Ord. 939, 2-22-1994)
7-11-8: ALTERNATE ANTI-SKID MATERIALS:
Experimentation with alternate anti-skid materials may be approved in writing by DEQ if DEQ determines that the impact of such experiments or tests does
not contribute appreciably to air quality degradation. (Ord. 939, 2-22-1994)
7-11-9: REPORT SUBMITTAL:
Affected entities and suppliers shall submit all required reports to the appropriate office of the Idaho Division of Environmental Quality as identified by
resolution adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 939, 2-22-1994)
7-11-10: PUBLIC GOOD:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 147/303
The provisions of this Chapter are hereby found and declared to be in the furtherance of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience and it shall be
liberally construed to effect suchpurposes. (Ord. 939, 2-22-1994)
7-11-11: SEVERABILITY:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances or Code sections in conflict with this Chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict as necessary. Should
any sentence, section, clause, part or provision of this Chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the
validity of the Chapter as a whole or any other part thereof other than the part declared to be invalid. (Ord. 939, 2-22-1994)
Chapter 12
EXTENSION OF WATER SERVICE TO WETLANDS
7-12-1: EXTENSION LIMITATIONS:
Water service shall not be extended to any person, entity or structure lying within five (5) meters of a wetland as described by the Soil Conservation
Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers within the service area of the water distribution line extension along the
Kootenai Cutoff and McGhee Roads. (Ord. 944, 5-16-1994)
7-12-2: SEVERABILITY:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances or Code sections in conflict with this Chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict as necessary. Should
any sentence, section, clause, part or provision of this Chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the
validity of the Chapter as a whole or any other part thereof other than the part declared to be invalid. (Ord. 944, 5-16-1994)
Chapter 13
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT GUARANTY FUND
7-13-1: SHORT TITLE:
The fund created hereinafter shall be designated as the "Local Improvement Guaranty Fund". (Ord. 1010, 7-16-1998)
7-13-2: PURPOSE AND TAXING AUTHORIZATION:
A. The creation of the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund is for the purpose of guarantying to the extent of this Fund a payment of bonds or warrants and
interest thereon, hereafter issued against any local improvements within the City.
B. The City Council may appropriate or levy a tax not to exceed two hundredths percent (0.02%) of the market value for assessment purposes on all
taxable property within the corporate boundaries of the City in any one year, or by appropriation from such other sources as may be determined by the
City Council.
C. The sums so levied or appropriated in any year shall be more than sufficient to pay the outstanding warrants of said Fund and to establish therein a
balance, which combined levy and appropriation in any one year, shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the outstanding obligations thereby guaranteed.
D. The City Council shall not levy any tax as herein provided when the amount of monies in the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund equals ten percent
(10%) of the total outstanding obligations thereby guaranteed.
E. Tax levies herein authorized and directed shall be additional to and if need be, in excess of any and all statutory limitations. (Ord. 1010, 7-16-1998)
7-13-3: PRESENTMENT, PAYMENT, PRIORITY:
A. Whenever any bond or warrant or coupon drawn against a local improvement fund is presented to the City for payment and there is not sufficient
amount in said local improvement fund against which to draw to pay the same, unless otherwise requested by the holder, payment therefor shall be
made by warrant drawn against the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund.
B. Upon presentment to the City Treasurer, such warrants, if not paid, shall be registered and draw interest at a rate fixed by the Council. Said interest rate
shall, from time to time, be set by City Council resolution.
C. Neither the holder nor owner of any bond or warrant issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall have any claim therefor except for payment from
the special assessments made for the improvements for which said bond or warrant was issued and except as against the Local Improvement
Guaranty Fund.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 148/303
D. The City shall not be liable to any holder or owner of any bond, warrant, or interest coupon for any loss to the Guaranty Fund occurring in the lawful
operation thereof by the City. (Ord. 1010, 7-16-1998)
7-13-4: SUBROGATION:
Whenever there shall be paid out of the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund any sum on account of principal or interest of a local improvement fund or
warrant, the City, as trustee for the Fund, shall be subrogated to all of the rights of the holder of the bond or interest coupon or warrant so paid; and the
policies thereof, or the assessment underlying the same, shall become part of the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund.
A. Any fund surplus remaining in any local improvement fund after payment of all outstanding bonds or warrants payable out of such local improvement
fund, shall be paid into the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund.
B. Bonds or warrants guaranteed by such funds shall have no preference except in the order of presentment for payment. (Ord. 1010, 7-16-1998)
7-13-5: MAINTENANCE, OPERATION AND SOURCES OF FUNDS:
City Council may, by resolution, adopt and/or modify the rules and regulations for the maintenance and operation of the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund
as they deem necessary.
A. All money derived from:
1. Assignment of delinquency certificates;
2. Redemptions;
3. Sale of property under foreclosure for delinquent assessments;
4. Rent or sale of property, title to which has been obtained by the City,
shall be paid into the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund.
B. All delinquency certificates issued and such property acquired shall be held by the City for the benefit of the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund.
C. Money from the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund may be used to redeem property subject to local improvement assessments from general tax
delinquencies, underlying bonds or warrants guaranteed by the Fund, or to purchase such property at County tax sales or otherwise, from the County
for the purpose of protecting the Guaranty Fund.
1. After so acquiring title to real property, the City may lease, sell, and convey the same for such price and on such terms as may be determined by the
City Council, and any provision of law or ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding.
2. All proceeds from property sales shall belong to and be paid into the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund.
3. Any property purchased at tax sale shall not be sold for a sum lesser than the City paid thereof. (Ord. 1010, 7-16-1998)
7-13-6: REPLENISHMENT OF FUNDS:
Whenever there is not a sufficient amount of cash in the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund, at any time to pay any and all warrants together with interest
thereon, drawn against said Fund, the Council may replenish the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund by transferring or appropriating to it monies from the
General Fund of the City or other available sources as may be determined by the City Council, subject to the limitations prescribed by Idaho Code and this
Chapter.
A. Warrants: Drawing interest may be issued against the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund to meet any financial liability against it; but at the time of
making its next annual levy the City shall provide for the levy of a sum sufficient with other resources of the Guaranty Fund to pay warrants so issued
and outstanding.
1. The tax for this purpose is not to exceed two hundredths percent (0.02%) of the market value for assessment purposes on taxable property within
the City corporate boundaries in any one year. (Ord. 1010, 7-16-1998)
7-13-7: BOND AND WARRANT LIMITATIONS ON CLAIMS:
The holder or owner of any local improvement bond or warrant shall have no claim thereon against the City by which the same is issued, except to the
extent of the funds created and received by assessments against the property within any local improvement district and to the extent of his/her pro rata
share of any Local Improvement Guaranty Fund of the City. (Ord. 1010, 7-16-1998)
7-13-8: BOND PAYABLE FROM FUND:
Any local improvement district bond issued after the adoption of this Chapter shall provide that the principal sum of such bonds and interest thereon shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 149/303
be payable out of the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund created for the payment of costs and expenses of the improvement or out of the specific local
improvement fund, and not otherwise. (Ord. 1010, 7-16-1998)
7-13-9: EXCESS IN FUND - DESIGNATION:
When the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund exceeds in amounts of monies held therein ten percent (10%) of the total outstanding obligations thereby
guaranteed, the City Council may, by ordinance, authorize the Treasurer to return and pay such said excess or any part thereof to the General Fund, to
return and pay such excess or any designated part thereof, all or any part of local improvement district bonds of the City, then issued and outstanding or to
be issued.
A. Passage of such ordinance shall require the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of the full Council. (Ord. 1010, 7-16-1998)
7-13-10: FUND SEPARATE AND APART:
The Local Improvement Guaranty Fund shall be separate and apart from any local improvement fund or reserve fund established by the City for securing
payment of the principal of an interest on an issue of local improvement bonds, notes, warrants, or other short-term obligations. (Ord. 1010, 7-16-1998)
Chapter 14
RESERVED
(Ord. 1348, 10-4-2017)
Chapter 15
URBAN FORESTRY
7-15-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the CITY OF SANDPOINT URBAN FORESTRY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1190, 6-18-2008)
7-15-2: PURPOSE:
The city council recognizes that a healthy urban forest is a key component of the quality of life. This chapter is intended to encourage and promote the
preservation, expansion, protection and proper maintenance of the community forest of the city. Enhancing the beauty of the city, stimulating the planting
and growing of desirable trees and educating the public about the community forest while balancing the needs of the community with the needs of the
community forest are the primary goals of this chapter. (Ord. 1190, 6-18-2008)
7-15-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words used in the future tense include the present tense, and words in the plural
include the singular and words in the singular include the plural. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined in
this section shall have their common and ordinary meaning.
ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER(S): A property owner or owners whose property abuts a public right of way and who is therefore responsible for any
public tree on that right of way. When any part of the cylinder of the trunk crosses the private property line between two (2) owners, the owners share
responsibilities to the tree and both are considered abutting property owners.
APPLICANT: A person who is applying for a license, certification or permit as required by this chapter.
APPROVED TREE LIST: A list of trees that have been approved by resolution of the city council, also referred to as master tree list.
ARBORICULTURAL MANUAL: The "Arboricultural Specifications And Standards Of Practice For The City Of Sandpoint" adopted by resolution of the city
council which contains regulations and standards for the planting, pruning, removal and maintenance of trees on public property and a program for
developing and improving the tree, and other plant resources of the community. This manual also contains the "city maintenance responsibility list", the
"master tree list", and "vegetation management plan", and it is a reference of policies and regulations and procedures for particular points of law within this
chapter.
CITY: The city of Sandpoint, Idaho.
CITY FORESTER: A city staff member appointed by the mayor to direct the urban forestry program.
CITY MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY LIST: Those trees within public right of way for which the city has the sole responsibility for maintenance, pruning
and removal. This list shall be adopted by resolution as approved by city council resolution.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 150/303
CITY OF SANDPOINT SIDEWALK STANDARDS AND STANDARD DRAWINGS: Those standards and drawings developed by the public works
department and adopted by resolution by the city council for sidewalks in the city.
COMMERCIAL TREE WORK: Any work performed by a person on street or public trees for compensation.
COMMUNITY FOREST: The sum of all trees within the city limits of the city of Sandpoint, both public and private.
CONTROLLER: Every person (owner, agent, tenant, occupant, or lessee) who exercises care, custody and control of private real property that abuts a
right of way upon which a public tree is located.
DISEASED TREE: Any tree or part thereof that has become blighted, defaced, or infected by an injurious pest.
GUIDE FOR PLANT APPRAISALS: A book published by the International Society of Arboriculture that is commonly used by municipalities, landscape
architects and other parties interested in determining the real and present dollar value of individual trees.
HARDSCAPE: Sidewalks, curb, tree grates, tree grate frames, and irrigation systems, all of which are generally associated with street trees in an urban
setting.
HAZARDOUS TREE: Any tree or tree part that poses a high risk of damage to persons or property.
INJURIOUS PEST OR DISEASE: Refers to organisms capable of seriously damaging the form or structural integrity of a tree.
LICENSEE: A person with a valid contractor's license and/or tree service certification as required by this chapter.
MASTER TREE LIST: A list of approved and prohibited trees to be planted within the public rights of way.
PARK TREES: All trees in public parks and in all areas owned by the city but excluding those trees in the public right of way.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company, municipal corporation, or other governmental entity or organization of any
kind.
PERMIT TO DO WORK ON TREES: A permit signed by the city forester that allows the controller or licensee to prune or remove public trees and which
specifies conditions under which such work may be undertaken.
PRIVATE TREE: A tree that is not a public tree.
PRUNING, MAJOR: The pruning or cutting out of branches four inches (4") in diameter or greater; extensive root pruning; or cutting out of branches and
limbs constituting greater than fifteen percent (15%) of the tree's foliage bearing area. The pruning shall retain the natural form of the tree.
PRUNING, MINOR: Pruning or cutting out of water sprouts, suckers, twigs, or branches less than four inches (4") in diameter, and which constitutes less
than fifteen percent (15%) of the tree's foliage bearing area. The pruning shall retain the natural form of the tree. Removal of dead wood, broken branches
and stubs are included within the definition of minor pruning.
PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY: Property owned or leased by the city of Sandpoint.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: That strip of private land dedicated to, or over which is built, public streets, sidewalks or alleys, or used for or dedicated to
utilities installation within the right of way. To the extent permitted by state law, public right of way shall include right of way owned by the state of Idaho.
PUBLIC TREE: A tree that is situated in such a manner that twenty five percent (25%) or more of the tree trunk at ground level is on public property or
public right of way, including state of Idaho right of way.
PUBLIC TREE INVENTORY: An inventory of the location, size, health and condition of the city's ROW and park trees taken periodically and stored on a
database.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any organization, including telephone and electric, cable or gas companies, that has a franchise or other lawful right to use the public
rights of way.
REPLACEMENT TREE: A tree having minimum caliper of one and one-half inches (11/2") measured at a point six inches (6") above the ground line.
SECURITY AGREEMENT: A contract between the city and a developer and is part of a tree preservation plan. The agreement secures the contract with a
performance bond or cash escrow account.
SEVERE CROWN REDUCTION: The specific reduction in the overall size of a tree and/or the severe internodal cutting back of branches or limbs to stubs
within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal tree canopy and disfigure the tree. Severe crown reduction is not an acceptable form of
pruning.
SHRUB: A multiple stemmed, woody plant whose height at maturity is between three feet (3') and fifteen feet (15').
STREET: That portion of the public right of way which is improved, maintained and intended for use by vehicles to provide traffic circulation, primary
access to abutting properties and parking. This definition includes all of the area typically located between curbs.
STREET TREE: All public trees located within the public right of way.
TOPPING: The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than two inches (2") in diameter or the removal of the top part (trunk and limbs) of a coniferous
tree, thereby removing a significant portion of the normal crown and disfiguring the tree. Topping is not an acceptable form of pruning.
TREE: A woody perennial plant having one main stem or trunk and many branches. It usually exceeds fifteen feet (15') in height at maturity; however, its
failure to achieve such a height at maturity shall not preclude its inclusion as a tree.
TREE COMMITTEE: An advisory committee appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council to assist the city in the management of its
community forest.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 151/303
TREE LAWN: The area within the right of way easement, generally the lawn between the curb and sidewalk; also known as the "parking or planting strip".
TREE PRESERVATION ZONE OR TPZ: A circle surrounding the target tree with a radius of one foot (1') for every one inch (1") diameter of tree,
measured six inches (6") up from soil level.
TREE SERVICE: Commercial services provided for trees, including, but not limited to: planting, removal, pruning or engaging in technical arboricultural
practices.
TREE STANDARDS: The set of specifications concerning the planting, care and maintenance of trees as found in the arboricultural specifications and
standards guide for the city of Sandpoint.
VEGETATION MANAGEMENT PLAN: A comprehensive plan adopted by resolution of the city council, addressing the long term goals and strategic
planning related to tree planting, pruning, removal and maintenance needs of community trees to encourage the sustainability of the urban forest. (Ord.
1190, 6-18-2008)
7-15-4: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to any public tree located in the public right of way, in public parks, in a tree lawn, and on other city property as well as to those
trees and shrubs located on public and private property that are required by regulations or have been declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to this
chapter. (Ord. 1190, 6-18-2008)
7-15-5: CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF TREE COMMITTEE:
A. Committee Composition: A committee of five (5) to nine (9) persons shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council to serve three
(3) year appointments with staggered terms. At least a majority of the committee shall be residents of the city of Sandpoint. Further, at least a majority
shall have experience and expertise in arboriculture or disciplines such as public administration, horticulture, parks and recreation or landscape design.
Further, one member shall be a representative of the predominant organization representing downtown businesses. The city forester shall serve as
staff representative without voting privileges. A council member shall be appointed to serve as council liaison without voting privileges. Vacancies are
filled by appointment to unexpired terms in the same manner. Committee members may be removed without cause by majority vote of the full city
council. Members shall serve without compensation.
B. Committee Functioning: The Sandpoint tree committee shall elect a chair, vice chair, and secretary from within its membership, shall hold regular public
meetings as required by the chair, at least quarterly, and shall cause the secretary to maintain a written record of its deliberations and proceedings. A
quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. (Ord. 1190, 6-18-2008)
C. Committee Responsibility:
1. The Sandpoint tree committee shall be advisory in nature with the purpose of providing advice to the mayor and council and city forester as to the
preservation, protection and management of the community forest of the city, in accordance with the intents and purposes of this chapter.
2. The Sandpoint tree committee may review all manuals, plans and policies of the city relating to the community forest and make recommendations to
the city council.
3. When the Sandpoint tree committee has recommendations which require city council action, such recommendations shall be added to the agenda
for the next city council meeting.
4. The Sandpoint tree committee will help develop and implement educational materials and programs addressing community forestry issues,
including, but not limited to, participation in Arbor Day programs.
5. The Sandpoint tree committee will hear appeals as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1271, 6-20-2012)
D. Coordination And Communication: The Sandpoint tree committee will coordinate its activities regarding public trees by communicating with the
Sandpoint parks and recreation director or his or her designee.
E. Funding: The Sandpoint tree committee shall recommend an annual budget to the city council. The Sandpoint tree committee is authorized to seek
outside funding for its projects as may be approved by the council in accordance with city budgetary procedures. (Ord. 1190, 6-18-2008)
7-15-6: ARBORICULTURAL MANUAL:
The "Arboricultural Specifications And Standards Of Practice For The City Of Sandpoint" (arboricultural manual) as adopted by the city council may be
amended by resolution. The manual includes, but is not limited to, the specifications and standards for tree planting, pruning and removals, the city
maintenance responsibility list, master tree list, and vegetation management plan. (Ord. 1190, 6-18-2008)
7-15-7: CARE OF TREES WITHIN THE CITY:
A. City Responsibilities: The city shall be responsible for the following:
1. Care and maintenance of park and other public area trees that are maintained by the parks department. Maintenance shall include the removal of
dead, diseased or hazardous trees and the management of insects and diseases in those trees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 152/303
2. Care and maintenance of all public trees in the areas of "city maintenance responsibility list" as described in the arboricultural manual. In these
areas, no controller or adjoining property nor anyone else may prune or remove or deface any tree without penalty.
3. The management of insect and disease management programs for all trees in the city that have been infected by exotic, or nonnative, diseases and
insects.
4. The repair of damage done to the sidewalk and surrounding areas by the roots of public trees, or private trees when the city forester determines they
are appropriate species for their location and were appropriately placed. The city shall follow construction guidelines and standards as referenced in
the arboricultural manual and the "City Of Sandpoint Sidewalk Standards And Standard Drawings".
5. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city, without a charge to the abutting property owner(s), and based upon needs described indirectly or
directly in the city public tree inventory, from eradicating injurious pests and diseases, pruning or removing or planting trees located within the public
right of way.
B. Private/Controller Responsibilities: Every controller shall be responsible for the following:
1. Meeting all the requirements and obtaining all the permits necessary for work done on adjacent public trees as described in this section and in the
arboricultural manual;
2. Care and maintenance of public trees located on the right of way adjacent to the controller's private real property including:
a. Removal and replacement of public trees or removal of those portions of public trees declared to be a public nuisance by the city when they are
located on the right of way adjacent to the controller's private real property; removal and replacement regulations and procedures are described in
this section and in the arboricultural manual;
b. Pruning of public trees located on the right of way adjacent to the controller's private real property. Branches of trees that intrude into sidewalks
must be pruned to provide clearance for pedestrians and branches that intrude into the street must be pruned to provide clearance for city and
public vehicles. Clearance for sidewalks and streets is specified in the arboricultural manual. A permit is required for major pruning. See the
arboricultural manual for a sample permit;
c. Watering and fertilizing when necessary;
d. Refraining from injuring a public tree by any means including, but not limited to, topping or severe crown reduction; installing potentially harmful
devices such as tree houses on a tree; poor construction or excavation practices as defined by the arboricultural manual; damage to root systems
by compacting or filling on or around the base of a tree; storing or spilling harmful chemicals within the root system of a tree;
e. Control of injurious pests for public trees and shrubs located on the right of way adjacent to the controller's private real property;
f. Care, removal and replacement of street trees which are topped, or whose crowns are severely reduced or which are improperly pruned, based
upon current International Society of Arboriculture standards;
g. Abutting property owners shall not be responsible for removal and replacement of street trees where it can be shown by reasonable evidence that
the tree has been topped or improperly pruned or otherwise injured by a public or private utility;
3. Control of significant pests for private trees and shrubs on the controller's private real property;
4. Replacement within the right of way with trees that are appropriate for the location; that are on the city's approved master tree list; that are of
sufficient size and quality and are planted in a manner as specified in the arboricultural manual; that are not prohibited by the city:
a. The stump and roots of the removed tree shall be reduced in a manner described in the current edition of the city arboricultural manual;
b. All tree work derived debris shall be removed from the street and sidewalk by the day and time stipulated in the agreement between the city and
the controller/contractor called the "permit to do work on trees";
c. Trees are to be replaced within nine (9) months of removal and planted according to the best planting practices as described in the arboricultural
manual;
d. If replacement is not possible, or the tree committee agrees to an alternative, the abutting property owner shall pay into the urban forest account, a
replacement fee to be established by resolution of the city council;
e. If a tree is to be removed at the order of the city forester, unless immediate removal is necessary to protect public health and safety, the controller
has thirty (30) days to remove the tree;
5. Procurement of a signed "permit to do work on trees" from the city before any work is undertaken for trees within the right of way;
6. The city may allow alternate funding methods for tree removal and replacement for property owners who meet certain income guidelines as
described by council.
C. Standards: Care and maintenance of public trees shall adhere to the city's arboricultural specifications and standards guide, but those standards may
be modified by the city forester. (Ord. 1190, 6-18-2008)
D. Removal Of Public Trees And Shrubs:
1. Policy: It is the policy of the city that public trees shall not be removed without written authorization of the city forester who may seek concurrence
from the Sandpoint tree committee and city council. The city forester may consult with the tree committee regarding the removal of live, healthy trees.
Permits will be granted only under the criteria specified in the arboricultural manual.
2. Appeals: Decisions by the city forester may be appealed in a manner described in the section entitled "Appeals", of this chapter.
3. Emergency Pruning And Removal: If immediate removal or major pruning is required to protect the health and safety of the public or to restore basic
utility services, tree work to mitigate the immediate hazard may be performed without a permit. If there is an imminent danger to the traveling public
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 153/303
or to basic utility services, a city employee or utility company employee may act without a permit. The city forester shall be notified by the entity
undertaking the work within twenty four (24) hours of any emergency action taken. (Ord. 1271, 6-20-2012)
7-15-8: COMMERCIAL TREE LICENSE:
A. Any person provided compensation to prune, plant, or remove a street tree or park tree must be licensed to perform commercial tree work by the city
unless such person is supervised by the holder of a license or who is a city employee approved by the city forester, doing work for a city department.
See the arboricultural manual for specific qualifications.
B. The license is an annual license with a term from January 1 to December 31 of each year. The fee is set by resolution of the city council.
C. The license is not transferable, nor shall any part of the license be refundable.
D. The city may revoke or deny the license when the licensee or proposed licensee commits any of the following acts or omissions:
1. Knowingly violates any of the provisions described in that section currently entitled "Care Of Trees Within The City", of this chapter, or any of the
standards established in the arboricultural manual;
2. Knowingly combines or conspires with another person by permitting one's license to be used by such other person unless employed by the licensee.
Revocation shall be for a period of one year for the first violation, two (2) years for the second violation, and permanent for the third violation.
E. Any applicant whose license is denied or revoked may appeal the decision by following the procedures outlined in the section currently entitled
"Appeals", of this chapter. (Ord. 1190, 6-18-2008)
7-15-9: TREE PROTECTION, CONSERVATION AND PRESERVATION:
A. Protecting Public Trees During Construction: Construction and/or excavation by public or private controllers taking place within the "tree preservation
zone" of any tree growing in the public right of way shall adhere to protective methods as outlined in the arboricultural manual. The city forester will
inspect all such construction sites to ensure minimum damage to trees.
When public right of way trees are damaged, to the point that the tree(s) may die within a year or two (2) as a direct result of the damage, and as
determined by the forester or his designee, due to excavation or construction, the abutting property owner shall be responsible for paying to the city the
amount of money equal to the current value of the tree(s) damaged as determined by the "Guide For Plant Appraisal", except where public or private
contractor negligence damaged the tree in which case the contractor shall be responsible for the same damage costs.
Failure to follow the construction or excavation guidelines established in the arboricultural manual shall be cause to deny issuance of any applicable
city issued permits and to require remedial action in accordance with this chapter.
B. Private Trees And Agreements With The City: The applicant, prior to the removal of trees in an area subject to city jurisdiction, or prior to the approval
of, or issuance of a permit for any activity in connection with which privately owned trees are required to be protected or replaced shall enter into a
written security agreement as set forth in the arboricultural manual. (Ord. 1190, 6-18-2008)
7-15-10: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
The city forester may take such action as is necessary to abate public nuisances.
A. Nuisances Listed: The following are hereby declared public nuisances under this chapter:
1. Any dead tree or shrub located on city owned property or on the public right of way;
2. Any tree or shrub that harbors pathogens or injurious insects which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm other trees or shrubs;
3. Any tree or shrub that, by reason of location or condition, constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public. (Ord.
1190, 6-18-2008)
7-15-11: APPEALS:
Any controller may appeal decisions of the city forester to the tree committee within ten (10) days of the permit denial or the city forester's decision. The
appeal notice must be in writing and submitted to the city forester at least ten (10) days after a written decision. The notice must include, at a minimum, the
following information:
A. Name, address and telephone number of applicant;
B. Location of trees involved in the appeal;
C. Decision being appealed; and (Ord. 1190, 6-18-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 154/303
D. A concise statement of the reasons for appeal.
The appeal shall be given a priority to be heard at a regularly scheduled meeting of the tree committee. Decisions of the tree committee may be
appealed to city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days of written notice to the appellant of the tree committee's
decision.
A copy of the decision for the appellant is sent through U.S. mail, with proper postage affixed, to the address provided to the city on the original appeal
notice. Notice shall be considered complete three (3) days after mailing.
Decisions of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1271, 6-20-2012)
7-15-12: PENALTIES:
A. Any violation of any part of this chapter may be charged as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
a first offense. Second or subsequent violations may be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment in a
county jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by both. Each incident may be considered a separate violation.
B. The city may exercise any civil remedy it has by law.
C. In addition to remedies set forth under subsection A of this section, any person responsible for a violation of those sections currently entitled "Care Of
Trees Within The City" and "Tree Protection, Conservation And Preservation: Protecting Public Trees During Construction", of this chapter, must pay
the cost of repairing or replacing any tree damaged by the violation, including the cost of hardscape construction or reconstruction, if applicable. The
value of trees is to be determined in accordance with the latest edition of the "Guide For Plant Appraisal" as published by the International Society Of
Arboriculture. The city attorney or other designee of the city is authorized to seek restitution or other legal redress for violation of these sections. (Ord.
1190, 6-18-2008)
7-15-13: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE HISTORIC AND HERITAGE TREES:
The historic and heritage tree preservation designation recognizes the significance of trees to the city. A tree may be retained beyond its useful life
because of its contribution to the environment and city character. A heritage or historical tree may be designated by the tree committee, in coordination
with the historic preservation committee based on the criteria as described in the arboricultural manual. (Ord. 1190, 6-18-2008)
Title 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
8-1-1: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED:
Effective January 1, 2018, the approved editions of the following nationally recognized codes are adopted as the official building codes of the City of
Sandpoint, except as amended elsewhere in this title:
2015 International Building Code, except for sections 103.2 and 103.3.
2012 International Residential Code, except for sections R103.2 and R103.3.
2015 International Energy Conservation Code.
2012 International Mechanical Code, except for sections 103.2 and 103.3.
2012 International Fuel Gas Code, except for sections 103.2 and 103.3. (Ord. 1351, 12-6-2017)
8-1-1-1: AMENDMENTS TO ADOPTED CODES:
The following amendments shall be applicable to the adopted building codes:
A. International Building Code Amendments: Amendments to the International Building Code:
1. Section 111.3 is hereby amended through the addition of the following:
"The building official may, prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy, require that the owner provide the city with a bond, letter of
credit or other security, acceptable to the city attorney in the amount of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the cost of any required public
improvements."
2. Section 406.3.4 Separation. Delete item #1 and replace with the following:
The private garage shall be separated from the dwelling and its attic area, including supporting members with materials approved for one-hour fire
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 155/303
resistive construction on the garage side members and a self closing, tight fitting solid wood door 13/8 inches in thickness, or a self closing, tight
fitting 20 minute fire-rated door, or a solid or honeycomb steel door not less than 13/8 inches in thickness, or a door in compliance with section
715.4.3. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted.
3. Table 1018.1 Corridor Fire-Resistance Rating. For an R occupancy, replace ".05" hour required fire-resistance rating with a sprinkler system with "1"
hour.
(Ord. 1310, 12-17-2014)
B. International Residential Code Amendments: Amendments to the International Residential Code:
1. Residential roof snow loads shall have a minimum of 55 pounds per square foot snow load. This includes manufactured homes, except that an
existing manufactured home already installed within city limits at the time of the passage of this section may remain without having to meet the
minimum roof snow loads as set forth. Any manufactured home allowed to remain may be moved to a different location within the city without having
to meet the minimum snow loads.
(Ord. 1324, 2-17-2016)
2. Sections R103.2 and R103.3 shall be deleted in their entirety.
3. Section R302.6 shall be amended as follows:
The garage shall be separated from the residence by one layer of 5/8" drywall on the garage side of the vertical wall. Where the separation is a floor
ceiling assembly, the garage side shall have a minimum of one layer of 5/8" type X gypsum board where the framing is 16" O.C. Framing spaced 24"
O.C. shall have two layers of 5/8" type X gypsum. Where the floor ceiling assembly is used as the separation, then the supporting walls shall be
protected by 1 hour rated construction on the garage side.
4. Section R101.2. Delete the exception.
5. Section R104.10.1 Areas Prone To Flooding. Delete entire section.
6. Section R106.1.3 Construction In Flood Hazard Areas. Delete entire section.
7. Section R109.1.3 Floodplain Inspections. Delete entire section.
8. Section R302.2 Townhouses. Delete the exception and replace with the following:
Two (2) 1 hour fire resistance rated wall assembly or a common two (2) hour fire resistance rated wall assembly is permitted for townhouses. If two
(2) 1 hour walls are used, plumbing and electrical installations within the wall cavity shall conform to fire resistance penetration requirements in
accordance with section R302.4 thru R304.4.2 for each of the two (2) 1 hour rated walls. The two (2) hour fire resistance rated common wall shall not
contain plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents within the wall cavity. Exception would be for electrical outlet boxes conforming to section
R302.4. The rated wall shall extend to the bottom of the roof sheeting.
9. Section R302.3 Two Family Dwelling. Delete exception 1.
10. Delete table R302.6.
11. Section R302.7. Delete reference to 1/2" gypsum board and replace with 5/8" gypsum board.
12. Section R313.1 Townhouse Automatic Sprinkler System. Delete exception and replace with the following:
Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required in townhouses where either two (2) 1 hour fire resistance rated walls or
a common two (2) hour fire resistance rated wall is installed between dwelling units or when additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses
that do not have an automatic fire sprinkler system installed.
13. Section R313.2 One And Two Family Dwelling Automatic Fire Systems. Delete this section.
14. Section R322 Flood Resistant Construction. Delete this section in its entirety.
15. Section R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection. Add to the end of item #1, with a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches from ground surface to the bottom of the
footing.
16. Delete tables R404.1.4.1(1), table R404.1(2), table R404.1(3), table R404.1.1(3), table R404.1.1(4).
17. Section R404.1.2 Concrete Foundation Walls. Delete this section and replace with the following:
Concrete foundation walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section, ACI 318, ACI 332 or PCA 100.
Minimum reinforcement for foundation walls (unless closer spacing is specified by design or engineering specifications) which do not exceed eight
(8) feet in height shall be eighteen (18) inches on-center for vertical reinforcement and eighteen (18) inches on center for horizontal reinforcement.
All continuous footings and foundation walls will require a minimum two (2) continuous reinforcing bars. Reinforcing bars shall be a minimum of size
#4 and may be grade forty (40).
18. Section G2406. Delete items 3 and 4.
19. Section G2445 Unvented Room Heaters. Delete this section in its entirety.
20. Part VII Plumbing. Delete this section in its entirety.
21. Part VIII Electrical. Delete this section in its entirety.
(Ord. 1310, 12-17-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 156/303
C. Ground Snow Load: The ground snow load shall be fifty-six (56) pounds per square foot in accordance with the ground snow loads for Idaho - 2015
edition as prepared by the University Of Idaho, November 2015.
(Ord. 1324, 2-17-2016)
D. Minimum Frost Depth For Footings: The minimum frost depth for footings shall be twenty four inches (24").
E. International Fuel Gas Code Amendments: Amendments to the international fuel gas code:
Section 103.2. Delete this section.
Section 103.3. Delete this section.
Section 621.4 Prohibited Locations. Add group R to groups A, E, I.
F. International Mechanical Code Amendments: Amendments to the international mechanical code:
Section 103.2. Delete this section.
Section 103.3. Delete this section.
(Ord. 1310, 12-17-2014)
8-1-2: AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT ADOPTED:
Pursuant to Idaho Code 39-4116(2), the city hereby adopts the Americans with disabilities act (ADA) part III (appendix A to part 36 - standards for
accessible design), accessibility guidelines for buildings and facilities as published in the "Federal Register" volume 56 no. 144, Friday, July 26, 1991, and
subsequent editions and the Americans with disabilities act (ADA) part II, accessibility guidelines for buildings and facilities, and transportation facilities as
published in the "Federal Register" volume 56 no. 173, Friday, September 6, 1991. (Ord. 1074, 12-18-2002)
8-1-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The city building inspector, or his designated agent, is hereby designated and empowered as the investigative officer for alleged violations of the
international building code and ADA parts II and III as more specifically identified in section 8-1-2 of this chapter, and as the primary enforcement officer to
enforce said codes and to take all such actions as necessary to ensure their enforcement. (Ord. 1074, 12-18-2002)
8-1-4: PENALTY:
Any person found to be in violation of the codes adopted in this chapter shall, upon a finding of guilt of violation of the same, be guilty of a misdemeanor
and subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment up to six (6) months or both in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this
code. Said penalty shall be in addition to all other civil and legal enforcement rights, restraints, injunctionary relief and abatement relief and all other legal
remedies otherwise available to the city. A violation may also result in revocation of a building's certificate of occupancy and other limitations on use of the
property. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2007)
8-1-5: BUILDING PERMITS:
No building permit will be issued without the contractor's presentation of his Idaho contractor's registration number except when the permit applicant
provides evidence to the satisfaction of the building official that the applicant is exempt from the registration requirements pursuant to title 54, chapter 52 of
the Idaho Code. (Ord. 1146, 2-15-2006)
8-1-5-1: PERMIT FEES:
Applicants shall pay permit and plan review fees in amounts to be determined by resolution of the Sandpoint city council. All permits required under this
chapter require fees to be paid prior to a permit being issued. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2007)
8-1-5-2: MANUFACTURED HOMES INSTALLATION PERMITS:
Placement of mobile/manufactured homes shall require an installation permit. The permit applicant shall supply to the building official the same site
information required from an applicant seeking a building permit for a single-family dwelling and shall pay a permit fee as set by resolution of the Sandpoint
city council. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2007)
Chapter 2
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
8-2-1: FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 157/303
A. International Fire Code: There exists and is published in book form a document titled the international fire code, as published by the International Code
Council, in cooperation with the Building Officials And Code Administrators International, Inc., the International Conference Of Building Officials, and
the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. The international fire code establishes standard performance requirements, safety
requirements, construction standards, inspection and enforcement providing for and relating to fire hazard prevention, public and private safety and fire
protection. The international fire code is intended to be published and distributed periodically.
The international fire code, and appendices B, C, D, E, and F, and such later editions as may be published and adopted by the state fire marshal, with
those certain revisions, additions, deletions and appendices approved by the state of Idaho, department of insurance found in IDAPA 18 title 01 chapter
50 as now exist or as may hereafter be adopted are hereby adopted by the city as the official fire code for the city and shall be applicable and
enforceable in all circumstances, incidents and situations where the provisions of said international fire code provide instruction, requirements,
restrictions and guidelines for fire protection, public and private safety and fire hazard prevention in the city. The city shall maintain one copy of the
current edition on file in the fire chief's office.
The international fire code and appendices B, C, D, E, and F, as published and distributed and as above described, shall continue to be the fire code
for the city and each new annual volume code supplement or pocket part thereto when published and distributed and when placed on file in the office
of the fire chief, shall supersede any previous annual volume or annual supplement or code section or code pocket part respectively.
Appendices adopted:
Appendix B, Fire Flows Requirements For Buildings
Appendix C, Fire Hydrant Location And Distribution
Appendix D, Fire Apparatus Access Roads
Appendix E, Hazard Categories
Appendix F, Hazard Rankings (Ord. 1325, 4-20-2016)
8-2-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The fire chief of the city or his duly delegated authorized agent or subordinate shall be empowered to inspect, investigate and declare violations of the
international fire code. The fire chief and his duly delegated and designated agent or subordinate shall be the primary enforcement officer of the
international fire code within the city. (Ord. 1325, 4-20-2016)
8-2-3: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
Any and all ordinances of the city or portions or sections thereof, found to be in conflict with the provisions of the international fire code herein adopted are
hereby repealed. (Ord. 1325, 4-20-2016)
8-2-4: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, may be charged with a misdemeanor with
penalties pursuant to Idaho Code section 18-113. Each day's continued violation may constitute a separate offense. Penalties and prosecution remedies
shall be in addition to and shall not limit the civil enforcement, restraining, abatement or any other equitable remedies available to the city. A violation may
also result in revocation of a building's certificate of occupancy and other limitations on use of the property. (Ord. 1325, 4-20-2016)
Chapter 3
SWIMMING POOLS
8-3-1: FENCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Height And Location: All public, semi-public or private swimming pools located in the City capable of holding twenty four inches (24") or more of water
shall have the area in which the swimming pool is located surrounded by a fence of at least six feet (6') in height. No such fence or building shall be
located within five feet (5') of the edge of the swimming pool.
B. Gates And Latches: Gates leading to public, semi-public or private swimming pools shall be securely fastened shut when the pool is not in use by
authorized persons or supervised by a qualified attendant. Locks or latches shall be placed not less than four feet (4') above the ground.
C. Pool Cover Not A Substitute For Required Fence: A cover which may be used to enclose or cover the swimming pool shall not qualify as a substitute for
the required fence or as a means of providing minimum safeguards of the pool area. (1983 Code)
Chapter 4
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION AND CONTROL
8-4-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND OBJECTIVES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 158/303
A. Statutory Authority: The legislature of the State of Idaho, pursuant to Idaho Code sections 46-1020 through 46-1024, authorizes local governments to
adopt floodplain management ordinances that identify floodplains and minimum floodplain development standards to minimize flood hazards and
protect human life, health, and property. Therefore, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Sandpoint, Idaho does hereby ordain as follows.
B. Findings Of Fact:
1. The flood hazard areas of the City of Sandpoint are subject to periodic inundation that results in:
a. Loss of life and property;
b. Health and safety hazards;
c. Disruption of commerce and governmental services;
d. Extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection; and
e. Impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are caused by structures in flood hazard areas which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from
flood damages, as well as by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
3. Local government units have the primary responsibility for planning, adopting, and enforcing land use regulations to accomplish proper floodplain
management.
C. Statement Of Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to promote public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
1. Protect human life, health, and property;
2. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric, telephone,
sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains;
3. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas;
4. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
5. Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with flooding, generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
6. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
7. Ensure potential buyers are notified the property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
8. Ensure those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.
D. Objectives And Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter includes methods and provisions to:
1. Require that development which is vulnerable to floods, including structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety, and welfare of
citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
2. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights,
velocities, or erosion;
3. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion;
4. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert flood waters or that may increase flood hazards to other lands;
5. Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which carry and store flood waters. (Ord. 1350, 11-15-
2017)
8-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE): A structure on the same lot or parcel as a principal structure, the use of which is incidental
and subordinate to the principal structure.
ADDITION (To An Existing Building): An extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure.
APPEAL: A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of provisions of this chapter or request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent
(1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot (1') to three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the
path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: See definition of special flood hazard area (SFHA).
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 159/303
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): A determination by the Federal Insurance Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the
flood level that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. When the BFE has not been provided in a special flood hazard
area, it may be obtained from engineering studies available from a Federal, State, or other source using FEMA-approved engineering methodologies. This
elevation, when combined with the freeboard, establishes the flood protection elevation.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING: See definition of structure.
CRITICAL FACILITIES: Facilities that are vital to flood response activities or critical to the health and safety of the public before, during, and after a flood,
such as a hospital, emergency operations center, electric substation, police station, fire station, nursing home, school, vehicle and equipment storage
facility, or shelter; and facilities that, if flooded, would make the flood problem and its impacts much worse, such as a hazardous materials facility, power
generation facility, water utility, or wastewater treatment plant.
DATUM: The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of
points was the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical datum currently adopted by the Federal government as a basis for
measuring heights is the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. See Idaho Code section 46-1021.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any activity defined as development which will necessitate a floodplain development permit; such as: the construction of
buildings, structures, or accessory structures; additions or substantial improvements to existing structures; bulkheads, retaining walls, piers, and pools; the
placement of mobile homes; or the deposition or extraction of materials; the construction or elevation of dikes, berms and levees.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM): The digital official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on
which both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.
ELEVATED BUILDING: For insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: The Elevation Certificate is an important administrative tool of the NFIP. It is used to determine the proper flood insurance
premium rate; it is used to document elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with community floodplain management regulations; and it
may be used to support a request for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) or Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F).
ENCLOSURE: An area enclosed by solid walls below the BFE/FPE or an area formed when any space below the BFE/FPE is enclosed on all sides by
walls or partitions. Insect screening or open wood lattice used to surround space below the BFE/FPE is not considered an enclosure.
ENCROACHMENT: The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date
of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING STRUCTURES: See definition of existing construction.
FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION: See definition of base flood elevation (BFE).
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY: See definition of flood insurance study (FIS).
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway covered by floodwaters during the regulatory flood. See Idaho Code section 46-
1021.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administrator, where the boundaries of the
flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance
Rate Map (DFIRM).
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface
elevations; or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow or rise of rivers, streams or lakes.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
3. Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection A2 of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid
and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the
current.
B. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection A1 of this definition. See Idaho Code section 46-1021.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 160/303
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): A. The base flood elevation plus the freeboard.
1. In "special flood hazard areas" where base flood elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus one foot (1') of
freeboard; and
2. In "special flood hazard areas" where no BFE has been established, this elevation shall be at least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade.
FLOOD ZONE: A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) that reflects the severity or
type of flooding in the area.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: The individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: Any type of permit that is required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the
commencement of any development activity.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not
limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. See Idaho Code section 46-1021.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance), and other applications of police power. The term describes
such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding"). See Idaho
Code section 46-1021.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. See Idaho Code section 46-1021.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation.
FREEBOARD: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate
for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions,
such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the hydrologic effects of urbanization in a watershed. The base flood elevation
(BFE) plus the freeboard establishes the flood protection elevation (FPE). Freeboard shall be one foot (1') in "special flood hazard areas" where base flood
elevations (BFEs) have been determined and two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade in "special flood hazard areas" where no BFE has been
established.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A facility that cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water,
such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG): The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a
structure. Refer to the FEMA Elevation Certificate for HAG related to building elevation information.
LEVEE: A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed according to sound engineering practices, to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT: The City of Sandpoint.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG): The lowest point of the ground level next to the structure. Refer to the FEMA Elevation Certificate for LAG related to
building elevation information.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR section 60.3 and this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MARKET VALUE: The building value, not including the land value and that of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value
may be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum
(such as North American Vertical Datum of 1988 - NAVD88) to which base flood elevations (BFEs) shown on a community's FIRM are referenced.
MITIGATION: Any action taken which will reduce the impact, damage, or cost of the next flood that occurs.
MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW): Describes a condition where there is a river, flow, or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside usually as a result of a dual
condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Administrator only if
the mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that occurs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 161/303
MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing mudslide
(i.e., mudflow) damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, mudslide control works, and floodplain management regulations.
MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA: An area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate
indicate a potential for mudflow.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP): The NFIP is a Federal program created by Congress to mitigate future flood losses nationwide
through sound, community-enforced building and zoning ordinances and to provide access to affordable, Federally backed flood insurance protection for
property owners.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For floodplain management purposes, a structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
PERSON: Any individual, group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, political subdivision, public or private agency, or entity.
POST-FIRM: Construction or other development for which the "start of construction" occurred on or after the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM).
PRE-FIRM: Construction or other development for which the "start of construction" occurred before December 21, 1981 (ordinance no. 758), the effective
date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A. A vehicle that is:
1. Built on a single chassis, and
2. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, and
3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty truck, and
4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: See definition of floodway.
REMEDY A VIOLATION: To bring the structure or other development into compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is
not possible, to reduce the impacts of its non-compliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing
Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. For purposes of these regulations, the term "special flood hazard area" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood
hazard".
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred. See definition of "substantial improvement".
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: A. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which have
been identified by the local Code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
2. Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure"
and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 162/303
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the Governing Body from a requirement of this chapter.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or
other development without the Finished Construction Elevation Certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)
(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATERCOURSE: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse
includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 1350, 11-15-2017; amd. Ord. 1355, 8-15-2018)
8-4-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Sandpoint. Nothing
in this chapter is intended to allow uses or structures that are otherwise prohibited by the zoning ordinance.
B. Basis For Special Flood Hazard Areas: The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) for the Bonner County Idaho and Incorporated Areas, dated November 18, 2009, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM)
or Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRM), and other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. The FIS and
the FIRM are on file at the Office of the City Clerk for the City of Sandpoint, 1123 Lake Street, Sandpoint, Idaho 83864.
C. Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit: A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter
prior to the commencement of any development activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the provisions of subsection
8-4-4B of this chapter.
D. Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
E. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter shall not in any way repeal, abrogate, impair, or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
laws, ordinances, regulations, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions, etcetera. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes more stringent or greater restrictions shall control.
F. Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State Statutes.
G. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of City of Sandpoint or by any officer or employee thereof for flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or an administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
H. Penalties For Violation: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or altered unless in full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than one
hundred eighty (180) days, or both. And in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day the violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Sandpoint from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 1350, 11-15-2017)
8-4-4: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Designation Of Floodplain Administrator: The Planning and Zoning Director, hereinafter referred to as the "Floodplain Administrator", is hereby
appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.
B. Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator: The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the following duties:
1. Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that all necessary local, State, and Federal permits have been
received, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
3. Notify adjacent communities and the Idaho Department of Water Resources State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
4. Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 163/303
5. Prevent encroachments into floodways and flood fringe areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection 8-4-5E of
this chapter are met.
6. Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of subsection C3 of this section.
7. Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed, in
accordance with the provisions of subsection C3 of this section.
8. Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public utilities in accordance with the provisions of subsection C3 of this section.
9. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with
the provisions of subsection C3 of this section and subsection 8-4-5B2 of this chapter.
10. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or flood fringe areas (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The
person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section.
11. When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in accordance with the provisions of subsection 8-4-3B of this chapter, obtain, review,
and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with floodway data or flood fringe area data available from a Federal, State, or other source, including
data developed pursuant to subsection 8-4-5C2b of this chapter, in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
12. When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway or flood fringe area data has been provided in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 8-4-3B of this chapter, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or flood fringe area data available from a Federal, State,
or other source in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
13. When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area (SFHA)
is above the base flood elevation (BFE), advise the property owner of the option to apply for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA.
Maintain a copy of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file.
14. Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of this chapter and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended.
15. Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator
shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of this chapter
and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on
any premises within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
16. Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this
chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the
person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and
the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.
17. Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from
the approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of State or local laws; or for false statements
or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable State or local
law may also be revoked.
18. Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and
each member of his or her Inspections Department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
19. Follow through with corrective procedures of subsection D of this section.
20. Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
21. Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps, and studies adopted in
accordance with the provisions of subsection 8-4-3B of this chapter, including any revisions thereto including Letters of Map Change, issued by
FEMA. Notify the NFIP State Coordinator and FEMA of your community's mapping needs.
22. Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-Fs) and Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs).
C. Floodplain Development Application, Permit, And Certification Requirements:
1. Application Requirements: Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
a. A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain development:
(1) The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and other development;
(2) The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in subsection 8-4-3B of this
chapter, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard area;
(3) The flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in subsection 8-
4-3B of this chapter;
(4) The boundary of the floodway(s) or flood fringe area(s) as determined in subsection 8-4-3B of this chapter;
(5) The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in subsections 8-4-3B and C; or 8-4-5C of this chapter;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 164/303
(6) The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
(7) The certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer.
b. Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a special flood hazard area including but not limited to:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure in Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30 will be floodproofed; and
(3) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
c. If floodproofing, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33) with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance
plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures.
d. A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are met.
These details include but are not limited to:
(1) The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation, or on
columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
(2) Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with subsections 8-4-5A8b(1) through A8b(6) of
this chapter when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30.
e. Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
f. Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
g. Certification that all other local, State, and Federal permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
h. Documentation for placement of temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of subsections 8-4-5B6 and B7 of this
chapter are met.
i. A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and
(1) A map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.
2. Permit Requirements: The floodplain development permit shall include, but not be limited to:
a. A complete description of all the development to be permitted under the floodplain development permit (i.e., house, garage, pool, septic, bulkhead,
cabana, pole barn, chicken coop, pier, bridge, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment
or materials, etcetera).
b. The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed development in accordance with available data specified in subsection 8-4-3B of this
chapter.
c. The flood protection elevation required for the reference level and all attendant utilities.
d. The flood protection elevation required for the protection of all public utilities.
e. All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
f. A statement that no fill material or other development shall encroach into the floodway or flood fringe area of any watercourse, as applicable.
g. The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30.
h. A statement of the limitations of below BFE enclosure uses, if applicable (i.e., parking, building access and limited storage only).
i. A statement that all materials below BFE/FPE must be flood resistant materials.
3. Certification Requirements:
a. Elevation Certificates:
(1) An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 86-0-33) is required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain
development permit.
(2) An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 86-0-33) is required after the reference level is established. Within seven (7) calendar days of
establishment of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of
the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. Any work done within the seven (7) day calendar period and prior to
submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed.
Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
(3) A final as-built Finished Construction Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 86-0-33) is required after construction is completed and prior to
Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of
final as-built construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to Certificate of
Compliance/Occupancy issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify corrected as-built construction. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 165/303
b. Floodproofing Certificate: If non-residential floodproofing is used to meet the flood protection elevation requirements, a Floodproofing Certificate
(FEMA Form 086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of
any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design
elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the
operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit
approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure
to construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.
c. Manufactured Home: If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than thirty
six inches (36") in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the provisions of subsection 8-4-5B3b
of this chapter.
d. Watercourse: If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, the following shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit:
(1) A description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; and
(2) A professional engineer's certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects
to properties located both upstream and downstream; and
(3) A map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation; and
(4) An Idaho stream channel alteration permit approval shall be provided by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.
e. Certification Exemptions: The following structures, if located within Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements specified in subsections C3a and C3b of this section:
(1) Temporary structures meeting requirements of subsection 8-4-5B6 of this chapter; and
(2) Accessory structures less than two hundred (200) square feet meeting requirements of subsection 8-4-5B7 of this chapter.
4. Determinations For Existing Buildings And Structures: For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations,
movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of
substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the
building official, shall:
a. Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the
building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work. In the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall
be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made;
b. Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure;
c. Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
d. Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with
the flood resistant construction requirements of the adopted Idaho Building Code and this chapter is required.
D. Corrective Procedures:
1. Violations To Be Corrected: When the Floodplain Administrator finds violations of applicable State and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to notify
the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
2. Actions In Event Of Failure To Take Corrective Action: If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal service, stating:
a. That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain management regulations;
b. That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten (10) days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the
matter; and
c. That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
3. Order To Take Corrective Action: If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of this chapter, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the
violation within a specified time period, not less than sixty (60) calendar days, nor more than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days. Where the
Floodplain Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he or she may order that corrective action be taken in such
lesser period as may be feasible.
4. Appeal: Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal the order to the local elected Governing Body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the Clerk within ten (10) days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal,
the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local Governing Body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm,
modify and affirm, or revoke the order.
5. Failure To Comply With Order: If the owner of a building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the Governing Body following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished at the discretion of the court.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 166/303
E. Variance Procedures:
1. The Sandpoint City Council, as established by the City of Sandpoint, hereinafter referred to as the "Appeal Board", shall hear and decide requests
for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
2. Variances may be issued for:
a. The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
b. Functionally dependent facilities, if determined to meet the definition as stated in section 8-4-2 of this chapter, provided provisions of subsections
E9b, E9c, and E9d of this section, have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and create no additional threats to public safety; or
c. Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements of this section.
3. In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of
this chapter, and:
a. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
b. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
d. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
e. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined under section 8-4-2 of this chapter as a functionally dependent facility, where
applicable;
f. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
g. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
h. The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and Floodplain Management Program for that area;
i. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
k. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
4. The applicant shall include a written report addressing each of the above factors in subsections E3a through E3k of this section with their application
for a variance.
5. Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this chapter.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a
variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one
hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance.
7. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and the State of Idaho upon request.
8. Conditions for variances:
a. Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other Federal, State, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
b. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or flood fringe area if the variance would result in any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge.
c. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
d. Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit approval.
e. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
9. A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas provided that all of the following conditions are met.
a. The use serves a critical need in the community.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 167/303
b. No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood hazard area.
c. The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to at least the flood protection elevation.
d. The use complies with all other applicable Federal, State and local laws.
10. The City of Sandpoint will notify the State NFIP Coordinator of the Idaho Department of Water Resources of its intention to grant a variance at least
thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting the variance.
11. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal such decision to the court, as provided in Idaho Code 67-6535. (Ord. 1350,
11-15-2017)
8-4-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
A. General Standards: In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required:
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance
with the Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
3. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
4. All new and replacement electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding to the flood protection elevation.
These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes,
utility/cable boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
5. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
6. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
7. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
8. A fully enclosed area of new construction and substantially improved structures below the lowest floor shall:
a. Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to the flood protection elevation; and
b. Include, in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, flood openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
(1) A minimum of two (2) flood openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding;
(2) The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
(3) If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
(4) The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above the interior or exterior adjacent grade;
(5) Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
(6) Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood openings.
Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
9. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the
requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter.
10. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this chapter
and located totally or partially within the floodway, flood fringe area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the flood
protection elevation in the floodway, flood fringe area, or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of
the other requirements of this chapter.
11. New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be
permitted, except by variance as specified in subsection 8-4-4E10 of this chapter. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 8-4-4C3 of this chapter.
12. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and determined to be
reasonably safe from flooding.
13. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
14. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 168/303
15. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
16. When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
17. When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for the
more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood elevation (BFE) shall apply.
B. Specific Standards: In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in subsection 8-4-3B of this
chapter, or subsection D of this section, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of subsection A of this section, are required:
1. Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the flood protection elevation, as defined in section 8-4-2 of this chapter.
2. Non-Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure shall
have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the flood protection elevation, as defined in section 8-4-2 of this chapter.
Structures located in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 may be floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that all
areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the flood protection elevation are watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effect of buoyancy. For AH and AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance with subsections F1 through F2 of this section. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in subsection 8-4-4C3 of this chapter, along with the operational plan and the inspection and
maintenance plan.
3. Manufactured Homes:
a. New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the flood
protection elevation, as defined in section 8-4-2 of this chapter.
b. Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most current edition of the Idaho Division of Building Safety's "Idaho
Manufactured Home Installation Standard" in accordance with Idaho Code section 44-2201(2). Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an
elevation of the chassis thirty six inches (36") or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered
foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above thirty six inches (36") in height, an engineering certification is required.
c. All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of subsection B4 of this section.
d. An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged manufactured
home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
local Emergency Management Coordinator.
4. Additions/Improvements:
a. Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the
existing structure are:
(1) Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more
non-conforming than the existing structure; or
(2) A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
b. Additions to post-FIRM structures that are a substantial improvement with no modifications to the existing structure other than a standard door in
the common wall shall require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
c. Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
(1) Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction; or
(2) A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
d. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a three (3) year
period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is
started, must comply with the standards for new construction. For each building or structure, the three (3) year period begins on the date of the first
improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to the effective date of this chapter. If the structure has sustained substantial
damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The requirement does not, however,
include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code violations identified by the building official
and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
5. Recreational Vehicles: No recreational vehicle, travel trailer, tent or other temporary shelter shall be used by any tenant on the premises for living or
sleeping purposes. See section 3-12-4 of this Code.
6. Temporary Non-Residential Structures: Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must submit
to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a flash flood or other type of flood warning notification. The
following information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 169/303
a. A specified time period for which the temporary use will be permitted. Time specified may not exceed six (6) months, renewable up to one year;
b. The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;
c. The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be removed (i.e., immediately upon flood warning notification);
d. A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
e. Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
7. Accessory Structures: When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, elevation or
floodproofing certifications are required for all accessory structures in accordance with subsection 8-4-4C3 of this chapter, and the following criteria
shall be met:
a. Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);
b. Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
c. Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential;
d. Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
e. Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with the provisions of subsection A1 of this section;
f. All service facilities, such as electrical, shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of subsection A4 of this section; and
g. Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below flood protection elevation in conformance
with the provisions of subsection A8b of this section.
An accessory structure with footprint less than two hundred (200) square feet and is a minimal investment of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) or less and satisfies the criteria outlined in subsections B7a through B7g of this section is not required to meet the elevation or
floodproofing standards of subsection A8 of this section.
8. Tanks: When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met:
a. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base flood, including the effects of buoyancy (assuming the tank is empty);
b. Elevated above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the designed flood elevation on a supporting
structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during conditions of the base flood. Tank-supporting structures shall
meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area;
c. Not elevated above-ground tanks, that do not meet the elevation requirements of subsection A8 of this section shall be permitted in flood hazard
areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the
effects of flood-borne debris.
d. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
(1) At or above the flood protection elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the
tanks during conditions of the base flood; and
(2) Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions
of the base flood.
9. Construction Of Below-Grade Crawlspace:
a. The interior grade of a crawlspace must not be below the BFE and must not be more than two feet (2') below the exterior lowest adjacent grade
(LAG).
b. The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall, must
not exceed four feet (4') at any point.
c. There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be
drained within a reasonable time after a flood event.
d. The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five feet (5') per second for any crawlspace.
10. Other Development In Regulated Floodways And Flood Fringe:
a. Fences that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, in regulated floodways and
flood fringe shall meet the limitations of subsection E of this section.
b. Retaining walls, bulkheads, sidewalks, and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways and flood fringe shall meet the
limitations of subsection E of this section.
c. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings, and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel
from one side of a watercourse to the other side, which encroach into regulated floodways and flood fringe, shall meet the limitations of subsection
E of this section.
d. Drilling water, oil, and/or gas wells including fuel storage tanks, apparatus, and any equipment at the site that encroach into regulated floodways
and flood fringe shall meet the limitations of subsection E of this section.
e. Docks, piers, boat ramps, marinas, moorings, decks, docking facilities, port facilities, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities that encroach into
regulated floodways and flood fringe shall meet the limitations of subsection E of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 170/303
C. Standards For Floodplains Without Established Base Flood Elevations: Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A (also known as
Unnumbered A Zones) and established in subsection 8-4-3B of this chapter, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA,
the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of subsection A of this section, shall apply:
1. No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or new development shall be permitted, unless a determination of the
base flood elevation (BFE) is provided.
2. The BFE used in determining the flood protection elevation (FPE) shall be determined based on the following criteria:
a. When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall
also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in subsections A and
B of this section.
b. When floodway or flood fringe data is available from a Federal, State, or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements within
floodway and flood fringe areas shall also comply with the requirements of subsections A, B and E of this section.
c. All subdivision, manufactured home park, and other development proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is greater
than five (5) acres or has more than fifty (50) lots/manufactured home sites. Such base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in
accordance with subsection 8-4-3B of this chapter and utilized in implementing this chapter. The applicant/developer shall submit an application for
a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) prior to preliminary plat approval and have obtained a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) prior to any
building permits for structures being issued. See FEMA 480 and/or FEMA 265 for further information.
d. When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a Federal, State, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be
elevated or floodproofed (non-residential) to or above the flood protection elevation, as defined in section 8-4-2 of this chapter. All other applicable
provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall also apply.
D. Standards For Riverine Floodplains With Base Flood Elevations But Without Established Floodways Or Flood Fringe Areas: Along rivers and streams
where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided by FEMA or is available from another source but neither floodway nor flood fringe areas are
identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
1. Standards of subsections A and B of this section; and
2. Until a regulatory floodway or flood fringe area is designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the community.
E. Standards For Floodways And Flood Fringe Areas: Areas designated as floodways or flood fringe areas are located within the special flood hazard
areas established in subsection 8-4-3A of this chapter. The floodways and flood fringe areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of
floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in
subsections A and B of this section, shall apply to all development within such areas:
1. No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other developments shall be permitted unless:
a. It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood,
based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain
Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
b. A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been approved by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within six
(6) months of completion of the proposed encroachment.
2. If subsection E1 of this section is satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
3. Manufactured homes may be permitted provided the following provisions are met:
a. The anchoring and the elevation standards of subsection B3 of this section; and
b. The encroachment standards of subsection E1 of this section.
F. Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (Zone AO, AH, AR/AO, Or AR/AH): Located within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection 8-
4-3B of this chapter, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one
foot (1') to three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. In addition
to subsections A and B of this section, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the following requirements:
1. The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of two feet (2'), above the highest adjacent grade; or at least four feet (4') above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is
specified.
2. Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be floodproofed to the same level as required in subsection F1 of this section so that the
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below that level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification
is required in accordance with subsection 8-4-4C3 of this chapter, and subsection B2 of this section.
3. Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. (Ord.
1350, 11-15-2017)
8-4-6: LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 171/303
A. Effect On Rights And Liabilities Under The Existing Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance: This chapter, in part, comes forward by re-enactment of some
of the provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted December 21, 1981 (ordinance no. 758) as amended, and it is not the intention
to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued
thereunder are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit, or proceeding instituted or pending. All
provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of City of Sandpoint enacted on December 21, 1981 (ordinance no. 758), as amended, which
are not reenacted herein are repealed.
B. Effect Upon Outstanding Floodplain Development Permits: Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or
designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain Administrator or
his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of this chapter. Provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding
permit within a period of one hundred eighty (180) days subsequent to the date of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1350, 11-15-2017)
Chapter 5
SIGN CODE
8-5-1: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the fabrication, erection and use of signs, symbols, markings and advertising devices within the
city. These standards are desired to protect and promote the public welfare, health and safety of persons within the community and to aid in the
development and promotion of business and industry by providing sign regulations which encourage aesthetic creativity, effectiveness and flexibility in the
design and use of such devices without creating detriment to the general public and are adopted in accordance with that authority granted in Idaho Code
section 67-6518 (1980) and the general police powers of the city. As used herein, the term "building inspector" shall refer to the city's building official or
their designee; the term "planning administrator" shall refer to the city's planning director or their designee.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, noncommercial copy may be substituted for commercial copy on any lawful sign structure. (Ord. 1300, 6-
4-2014)
8-5-2: SHORT TITLE; CITATION:
This chapter shall be known as the SIGN CODE of the city of Sandpoint and may be so cited and shall be referred to herein as the sign code. (Ord. 1300,
6-4-2014)
8-5-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, or alter, any "sign" as defined in this chapter without first obtaining a sign permit from the building inspector.
All applications for sign permits shall be accompanied by plans, designs, specifications or drawings stating specifically all dimensions, animations, if any,
lighting, colors and plan of installation stating clearances and setbacks. The city building inspector or planning administrator shall have the authority to
refuse a sign permit for any sign which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-4: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED SIGN, ON PREMISES: A sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product or activity conducted or product
available on the premises where such sign is displayed.
ARCHITECTURAL BLADE: A roof sign or projecting sign with no visible legs or braces designed to look as though it could have been part of the building
structure, rather than something suspended from or standing on the building.
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION: Any projection not intended for occupancy, which includes signs, canopies, or marquees.
AREA OF SIGN: The area of all faces of the sign within a perimeter which forms the outside shape including any frame, forms an integral part of the
display, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists of more than one section or module, all
areas will be totaled. Where poster panels or bulletins are installed back to back, both faces are considered as area.
BACKGROUND AREA: The entire area of a sign on which copy could be placed, as opposed to the copy area, where copy is in fact posted or painted.
BANNER: A long, narrow flag or pennant hung over a street or entrance with no advertising copy.
BANNER SIGN: A sign composed of flexible material and securely attached at all four (4) corners to the primary structure of the business.
BUILDING CODE: The building code in effect for the city of Sandpoint.
BUILDING COMPLEX: A building or group of buildings within a single architectural plan and/or parcel of property housing two (2) or more commercial
units of operation and providing common facilities or utilities, such as shopping centers, professional office buildings, etc.
BUILDING FACE OR WALL: All window and wall area of a building in one plane or elevation.
BUILDING FRONTAGE: The linear width of a building facing the right of way or the linear length of the right of way facing the building, whichever is
smaller.
CANOPY, MARQUEE OR AWNING: A permanent rooflike shelter extending from part or all of a building face over a public right of way and constructed of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 172/303
any suitable weather resistant material.
CANOPY, MARQUEE OR AWNING SIGN: Any such sign attached to or constructed in or on a canopy, marquee or awning. For the purpose of this sign
code, the square footage of a canopy sign shall be determined by the smallest square or rectangle that will enclose the copy area so long as any lighting
below the canopy is shielded and down directed so the canopy does not appear illuminated. The amount of signage on an awning shall be limited to the
lesser of thirty five (35) square feet per individual tenant space or twenty five percent (25%) of the total area of the awning. Awning signs shall not be
allowed above the first story of a building.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (Manual): A sign on which copy or sign panels may be changed manually in the field, such as boards with changeable letters
or changeable pictorial panels.
CHANGING SIGN (Automatic): An electronically or electrically controlled sign, message center or reader board, where different copy changes are shown
on the same location.
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL PARK: A planned, coordinated development of a tract of land with two (2) or more separate industrial or commercial
buildings. Such development is planned, designed, constructed, and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign identifying a building or construction site and the architects, engineers, financial institutions, contractors and
suppliers involved.
COPY: The wording on a sign surface.
ELECTRONIC SIGN: Includes those displaying time and temperature and also refers to digital or video displays or any sign that contains dynamically
generated digital content.
FEATHER FLAG: A temporary, freestanding sign attached on one side to a pole or staff driven into the ground for support, or having a crossbar base
suitable for standing or weighting the sign securely on a hard surface. The sign face may be vertical or vertically tapered and consist of a loose polyknit or
semirigid membrane. This definition includes, but is not limited to, those advertising mechanisms referred to as blade, feather, feather sail, message, sun
blade, swooper, teardrop, wind flag, banner, or sign.
FLASHING SIGN: Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of
animation, or an externally mounted intermittent light source.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign erected on a freestanding frame, mast or pole and not attached to any building.
HEIGHT OF SIGN: The vertical distance measured from the adjacent street grade or upper surface of the street curb to the highest point of said sign.
Elevated roadways shall not be used to measure height.
INTERNALLY LIGHTED SIGN: A sign which is wholly or partially illuminated by an internal light source from which source light passes through the display
surface to the exterior of the sign.
MURAL: A pictorial display without advertising copy on the exterior wall of a building.
MURAL SIGN: A wall painting or design that may include graphics, illustrations or symbols that represent the on site business use or name but shall be
limited in its allowed sign area to only such numbers, letters, logos or trademarks that represent or identify the business or use occupying the building on
which the mural sign appears.
NEON SIGN: Any sign or portion of a building illuminated or outlined by tubes using electrically stimulated neon or other gas.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the effective date hereof, or is located in
newly annexed territory, and which does not conform to all applicable provisions of this chapter as it may be amended from time to time.
OFF PREMISES SIGN OR OFF SITE SIGN: Any sign that relates to or advertises products, services or uses at, or directs persons to, a different premises
from where the sign is installed.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign calling attention to any business, product or activity conducted or produced on the property where such sign is located, or
identifying the premises upon which such sign is located.
PERMANENT SIGN: Any sign other than a temporary sign.
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or building, including sandwich type signs, sidewalk or curb signs.
PREMISES: An area of land with its appurtenances and building which, because of its unity of use, is one unit of real estate.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign, other than a wall sign, which is attached to and projects from a structure or building face.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof or on top of or above the parapet of a building.
SIGN: Any identification, description, illustration, symbol, statue or device, illuminated or nonilluminated, which is visible from any public place designed to
advertise, identify or convey information, including any landscape where letters or numbers are used for the purpose of directing the public's attention to a
product or location, with the exception of window displays and flags of any state or nation. For the purpose of removal, sign shall also include all sign
structures.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign which is not permanently affixed and is in place for thirty (30) days or less.
WALL SIGN: A sign painted on, attached to or erected against a wall of a building with the face parallel to the building wall and extending not more than
one foot (1') therefrom. (Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-5: IMPAIRMENT OF TRAFFIC AND RIGHTS OF WAY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 173/303
In addition to other requirements of the zoning code and sign code, all signs, including signs inside windows, shall comply with the following conditions:
A. No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any street(s) in such a manner as to obstruct the free and clear vision of pedestrians and vehicular traffic
or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape, color, words, phrases or symbols, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused
with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
B. No sign shall be erected or maintained which, by use of lights, illumination, or sound, creates an unduly distracting or hazardous condition to a motorist,
pedestrian or the general public. (Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-6: SIGN DISTRICTS:
For the purpose of determining allowable sizes, numbers, materials, placement and other requirements for restrictions on signs as set forth in this chapter,
the city shall be divided into sign districts as follows:
A. Downtown Overlay District: Businesses included within the downtown overlay district are those which front upon any street that is part of the boundary
and all businesses located within the area encompassed by the boundaries, which shall be defined as:
Starting at Superior Street and First Avenue, then west to Third Avenue, north to Lake Street, then west to Boyer Avenue, north to Highway 2, then
east to Sixth Avenue, north to Alder Street, east to Short Avenue, north to Larch Street, east to Fifth Avenue, north one thousand four hundred and ten
(1,410) feet then east to the City border and returning south along the City border, then east across Sand Creek along the southern border of the water
treatment facility, south along Lake Pend Oreille around city beach to Highway 95 as it enters Sandpoint, then west to the point of beginning.
B. Sand Creek Sign Overlay District: Any business within the downtown overlay district set forth above that has frontage on both Sand Creek and one of
the following streets: Lake Street, First Avenue, Cedar Street, Second Avenue, Poplar Street, Third Avenue, Larch Street, and Fifth Avenue, including
those parcels south of the trestle bridge that crosses Fifth Avenue.
1. Standards: The downtown overlay district shall apply. In addition, those businesses within the Sand Creek overlay district that have dual building
frontage shall be allowed one additional wall sign facing Sand Creek as provided below:
a. Prohibited Signs: Signs prohibited in this chapter as listed in section 8-5-13 of this chapter retain prohibition.
b. Sign Size: Buildings utilizing the additional signage allowance are limited to twenty percent (20%) of the building's Sand Creek facing facade or
four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is less. In the case of a mural sign, only the letters and numbers making up the business name shall be
counted as sign area.
c. Illumination: Signs may be illuminated through downlit illumination, halo illumination, or may utilize internal illumination when not composed of a
single flat panel display.
C. Special Standards For Buildings That Span The Width Of Sand Creek: Given the distinct visual prominence of enclosed buildings that span the width of
Sand Creek, the following special standards for signage shall apply to ensure that signage is presented in such a way that will limit "visual noise" and
will preserve the historical nature of town as stated in the comprehensive plan:
1. Prohibited Signs: Signs prohibited in this chapter as listed in section 8-5-13 of this chapter retain prohibition. A single banner may be allowed west of
the thread of Sand Creek and within one hundred feet (100') of the nearest street curb, subject to the provisions set forth in the "portable signs"
section. Banners are otherwise prohibited. A-frame signs are allowed subject to section 8-5-12 of this chapter.
2. Sign Sizes: A maximum of two hundred (200) square feet of total sign area is allowed west of the thread of Sand Creek and within one hundred feet
(100') of the nearest street curb. Directory signage totaling no more than two hundred (200) square feet, which may be double sided, is allowed
within seventy feet (70') of the southbound shoulder lane of Highway 95.
3. Window Signs: Window signs are limited as follows:
a. Lettering or symbols to be no greater than one-half (1/2) of window height.
b. Lettering or symbols to be spaced uniformly and allowed only in ground floor windows.
c. Lettering or symbols to be of one color.
d. Lettering to be uniform font size.
e. Signage to be categorical in content, as examples: coffee, food, drink, gallery, restaurants, artisans, shopping, dining, gelato, burgers, barbecue,
jewelry, furniture, etc.
f. Lettering or symbols to be made of permanent durable vinyl or other such product that will withstand UV rays, and to be removed when faded and
not legible.
4. Signage Representing Use Of Building: Signage representing the use of the building is allowed, subject to other provisions in this chapter, sign size
notwithstanding.
D. General Sign District: All the area within the corporate limits of the city where signs are a permitted use pursuant to the zoning ordinances of the city,
excepting the downtown and Sand Creek overlay districts.
E. Sign District Map:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 174/303
(Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-7: MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION:
A. Materials: Signs may be constructed of durable materials such as painted, stained or carved wood, brick or stone, plastics or polymers, glass or metal,
provided metal signs shall not be pointed on their edges creating a safety hazard and shall be treated to prevent reflective glare.
B. Support Structures: Exposed metal support structures for signs, including, but not limited to, posts, poles and sign sides or edges, must be faced or
covered with wood, brick or stone, or painted. The planning administrator must approve the color and material.
C. Exposed Neon: Exposed neon may be used only in one of the following ways: inside a building window, provided the total area of all signs does not
exceed ten (10) square feet and which shall be included in the total sign area; as an accent on exterior wall signs, provided the total square footage of
the neon may not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total area of the sign (neon square footage shall be determined by the smallest square or rectangle
that will enclose the area of the neon); or not more than two (2) vacancy/no vacancy signs for each motel or hotel, not to exceed ten (10) square feet
and which shall be included in the total sign area.
D. Banner Frame: Businesses wishing to utilize banner material for permanent signage will be required to install a frame around the outside edge of the
banner. The frame may be of metal, wood, or other material in order to provide an attractive and durable border to such sign. Any existing permanent
signs using banner material shall be required to install such frame within one year of the adoption of this section. If not used for permanent signage, the
provisions of section 8-5-12 of this chapter shall apply to number, size, and location of any banner sign.
E. Compliance With Certain Regulations Required: All signs shall be Underwriters Laboratory (UL) approved, except for signs typically not requiring UL
approval, such as wood signs that are indirectly lighted. All other signs shall comply with the most current printing of the national electrical
code/international building code. Drawings of all signs showing size, location, color and other information as deemed necessary by the city building
inspector or planning administrator must be submitted prior to receiving a sign permit. All plans for freestanding or roof signs as allowed by this chapter
shall be submitted with the signature and stamp of a licensed engineer unless otherwise waived by the city building inspector. The engineer's review of
a sign structure, if required, shall include, but not be limited to, the effects of wind, seismic forces, allowable stresses, combined loads, overturning
movement from lateral forces, and the stresses of wire or rope and their fastenings.
F. Bracing Systems: Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and seismic forces as specified in this section. All bracing
systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be
transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such a manner as not to overstress any of the elements thereof.
G. Supports: The supports for all signs or sign structures shall be placed in and upon private property and shall be securely built, constructed and erected
in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 175/303
H. Setbacks: No projecting sign, canopy, or marquee shall extend from a building to a point beyond eighteen inches (18") from the back of the adjacent
street curb, nor shall it be lower than eight feet (8') above the sidewalk from which they overhang. For freestanding sign standards, see section 8-5-11
of this chapter. (Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-8: SIGN SIZES:
All signs shall be proportioned in size to the building on which they are to be mounted or which contains the business they are advertising, and the total
square footage for all signs shall be limited based on primary entrance frontage as follows:
A. General Sign District: Two and one-half (21/2) square feet of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage up to a maximum of one hundred fifty
(150) square feet of total sign area, unless adjusted as hereinafter provided.
B. Downtown Overlay District: Two (2) square feet of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage up to a maximum of one hundred twenty five (125)
square feet of total sign area, unless adjusted as hereinafter provided.
C. Sand Creek Overlay District: See subsection 8-5-6B of this chapter.
D. Square Footage Penalty: A square footage penalty equal to fifty percent (50%) shall be imposed and deducted from the total square footage allowable
for each internally lighted wall, projecting or freestanding sign, that utilizes white, off white, light gray, yellow, or cream for the background or noncopy
portions of a sign, except when used as the background for reader board or changeable copy signs as permitted by subsection 8-5-13I and where the
area utilized for internally lit changeable copy cannot exceed fifty percent (50%) of the business's allowed sign area.
E. Nonconforming Business Use: Any business use located within a residential zone of the city that is considered legally nonconforming or is approved
through a conditional use permit process shall be subject to the sign areas as set forth in subsection B of this section for the downtown overlay district.
(Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-9: MASTER SIGN PROGRAM:
A. Approval of a master sign program will allow flexibility with regard to sign area, number, location, or height of permitted signage to the extent that the
master sign program will enhance the overall development. Approval of a master sign program will allow for an increase of up to twenty five percent
(25%) in overall sign area.
1. Applicability: The approval of a master sign program shall be required whenever any of the following circumstances exist or whenever an applicant
requests the approval of a master sign program:
a. Three (3) or more separate tenant spaces are to be created on the same parcel; or
b. A single building has multiple tenant spaces where each tenant space does not have a clearly defined street facing business presence (tenant
spaces may be located behind or above other businesses); and
c. The planning administrator determines that a master sign program is needed because of special project characteristics (e.g., the size of proposed
signs, limited site visibility, a business within a business, the location of the site relative to major transportation routes).
2. Approval Authority: The planning administrator may approve a master sign program through the granting of a sign permit for a master sign program.
3. Application Requirements: A sign permit application for a master sign program shall include all information and materials required by the department.
Information to be submitted should include:
a. Proposed signage types.
b. Proposed signage locations.
c. Breakdown of sign area allowed each tenant.
4. Standards: A master sign program shall comply with the following standards:
a. The program shall comply with the purpose of this chapter and underlying standards for the sign district.
b. The program shall accommodate future revisions that may be required because of changes in use or tenants.
5. Revisions To Master Sign Programs: Revisions to a master sign program may be approved by the planning administrator with a standard sign permit
if the intent of the original approval is not affected. Revisions that would substantially deviate from the original approval shall require the approval of a
new master sign program. (Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-10: NUMBER OF SIGNS:
A. The maximum number of signs for each business shall be two (2) for each street frontage. In no case shall a business be allowed more than two (2)
permanent signs on one side of a building. Those businesses that fall within the Sand Creek overlay district may also be allowed one additional wall
sign facing Sand Creek, subject to the standards set forth in subsection 8-5-6B of this chapter. (Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-11: FREESTANDING SIGNS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 176/303
A. Number Allowed; General Regulations: Only one freestanding sign may be allowed for each single- or multi-tenant building, which shall be constructed
of durable materials, shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height from grade to the top of the sign or supporting structure, whichever is higher, shall not
encroach on any public right of way, and shall comply with all other applicable design and construction standards as set forth in this chapter; and
further provided that single or double tenant signs shall not exceed twenty five (25) square feet.
B. Setback: All freestanding signs located within the city limits shall be set back in accordance with the proposed height of the sign (e.g., a 6 foot tall sign
requires a 6 foot setback) provided that signs which are less than five feet (5') in height shall observe a setback of no less than five feet (5'), measured
from the property line to the nearest point of the support structure or sign face. Freestanding signs may encroach within the setback up to eighteen
inches (18") from the property line when:
1. Not illuminated with the exception of downlighting;
2. No more than five feet (5') in height; and
3. Plans are submitted with the signature and stamp of a licensed engineer. The engineer's review shall include, but not be limited to, the effects of
wind, seismic forces, allowable stresses, combined loads, overturning movement from lateral forces, and the stresses of wire or rope and their
fastenings.
C. Height: Freestanding signs may extend to a height of no more than ten feet (10') from grade to the top of the sign or supporting structure, whichever is
higher. Other signs, including wall signs, shall not extend above the roofline of the building containing the business it advertises, exclusive of false
fronts.
D. Landscaping: The ground area around the base of all freestanding signs shall be landscaped, providing that the building inspector and planning
administrator may exempt freestanding signs from this requirement where it is demonstrated by the applicant that the landscaping would unduly
interfere with pedestrian or vehicle traffic.
E. Commercial/Industrial Park Entrance Signs: For separate buildings in close proximity or on individual lots within a commercial/industrial park, this
provision allows one freestanding entrance sign, not to exceed fifty (50) square feet for the complex or park. Signs must be located at the entry of the
commercial/industrial park or primary access and shall abide by clear vision triangle specifications set by state law. One double sided sign per street
abutting the perimeter of the park is allowed. Signs may not exceed the maximum height established for freestanding signs within the same zoning
district and may not be internally lighted. External lighting that is concealed and focused downward onto the sign is permitted. Space may be made
available on the entry sign for each tenant and/or lot in the park. Applications for entrance signs shall stipulate who will be responsible for installation
and maintenance. (Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-12: PORTABLE SIGNS (A-FRAMES AND BANNERS):
In addition to the number of signs allowed according to street frontage, all businesses shall be allowed one A-frame or banner, subject to the following
requirements:
A. General Requirements:
1. Placement of portable signs shall only be allowed following issuance of a portable sign permit. Such permits will be exclusive to the permittee's
location and business name. Transfer of the portable sign to another location or change in the business name will require amendment of the sign
permit.
2. All portable signs shall be constructed of solid and durable materials, and no lighting or reflective materials shall be used.
3. All signs permitted herein are subject to the maintenance, repair, and removal provisions set forth in sections 8-5-17 and 8-5-18 of this chapter.
4. The planning administrator, building inspector, fire chief, police chief and/or public safety officer of the city of Sandpoint may cause the immediate
and permanent removal, without notice, of any portable sign found to be in violation of any provision of this code, including, but not limited to,
permitting requirements or placement in the public right of way in a manner that encroaches into the pedestrian travel zone, is unsafe, or blocks or
impedes access.
B. A-Frame Signs:
1. Businesses within the same building may share the use of a single A-frame, but in no case shall a single business be allowed to advertise on more
than one A-frame sign. Minimum spacing between A-frame signs for multi-tenant buildings shall be one hundred feet (100'); this spacing may be
reduced to fifty feet (50') upon approval by the planning administrator.
2. For those A-frame signs placed in the right of way, each face of the A-frame shall be no wider than two feet (2'), and no taller than three feet (3'),
including any sign frame. An A-frame placed on private property may differ in dimensions, but in no case shall each face be greater than six (6)
square feet.
3. Any person or business placing an A-frame upon the public right of way in conformance with this section shall execute a hold harmless agreement
by which the person or business placing such A-frame sign accepts any and all liability for damages of any nature suffered by anyone as a result of
the placement or maintaining of such sign and further shall agree to hold the city harmless from and indemnify the city for any such claims for
damages.
4. All A-frame signs shall be suitably anchored, weighted or designed to be resistant to the weather conditions; shall not begin more than four inches
(4") above the sidewalk; shall be required to be removed at the end of each business day; and shall not be displayed during the nonbusiness hours
of the commercial use such signs advertise. Signs with wheels which can be rolled into place are prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 177/303
5. All A-frame signs placed within the right of way shall be located immediately abutting the building containing the business advertised thereon, and
may not encroach into the pedestrian travel zone as defined in subsection 7-2-2C of this code. Should the width of the existing sidewalk not allow for
the placement of a sign that would not encroach into this zone, the business owner may request an exception from the planning administrator and
building inspector to allow a single face A-frame sign, not to exceed six (6) square feet in size, to be placed so as to securely lean against the
building.
If not located within the right of way, the A-frame sign shall be located so as to not interfere with pedestrian movement on any private pedestrian path
or sidewalk and shall not be placed so as to prevent the use of any required parking spaces, interfere with persons exiting their vehicles, or restrict
the turning movements of vehicles within a parking area.
C. Banners:
1. Standards: All businesses will be allowed the option of utilizing a twelve (12) square foot banner as a portable sign set forth above. Such banner
must be securely attached at all four (4) corners to the primary structure of the business and maintained in good repair in accordance with the
provisions set forth in section 8-5-17 of this chapter.
2. Special Event Banners: A special event banner permit may be obtained for a single event for businesses that are set back from a street fifty feet
(50') or more and subject to the size restrictions set forth below. Special event banners may not be used concurrently with another banner and are
only allowed for a seventy two (72) hour period. Additionally, special event banner permits shall not be issued to a business more than once per
month. The size of banners shall be restricted by linear business frontage as follows:
Building Frontage
(Linear Feet)
Banner Size
(Square Feet)
100 - 150 50
150 - 200 100
Over 200 300
(Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-13: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following shall be prohibited in all districts:
A. Moving Appurtenances: Moving mechanical or electrical appurtenances attached to a sign or otherwise intended to attract attention to a sign.
B. Interference With Visibility Of Traffic Device: Any sign located so as to conflict with the clear and obvious appearance of public devices controlling public
traffic.
C. Rotating Beacon Lights: Rotating beacon lights used above or attached to any sign structure, sign or building.
D. Flashing, Moving Signs: Animated, rotating, flashing signs or signs which have moving parts.
E. Portable Signs With Wheels: Portable signs with wheels which can be rolled onto the sidewalk or street right of way and signs which are supported by a
heavy weight at the base which can be rolled into place. Design standards for allowed portable signs are set forth in section 8-5-12 of this chapter.
F. Off Premises Signs: "Off premises signs", defined as signs for advertising or identification of a business which is not located on the same premises as
the business, excepting directional and informational signs placed by governmental agencies.
G. Neon Signs: Neon signs or valances, unless otherwise allowed in this chapter.
H. Feather Flags: Feather flags.
I. Reader Board; Changeable Copy Signs: Reader board or changeable copy signs, provided that one such nonelectronic sign shall be allowed for:
1. Businesses where the primary business function is as a venue for changing entertainment or events.
2. Movie theaters.
3. Businesses with convention facilities that qualify for liquor licenses under the statutes of the state.
4. Schools or churches, provided that those located within or abutting a residential district may not be internally lit.
Not more than two (2) such nonelectronic signs shall be allowed for gasoline service stations, provided that the only changeable copy shall be fuel
prices.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 178/303
J. Electronic Signs: Any existing electronic signs that are legally nonconforming at the time of passage hereof, except those signs that have been granted
historic status as set forth herein, shall have until March 31, 2022, to come into compliance with the provisions of this sign code.
K. Roof Signs: Roof signs erected at the peak or that extend above the highest point of a building.
(Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-14: VEHICLE MOUNTED COMMERCIAL SIGNS:
A. All vehicle mounted commercial signs shall be permanently affixed, painted, magnetically applied or otherwise mounted upon a vehicle and shall not
project more than eighteen inches (18") above the surface to which they are attached; and any sign which is mounted upon the roof, hood or trunk of a
vehicle and which projects above such surface upon which it is mounted shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area per face.
B. The primary purpose of any vehicle upon which a vehicle mounted commercial sign is affixed must be to serve a useful function in the transportation or
conveyance of persons or commodities from one place to another, including transportation to and from work, and such intermittent delays and stops as
are customary in the routine conduct of the business or activity for which the transportation or conveyance occurs.
C. No vehicle upon which a vehicle mounted commercial sign is affixed may be parked on any lot or public right of way for the primary purpose of directing
or attracting the attention of the public to a building, institution, product, organization, event or location offered or existing elsewhere except as provided
for below.
D. Banner signs displayed on vehicles shall be subject to the regulations contained in subsection 8-5-7D of this chapter.
E. Vehicle mounted signs used in connection with a special event are exempted from the requirements of this section for only the twenty four (24) hour
period just preceding and during the term of the special event. Upon the conclusion of the special event, such signs must either be dismantled, moved
to a location where the sign is not visible from public rights of way or made to comply with the provisions of this section. For the purposes of this
subsection, the term "special event" shall mean a parade, circus, fair, carnival, festival or other similar event that is intended to or likely to attract
substantial numbers of persons and is different in character from the customary or usual activities generally associated with the property upon which
the special event is to occur.
F. Vehicle mounted political signs pertaining to a specific election are exempted from the requirements of this section.
G. This section shall not apply to signs that are being transported for installation. (Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-15: EXEMPTED SIGNS:
The following signs shall be exempted from the provisions of this sign code, providing that they meet the requirements set forth in this section. Signs that
exceed the stated area allowances shall be subject to the same permit requirements as otherwise set forth in this title.
A. All signs erected in a public right of way by a public agency controlling or directing traffic shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
B. Political signs pertaining to a specific election which must be removed within five (5) days after the election by the candidate or property owner who
placed the sign.
C. Real estate signs of less than four (4) square feet of sign area located within the building setback areas not occupying any portion of the public right of
way.
D. Construction signs announcing the construction of a building or project naming owners, contractors, subcontractors, lending institutions, and architects,
not to exceed one sign of thirty five (35) square feet for each street frontage of the building frontage. Said sign shall be removed upon occupancy of the
building for which the sign was intended.
E. Flags, either official or historical, of any state or nation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 179/303
F. Any sign inside a building, window, or on a door, except flashing, animated or rotating signs visible from outside the building. The total percentage of
coverage for signs on or within windows and doors shall not exceed thirty five percent (35%).
G. Owner identification or occupant identification signs for residential structures, private warning signs and "For Sale" or "For Rent" signs, none of which
may exceed two (2) square feet.
H. Murals, as defined in this chapter. All requests for murals shall be reviewed by the arts commission and the planning administrator, with their
recommendation forwarded to city council for approval on consent calendar. The responsibility for review shall fall to the planning and zoning
commission in the event there is no active arts commission appointed.
I. Kiosks provided by the chamber of commerce, downtown business association and other nonprofit organizations that typically list local community
events. A kiosk with space to list community events, locations of community buildings and a list of local businesses keyed to a location map may be
permitted at the discretion of the planning commission. Business and property owners adjoining the parcel under consideration shall be notified of such
request. Said notice shall inform such owners that they may comment on the application during a period of not less than fifteen (15) days after mailing
of the notice and prior to final action on said application. Said permit approval shall be based on compliance with the following:
1. Safe and adequate vehicular and nonvehicular access to the kiosk;
2. Kiosk layout and design which reflects an intent to notify visitors and residents of community events; and
3. Use of durable materials on the kiosk.
The combined total for all signs within any one kiosk shall not be more than one hundred (100) square feet. Kiosks shall be placed within a
landscaped area. Each entrance to the city shall have a designated area for these signs. Locations throughout the downtown core may also be
selected for smaller kiosks (up to 50 square feet each) serving the same purposes as above. All signs advertising a specific event shall be
immediately removed at the conclusion of the event unless extended in writing by the planning administrator.
J. Signs stating the name of a housing complex of ten (10) or more dwelling units, provided that the sign does not exceed twenty five (25) square feet.
Freestanding signs shall be placed within a landscaped area and shall be approved by the planning administrator.
K. Signs which are exclusively intended to direct pedestrian and vehicular traffic to entrances, exits, drive-up lanes, etc., smaller than three (3) square feet,
with no advertising.
L. One directory sign per entrance for multi-tenant buildings that does not exceed three (3) square feet. A larger directory sign size, with a maximum area
of six (6) square feet may be allowed upon approval by the city planning and zoning commission.
M. Portable signs or banners, when used by churches, charities, and other similar nonprofit institutions or governmental entities for the purpose of
announcing benefit or emergency programs occurring within the church or institution, such as weekly free meals or cold weather shelters. Such signs
must adhere to the standards set forth in section 8-5-12 of this chapter and may only be in place on the same premises and on the days such programs
are taking place.
N. Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, including building names and dedication dates, or works of art, so long as such features or
works do not contain letters or numbers (except in case of building names and dedication dates). Signs for building names shall be in harmony with the
architecture of the building and are not to exceed twelve feet (12') in letter height.
O. Public works of art that contain letters/numbers if approved by the Sandpoint arts commission. (Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-16: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. A "nonconforming sign" is any advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the effective date hereof, or is located in
newly annexed territory, and which does not conform to all applicable provisions of this chapter as it may be amended from time to time.
B. All nonconforming signs which are nonconforming due to exposed metal support poles, structures or edges, background color, or material, or because
of design or construction standards, are allowed to remain as long as they advertise a bona fide business. However, in the event there is a change in
the type of business, a request is made for a land use permit to change the use of the property, or a building permit is obtained for work involving any
exterior building changes or building replacement or modifications to a site(s) upon which nonconforming signs exist, then all nonconforming signs on
the subject site shall be removed or modified to comply with all the provisions of this chapter. A sign which does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter shall not be structurally altered, relocated, or replaced unless it is immediately brought into compliance. In addition, all temporary and/or Aframe
signs not meeting the provisions of this chapter shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the passage of this chapter. Flashing or rotating signs
shall comply with the provisions of this chapter within sixty (60) days of its passage. In cases where removal of a nonconforming sign is required and
would create an extreme hardship or substantial loss to the owner, as demonstrated by the owner, the owner then agrees to a reasonable time frame
for the eventual removal of the nonconforming sign. This provision shall not apply to nonconforming signs illegally erected, those which pose a public
safety hazard, or temporary, portable or off premises sign.
C. In certain cases nonconforming signs may be given a historic status. All requests for historic sign status shall be reviewed by the historic commission
and the planning administrator, with their recommendation forwarded to city council for approval on consent calendar. The responsibility for review shall
fall to the planning and zoning commission in the event there is no active historic commission appointed. Independent consideration of each request
will be given, and the applicant shall address each of the criteria below:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 180/303
1. At least fifty (50) years old or attached to a building which is on the national register of historic places.
2. On premises sign.
3. Unique in design and enhances the cultural, historical, nostalgic, or aesthetic quality of the city.
4. Structurally safe.
Once designated, historic signs are deemed in compliance with this chapter regardless of their size, material, colors or location. Decisions to grant
historic status to a sign shall be made on a case by case basis, according to the criteria above. The granting of historic status for a sign shall not be
considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant other historic status designations.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, all signs that are nonconforming only because of the setback requirements set forth in
subsection 8-5-11B of this chapter are hereby not required to move, provided they are not located on public right of way, in which case they are
required to move in compliance with subsection 8-5-11B of this chapter. (Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-17: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR:
Every sign, including, but not limited to, those signs for which permits are required or for which no permits or permit fees are required, shall be maintained
in a safe, presentable and good structural material condition at all times, including the repair or replacement of defective parts, painting, repairing, cleaning
and other acts required for the maintenance of said sign. The building inspector shall require compliance with all standards of this provision. If the sign is
not made to comply with adequate safety and maintenance standards, the planning administrator shall require its removal in accordance with this
provision. (Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-18: REMOVAL AND DISPOSITION OF SIGNS:
A. Abandoned Signs: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any sign which is located on property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a
period of two (2) months or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been
abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change of ownership or management of such business,
shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of six (6) months or more. Any sign which no longer, for a period of
three (3) consecutive months, advertises goods, products, services or facilities available to the public, shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
Abandoned signs shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which the sign is located. Signs that are conforming under the provisions of this
chapter as to location, size, etc., but no longer advertise a bona fide business may, with the approval of the property owner/tenant and the planning
administrator of the city, have the message or sign copy covered with paint or other material as approved by the planning administrator. In the event the
property owner refuses to cover a conforming sign that no longer advertises a bona fide business and is deemed to be abandoned, the remaining
provisions of this section shall be enforced.
B. Dangerous Or Defective Signs: No persons shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him, any sign which is in
a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the premises or the owner of the sign. Upon failure of
the owners to remove or repair a dangerous or defective sign, the building inspector shall proceed as described in subsection C of this section.
C. Removal Of Signs: The building inspector shall cause to be removed any sign that endangers the public safety such as an abandoned, dangerous or
materially, electrically or structurally defective sign. The building inspector shall prepare a notice which shall describe the sign and specify the violation
involved and which shall state if the sign is not removed or the violation is not corrected within twenty (20) days, the sign shall be removed in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
All notices mailed by the building inspector shall be sent by certified mail. Any time periods provided in this section shall be deemed to commence on
the date of the mailing of the certified mail. The notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property on which the sign is located, the owner of the sign
and the occupant of the property. If any such person is unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be mailed to such person's last known address, if any,
and posted on the sign or on the premises.
Any person having an interest in the sign or the property may appeal the determination of the building inspector ordering removal or compliance by
filing a written notice of appeal with the city planning and zoning commission within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice. Notwithstanding the above,
in cases of emergency, the planning administrator and/or building inspector may cause the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign without
notice.
D. Disposal Of Signs; Costs: Any sign removed by the building inspector pursuant to the provisions of this section, shall become the property of the city
and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate. The cost of removal of the sign by the city shall be considered a debt owed to the city by
the owner of the sign and the owner of the property, and may be recovered in an appropriate court action by the city. The costs of removal shall include
any and all incidental expenses incurred by the city in connection with the sign's removal.
When it is determined by the building inspector that said sign would cause an imminent danger to the public safety, and contact cannot be made with a
sign owner or building owner, no written notice shall have to be served. In this emergency situation, the building inspector may correct the danger, all
costs being charged to the sign owner and property owner.
If it shall be necessary for the building inspector to remove a sign pursuant to the provisions hereof, and it should be practicable to sell or salvage any
material derived in the aforesaid removal, he may sell the same at private or public sale at the best price obtainable and shall keep an account of the
proceeds thereof. Such proceeds, if any, shall be used to offset the costs of removal to be charged to the sign owner or property owner. Any excess
cost over and above such costs and the cost of the removal shall be levied as an assessment against the property on which the sign is located, by the
city council, certified to the auditor and collected as any other assessment by the city. Should the proceeds exceed the costs, the excess shall be paid
to the owner of the premises from which said sign was removed or to the owner of said sign, whenever claim thereof is established. (Ord. 1300, 6-4-
2014)
8-5-19: APPEALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 181/303
Appeals from decisions made by the planning administrator shall be made to the city planning and zoning commission. Appeals from the provisions or
enforcement of this chapter shall be made as provided in title 9, chapter 9 of this code. (Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
8-5-20: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-4-1 of
this code, and a separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day during or which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1300, 6-4-2014)
Chapter 6
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
8-6-1: UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS ADOPTED:
There is adopted by the city council that certain code known as the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, 1997 edition, together with any
amendments, additions, new editions and modifications made thereto. Said uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, 1997 edition, is
adopted and incorporated as if set out at length in this chapter. As each subsequent edition is published, distributed and received in the office of the city
clerk, each new edition and new supplements shall supersede the prior existing edition or supplement respectively and shall be the effective manual and
official abatement of dangerous buildings code for the city.
One copy of the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, 1997 edition, shall be maintained by the city, on file in the office of the city clerk
for inspection by the public. (Ord. 1074, 12-18-2002)
8-6-2: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of the said uniform code. Any person found to be in
violation of the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings shall, upon a finding of guilt of violation of the same, be subject to a fine not to
exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Said penalty provision shall
be in addition to all other civil and legal enforcement rights, restraints, injunctionary relief and abatement relief and all other legal remedies otherwise
available to the city. (Ord. 1074, 12-18-2002)
Chapter 7
GAS SERVICE REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. GAS DISTRIBUTION AND TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS
8-7A-1: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this article shall have the meanings herein given to them:
DIRECTOR: The public works director of the city of Sandpoint and his duly authorized representative.
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM: Any system of mains, pipes, service lines, regulators, meters, fixtures, connections and attachments used in the distribution of
gas.
GAS: Natural, manufactured or mixed gas suitable for domestic and industrial fuel.
GAS INSPECTOR: The construction inspector of underground gas piping of the permittee.
PERMITTEE: Any person holding a franchise to distribute gas in the city.
PERSON: Every person, firm, corporation or association.
PUBLIC PROPERTIES: Any street, alley, roadway, sidewalk, viaduct, highway, bridge, park drive or public ground open as a matter of right to public travel.
SERVICE LINE: A pipe, regulator and meter which conveys gas from a main or other distribution or transmission line to and on a consumer's premises.
TRANSMISSION SYSTEM: A system of pipelines installed to transmit gas from a source or sources of supply to one or more distribution centers or a pipe
installed to interconnect sources of supply. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code; Ord. 1318, 10-21-2015)
8-7A-2: CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND SAFETY STANDARDS:
The rules and regulations pertaining to matters of public safety in the construction and operations of facilities for the transmission and distribution of gas of
the public service commission of the state of Idaho, general order 98, adopted May 31, 1955, and the provisions of regulations for the transportation of
natural and other gas by pipeline, title 49 of the code of federal regulations, on file in the office of the city clerk, are each hereby adopted by reference as
standards for gas installations in the city, provided that in the event any of the provisions of said rules and regulations or said federal code should conflict
with any of the provisions of this article, the federal code shall govern and be observed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 182/303
The city shall maintain three (3) copies of the current edition, one of which shall be on file in the city clerk's office.
All amendments and additions to said rules and regulations and the federal code, when printed and filed with the city clerk, shall thereupon become
amendments and additions thereto if not in conflict with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
8-7A-3: INSPECTIONS AND TESTING OF SYSTEMS:
A. All construction of a gas distribution or transmission system shall be inspected by the gas inspector or an inspector for the permittee.
B. Before any newly constructed distribution or transmission system is placed in service, it shall be tested by the permittee in conformity with the codes
adopted by this article. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
8-7A-4: CONNECTIONS TO STEEL MAINS:
Service lines shall not be connected to steel or approved mains by means of a clamp or saddle type service connection, except by special permission of
the gas inspector. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
8-7A-5: LOCATION OF APPURTENANCES:
A. Service Shutoffs: Service shutoffs shall be installed on all new services, including replacements, at the curb or property line for each service, or at an
easily accessible place on the outside of the building served. If the latter method is used, such service shall not enter a building directly without coming
above ground. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
B. Pipes: All mains shall be laid in alleys or easements whenever possible, or at locations generally on the south and west sides of streets and alleys as
directed by the director. Mains shall have a lateral clearance of not less than four feet (4') from water mains and twelve inches (12") from any other
subsurface structure; provided, that under exceptional circumstances, the director may authorize less clearance. Mains shall have a vertical clearance
of twelve inches (12") when crossing another pipe. Mains shall be laid with a cover not less than thirty inches (30"), except under unusual
circumstances. Where the trench is in rock, the cover may be twenty four inches (24") if the main is properly cushioned as required in subsection 8-7A-
7A of this article. Where the trench is in a parking strip, the cover may be eighteen inches (18"). In the event interference with other subsurface
structures makes it impractical to maintain the above depths, the director may permit gas pipelines and mains to be constructed so as to avoid such
subsurface structures. Minimum depth of service lines shall be twelve inches (12") at the service terminal and shall normally be sloped to required
depth at the main. No person shall install a gas service line on consumer's premises in the same ditch as the water service line without written
permission from the director. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code; Ord. 1318, 10-21-2015)
8-7A-6: PROTECTION AND REMOVAL OF UTILITIES:
The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of any underground utilities and protect the same against damage. The permittee shall be
responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipe, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit or other
utility. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the director and the utility involved. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd.
1983 Code; Ord. 1318, 10-21-2015)
The permittee shall support and protect, by timbers or otherwise, all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by
the construction or maintenance work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect the same under, over, along or across said work. In
case any of the said pipes, conduits, wires or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the authorities having control of the same and the
expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee.
If it should be necessary to move an existing utility, the work shall be done by the owner of such utility. Whenever the permittee's utility interferes with the
actual construction of any public improvement, such utility shall be moved by the permittee. No utility, either publicly or privately owned, shall be moved to
accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
8-7A-7: TRENCHES AND EXCAVATION WORK:
A. Trenches: Trenches shall not be excavated more than three hundred feet (300') in advance of pipe laying, nor left unfilled for more than seven hundred
feet (700') where pipe has been laid, except by special permission from the director. The length of the trench that may be opened at any time shall not
be greater than the length of pipe and the necessary accessories which are available to the site ready to put in place. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983
Code; Ord. 1318, 10-21-2015)
The complete trench shall be kept not less than thirty feet (30') ahead of the pipe layers. Trenches shall be at least six inches (6") wider on each side or
a total of twelve inches (12") more than the exterior diameter of the pipe, except where pipes are four inches (4") or less in diameter. Where excavation
is made in rock, a minimum of six inches (6") of noncorrosive soil, sands or fines of existing spoils shall be used as a padding beneath the pipe and an
additional six inches (6") above the pipe.
Excavation for manholes and other structures shall be sufficient to leave at least twelve inches (12") between their outer surfaces and the sides of the
excavation. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
B. Water In Trenches: The permittee shall pump, bail or otherwise remove any water which accumulates in trenches. Dewatering trenches may be
accomplished in any manner approved by the director. Water shall not be permitted in trenches at any time during construction nor until backfilling over
the top of the pipe has been completed unless otherwise specifically permitted by the director. The groundwater level in trenches shall not be permitted
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 183/303
to rise above an elevation of six inches (6") below the pipe. The permittee shall perform all work necessary to keep the trenches clear of water while
the foundations and the masonry are being constructed or the pipe laid. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code; Ord. 1318, 10-21-2015)
C. Breaking Through Pavement: Whenever it is necessary to break through existing pavement for the purpose of constructing gas service facilities, and
where trenches are to be four feet (4') or over in depth, the pavement and the base shall be removed to at least six inches (6") beyond the outer limits
of the subgrade that is to be disturbed in order to prevent settlement, and a six inch (6") shoulder of undisturbed material shall be provided on each
side of the excavated trench. The face of the remaining pavement shall be approximately vertical. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
D. Tunnels: Tunnels under pavement shall not be permitted except by permission of the director and, if permitted, shall be adequately supported by
timbering and backfilling under the direction of the director. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code; Ord. 1318, 10-21-2015)
E. Backfilling:
1. Backfilling in all public streets and improved areas, both public and private, shall be completed to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed
ground in which the trench was dug. Compacting shall be done by mechanical tampers or vibrators, or by rolling in layers as required by the soil in
question.
2. Backfilling up the first eighteen inches (18") above the top of utility pipes or similar installations shall be done with thin layers, each layer to be
tamped by manual or mechanical means. Layers that are hand tamped shall not exceed four inches (4") in thickness, layers that are power tamped
shall not exceed six inches (6") in thickness. These same requirements shall apply to the remainder of the backfilling if tamping is the method used
for backfilling.
F. Care Of Excavated Material: All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench, or in highways, shall be piled and maintained in such
a manner that the toe of the slope of the excavated material is at least eighteen inches (18") from the edge of the trench. When the confines of the area
through which the gas pipes are to be laid are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, the permittee may be required to
haul excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to secure
the necessary permission and make all necessary arrangements for all storage and disposal sites required. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
8-7A-8: PROTECTION OF PROPERTY:
A. General: The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the
progress of the construction or maintenance work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property. Wherever it may be necessary
for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled, and the area
restored as nearly as possible to its original condition. Permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip
areas or easements across private property without first having notified the property owner, or in the case of public parks, the city park department.
(Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
B. Preservation Of Monuments: The permittee shall not disturb any surface monuments or hubs found on the line of the improvements unless authorized
by the director.
C. Damage To Existing Improvements: All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of construction or maintenance work shall be
repaired by the permittee. Materials for such repair shall conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances. If, upon being ordered, the permittee
fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the director may cause said necessary labor and materials to be furnished by other
parties and the cost thereof charged against permittee. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code; Ord. 1318, 10-21-2015)
8-7A-9: PROPERTY LINES AND EASEMENTS:
Property lines and limits of easements shall be indicated on the plans and it shall be the permittee's responsibility to confine its construction activities
within these limits. Any damage resulting from trespassing beyond these limits shall be the sole responsibility of the permittee. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd.
1983 Code)
8-7A-10: INTERFERENCE WITH OTHER SERVICES:
The work provided for herein shall be conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Material or obstructions shall not be
placed within fifteen feet (15') of fire hydrants. Passageways leading to fire escapes or firefighting equipment shall be kept free of material piles or other
obstructions. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
8-7A-11: PROVISION FOR WATERCOURSES:
The permittee shall provide for the flow of all watercourses, sewers or drains intercepted during the progress of the work, and shall replace the same in as
good condition as it found them or shall make final provisions for them as the director may direct. The permittee shall not obstruct the gutter of any street,
but shall use all proper measures to provide for the free passage of surface water. The permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water,
mud, silt or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other operations, and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its
failure so to provide. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code; Ord. 1318, 10-21-2015)
8-7A-12: ROUTING AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC DURING CONSTRUCTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 184/303
During construction, traffic shall be maintained at all times so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of abutting property and to
the general public, provided that the director may permit the closing of public properties to all traffic for a designated period of time, if, in his opinion, it is
necessary. Before any public property may be closed or restricted to traffic the permittee must obtain the approval of the director and notify the chief of the
fire department and the chief of the police department. The permittee shall route and control all traffic, including its own vehicles, as directed by the chief of
the police department. Upon completion of construction work, the chief of the police department and the chief of the fire department shall again be notified
before traffic is returned to its normal route. Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the chief of the police department, they shall be furnished by the
permittee at its expense.
Through traffic shall be maintained without detours if possible. When it is necessary to construct a detour, the permittee shall construct same at its
expense in accordance with specifications, of the director. The permittee will be responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to any public properties
by the operation of its equipment.
The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable timber barriers to confine earth from trenches or other excavations in order to minimize encroachment
upon highways. It shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossings over excavations and across highways during construction to accommodate
vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections, under the supervision of the director. Decking shall be not less than four inches (4") thick and
shall be securely fastened together with heavy wire and staples. Pedestrian crossings shall consist of planking three inches (3") thick, twelve inches (12")
wide and of length required, together with necessary blocking. The walk shall be not less than four feet (4') wide and shall be provided with a railing if
required by the director. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code; Ord. 1318, 10-21-2015)
8-7A-13: INSURANCE:
The permittee shall have and maintain in force bodily injury liability insurance, with limits of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) each person, and
two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) each occurrence, and which insurance may contain a deductible amount as may be approved by the city
council; property damage liability insurance, with limits of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) each accident, and one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) aggregate, which insurance may contain a deductible amount as may be approved by the city council. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983
Code)
8-7A-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
in any sum not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 365, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
ARTICLE B. GAS PIPING AND APPLIANCES
8-7B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words, terms and phrases are hereby defined and shall have the meanings herein given to them:
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL: A tag issued by the inspector, to be attached to equipment, describing the equipment inspected, stating the address of
premises, date of inspection and permit number.
CONSUMER: Any person using gas, including residential, commercial and industrial users.
GAS: Natural, manufactured or mixed gas suitable for domestic or industrial fuel.
GAS APPLIANCE: Any appliance or device used for burning gas.
GAS COMPANY: Any person or persons holding and exercising a franchise to distribute gas within the corporate limits of the city.
GAS FITTER: Any person who does gas fitting work on any gas system or gas appliance.
GAS FITTING SYSTEM: All gas piping, duct work, appliances accessories installed or used in connection with consumption of gas on consumer's
premises.
GAS FITTING WORK: The installation, alteration, extension, repair or maintenance, from the outlet of the gas meter, of gas piping, venting and
appliances.
GAS INSTALLER: Any person who is licensed and who engages or employs licensed gas fitters, servicemen, and/or apprentices, to install gas equipment
and accessories within the city.
GAS PIPING SYSTEM: All gas piping from the outlet of the gas meter installed or used in connection with consumption of gas on consumer's premises.
INSPECTOR: The gas inspector of the city or his duly authorized representatives.
PERSON: Any person, firm, association, corporation or municipal corporation.
PREMISES: The property of the consumer up to the property line and including any buildings or structures thereon.
USED GAS APPLIANCES: A gas appliance which has been previously sold, installed or used. (Ord. 366, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
8-7B-2: INSTALLATION, CONVERSION, MAINTENANCE, OPERATION, AND SAFETY STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 185/303
(Rep. by Ord. 1121, 11-17-2004)
8-7B-3: PERMITS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, alter, or extend any gas fitting system or part thereof without first obtaining a permit from the inspector;
provided, however, that in case an emergency arises before or after office hours which emergency work requires a permit, such work may be made under
the express condition that a permit shall be obtained before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of the next working day. (Ord. 1274, 7-18-2012)
The application for a permit shall state the work to be done and the address of the premises. No work shall be done other than that designated in said
permit. In the event additional work is to be done, another permit must be obtained. A separate permit shall be required for each street address.
All permits shall terminate ninety (90) days after issuance unless extended by the inspector for good and sufficient cause.
The fees for permits and inspections associated with this chapter shall be set by resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. 883, 4-17-1989)
8-7B-4: INSPECTIONS:
A. Inspection Division: The gas inspection division shall have charge of inspection of all gas appliances and accessories under the provisions of this
article.
B. Duties Of The Inspector, Entry Or Inspection: It shall be the duty of the inspector to cause inspection to be made on all gas appliances, gas piping,
liquefied petroleum gas storage, duct work, venting, wiring, etc., on all appliances installed in a single-family dwelling, and accessories thereto. The
inspector may enter any consumer's premises at any reasonable time upon presentation of proper credentials for the purpose of making inspections or
preventing violations of any of the provisions of this article.
C. Records Of The Inspection Division: The inspector shall keep a record of all inspections made by the inspection division. He shall also keep a record of
all licenses and permits issued under this article. (Ord. 366, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
D. Rough Gas Piping Inspection: Rough gas piping inspection shall be made by the inspector after all piping authorized by a permit has been installed and
before such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixture or gas appliance has been attached thereto. (Ord. 366, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code;
Ord. 883, 4-17-1989)
E. Final Piping Inspection, Pressure Tests: Final inspection of piping shall include pressure tests. After the inspector determines that such piping has been
installed in conformity with this article, he shall advise the gas company and authorize it to grant gas service.
F. Inspection Required If Gas Not Used For Period Of Time: A new permit shall be required for a consumer's premises that has already been piped for gas,
but where no gas has been used for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months or more.
G. Gas Service And Final Inspection: It shall be unlawful for any person to turn gas into any appliance for which gas service has been authorized until the
inspector is notified. This notice shall serve as a request for a final inspection on the appliance, and the inspector shall cause said appliance to be
inspected within a reasonable time. The inspector shall attach a certificate of approval to the appliance when approved on final inspection. (Ord. 366, 8-
12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
8-7B-5: DANGEROUS OR DEFECTIVE WORK OR MATERIAL:
A. Defective Work Or Unapproved Materials: If an inspection indicates that unapproved materials have been used or defective workmanship has been
performed in the installation, alteration, repair or extension of any gas piping, fixture or appliance in or on any consumer's premises, such defective
materials or work shall be replaced by the holder of the permit within three (3) days, and another inspection shall be made.
B. Dangerous Or Defective Piping Or Appliance: The inspector is authorized to cause to be disconnected any gas piping, fixture or appliance which has
been connected before a certificate of approval has been issued or which upon inspection shall be found defective or in such condition as to endanger
life or property. In all cases in which such disconnection is made, a notice shall be affixed thereto by the inspector, stating the reason or reasons
therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove said notice or to reconnect said gas piping, fixture or appliance until authorized by the
inspector. (Ord. 366, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
8-7B-6: DISCONTINUANCE OR REFUSAL OF SERVICE BY GAS COMPANY:
The gas company is authorized to discontinue or refuse to supply gas for any gas piping, fixture or appliance which it may find to be defective or leaking,
or in such condition as to endanger life or property. In such case, the gas company shall immediately give a written notice of discontinuance or refusal of
service to the inspector and the occupant of the consumer's premises, where such gas supply is discontinued or refused. The inspector shall immediately
make an investigation of the conditions reported by the gas company, and it shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect said gas piping, fixture or
appliance until authorized by the inspector. (Ord. 366, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
8-7B-7: INSTALLATION PLANS, APPLIANCES IN EXCESS OF FOUR HUNDRED THOUSAND BTU:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 186/303
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, extend, alter or repair any gas fitting system or appliance having an input rating exceeding four
hundred thousand (400,000) BTU input per hour on any consumer's premises within the city without first filing with the inspector a plan of the proposed
installation, extension, alteration or repair, which plan must be approved by him before commencement of work. (Ord. 366, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
8-7B-8: REPAIRS OR ALTERATIONS:
Repairs or alterations to gas piping or appliances shall be made with such materials and by such methods as are provided for by this article for new work,
except when, in the opinion of the inspector it is impractical to do so. (Ord. 366, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
8-7B-9: RESPONSIBILITY OF GAS INSTALLER:
The gas installer shall have full responsibility of all heating appliances or parts thereof, in accordance with permit issued to him under this article. (Ord.
366, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
8-7B-10: LIABILITY OF CITY:
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the city any liability or responsibility for damages resulting from defective gas piping or appliances or
the installation thereof, nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of
inspections. (Ord. 366, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
8-7B-11: UNLAWFUL APPROVAL:
The issuance of a permit shall not be construed to allow any violation of the provisions of this article. No permit purporting to give authority to violate or
cancel the provisions of this article shall be valid. (Ord. 366, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
8-7B-12: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
in any sum not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. (Ord. 366, 8-12-1963; amd. 1983 Code)
Chapter 8
BUSINESS OCCUPANCY
(Rep. by Ord. 862, 5-16-1988)
Chapter 9
ELECTRICAL CODE
8-9-1: SCOPE OF CODE:
The regulations of this Code shall apply to all electrical wiring and equipment installed within the corporate limits of the City except wiring and equipment
which is used for the generation, control, distribution or communication system of a public utility and which is installed by or for, and owned and maintained
by an electric or communication utility operating under due authority granted by the City. Electrical wiring in railway cars or automotive equipment is
exempt from the requirements of this Code. The requirements of this Section shall be in addition to requirements pursuant to Idaho Code and enforced by
officials designated by the State. (Ord. 783, 7-18-1983)
8-9-2: MINIMUM SAFETY STANDARDS:
Except as herein provided all installations of wires and equipment to convey electric current and apparatus to be operated by such current, made after the
effective date of this Code, shall be in substantial accord with the current edition of the National Electrical Code, as approved by the American Standards
Association, relating to such work so far as the same covers both fire and personal injury hazards, and as the National Electrical Code shall be amended,
revised, compiled and published from time to time and as such amendments or revisions are adopted by the Idaho State Electrical Board. The City shall
maintain three (3) copies of the current National Electrical Code for use and examination by the public, one of which will be on file in the office of the City
Clerk. (Ord. 783, 7-18-1983)
8-9-3: FIRE CHIEF OR AGENT AS ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
For the purposes of this Section, the Fire Chief or his agent is hereby designated the Electrical Inspector. (Ord. 783, 7-18-1983; amd. Ord. 856, 12-21-
1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 187/303
8-9-4: RIGHT OF ACCESS TO BUILDINGS:
The Electrical Inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any public or private buildings or premises in the discharge of his official
duties or for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the electrical wires or appliances contained therein. He shall be given prompt access to any
premises upon notification to the proper authority. (Ord. 783, 7-18-1983; amd. Ord. 856, 12-21-1987)
8-9-5: AUTHORITY TO DISCONTINUE ELECTRICAL OPERATIONS:
The Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical currents to any equipment which he finds to be in an unsafe
condition and cut or discontinue electrical service in case of emergency and when such electrical currents are dangerous to life or property or may
interfere with the work of the Fire Department. No person shall reconnect any equipment thus cut off until written permission is given by the Electrical
Inspector. (Ord. 783, 7-18-1983; amd. Ord. 856, 12-21-1987)
8-9-6: LIABILITY OF CITY:
This Code is not to be construed to relieve from or lessen responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical
wiring or equipment, for damages to person or property caused by any defects therein, nor shall the City be held as assuming any such liability by reason
of the inspection required herein. (Ord. 783, 7-18-1983; amd. Ord. 856, 12-21-1987)
8-9-7: ENERGIZING PERMIT:
A. No person shall energize a new or upgraded existing electric service or set an electric meter for any structure or install construction power to assist in
the construction of a structure until approval has been granted by the Building Inspector of the City.
B. The serving electric utility shall not initiate service until it receives an "energizing permit" that has been approved and issued by the Building Inspector of
the City.
C. The utility company shall be permitted to provide connection or energizing to the use specified after receipt of an "energizing permit" and shall then
validate the "energizing permit" by recording the hook-up date, affixing the utility agent's official signature, and returning such permit to the Building
Inspector of the City.
D. Any person who energizes or provides electric service to a new or upgraded construction or remodeling and refurbishingwhich requires a building
permit without first obtaining the "energizing permit" and having the same validated as hereinabove set forth shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 970, 3-20-1995)
8-9-8: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this Code, or neglect or refuse to comply with any order or notice made by the Electrical Inspector pursuant
to the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 783, 7-18-1983; amd. Ord. 856, 12-21-1987)
Chapter 10
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
8-10-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Title: This chapter, together with the amendments hereto, shall be known as the SANDPOINT OUTDOOR LIGHTING CODE.
B. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the public health, safety, welfare, quality of life, and ability to view the night sky in the
city of Sandpoint by establishing regulations and a process of review for exterior lighting. This chapter establishes standards for exterior lighting in
order to accomplish the following:
1. To protect against direct glare and excessive lighting.
2. To provide safe roadways for motorists, cyclists, and pedestrians.
3. To protect and reclaim the ability to view the night sky and thereby help preserve quality of life.
4. To prevent light trespass in all areas of the city.
5. To promote efficient and cost effective lighting.
6. To ensure that sufficient lighting can be provided where needed to promote safety and security.
7. To allow for flexibility in the style of lighting fixtures.
8. To provide lighting guidelines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 188/303
9. To provide assistance to property owners and occupants in bringing nonconforming lighting into conformance with this chapter.
10. To work with other jurisdictions within Bonner County to enact the goals of this chapter.
C. Scope: All exterior lighting installed in the city of Sandpoint after the effective date hereof is required to comply with this chapter.
1. All existing lighting located on a subject property that is part of an application for a city of Sandpoint site plan review, conditional use permit,
subdivision, or building permit shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of this chapter. Conformity shall occur prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, final inspection, or final plat recordation when applicable. For other permits, the applicant shall have a maximum of thirty
(30) days from the date of permit issue to bring the lighting into conformance.
2. Construction not requiring permits shall also be required to comply with this chapter. Such construction shall include, but not be limited to, parking lot
construction and convenience store remodel/brand change.
3. All existing exterior lighting that is not in compliance with this chapter shall conform within five (5) years of the adoption of this chapter unless a light
trespass exists. Where light trespass exists, lighting shall conform within sixty (60) days of notice from the city. (Ord. 1155, 10-18-2006)
8-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, the words or phrases used in this chapter shall be considered to have the meaning assigned in common usage and
giving this section its most reasonable application.
AREA LIGHT: Light that produces over one thousand eight hundred (1,800) lumens. Area lights include, but are not limited to, streetlights, parking lot
lights, and yard lights.
AVERAGE FOOT-CANDLE: The level of light measured at an average point of illumination between the brightest and darkest areas. The measurement
can be made at the ground surface or at four (4) to five feet (5') above the ground.
BALLAST: A device used with a discharge lamp to obtain the necessary voltage, current, and/or waveform for starting and operating the lamp.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The city of Sandpoint building official.
BULB: The source of electric light (to be distinguished from the whole assembly).
CANDELA (cd): Unit of luminous intensity.
CANOPY: A covering that serves as a roof to shelter an area from the weather.
COMMISSION: The city of Sandpoint planning and zoning commission.
EXISTING LIGHTING: Any and all lighting installed prior to the effective date hereof.
EXTERIOR LIGHTING: Temporary or permanent lighting that is installed, located, or used in such a manner as to cause light rays to shine outside.
Fixtures installed indoors that are intended to light something outside are considered exterior lighting for the intent of this chapter.
FIXTURE: The assembly that holds the lamp in a lighting system. Includes elements designed to give light output control such as a reflector (mirror),
refractor (lens), ballast, housing, and the attachment parts.
FLOODLIGHT: Lighting that produces up to one thousand eight hundred (1,800) lumens and is designed to "flood" a well defined area with light. Generally,
floodlights produce from one thousand (1,000) to one thousand eight hundred (1,800) lumens.
FLUX (RADIANT FLUX): The rate of flow of energy through a given surface. Units are erg/sec or watts.
FOOT-CANDLE: Illuminance produced on a surface one foot (1') from a uniform point source of one candela. Measured with a light meter.
FULL CUTOFF FIXTURES: Fixtures that are designed or shielded (as installed) so that all light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamps or
indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted.
GLARE: Intense light that results in discomfort and/or a reduction in visual performance and visibility.
HOLIDAY LIGHTING: Festoon type lights, limited to small individual bulbs on a string, where the output per bulb is no greater than fifteen (15) lumens.
IESNA: Illuminating Engineering Society of North America; the professional society of lighting engineers.
ILLUMINANCE: The density of luminous flux incident on a surface. Unit is foot-candle or lux.
LAMP: The source of electric light; the bulb and its housing. To be distinguished from the whole assembly.
LIGHT: The form of radiant energy acting on the retina of the eye to make sight possible.
LIGHT POLLUTION: Any adverse effect of manmade light including, but not limited to, light trespass, uplighting, the uncomfortable distraction to the eye,
or any manmade light that diminishes the ability to view the night sky. Often used to indicate urban sky glow.
LIGHT TRESPASS: Light falling where it is not wanted or needed, generally caused by a light on a property that shines onto theproperty of others.
LIGHTING: Any or all parts of a luminaire that function to produce light.
LUMEN: Unit of luminous flux; the flux emitted within a unit solid angle by a point source with a uniform luminous intensity of one candela. One foot-candle
is one lumen per square foot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 189/303
LUMINAIRE: The complete lighting unit, including the lamp, the fixture, and other parts.
LUMINANCE: At a point and in a given direction, the luminous intensity in the given direction produced by an element of the surface surrounding the point
divided by the area of projection of the element on a plane perpendicular to the given direction. Units: Candelas per unit area. The luminance is the
perceived brightness that we see, the visual effect of the luminance, reflected, emitted, or transmitted from the surface.
NINETY DEGREE (90°) FULL CUTOFF TYPE FIXTURES: Fixtures that do not allow light to escape above a ninety degree (90°) angle as measured from
a vertical line beginning at the center of the lamp and extending to the ground.
NONESSENTIAL: Lighting that is not necessary for an intended purpose after the purpose has been served. Does not include any lighting used for safety
and/or public circulation purposes. Example: For purposes of this chapter, lighting for a business sign is considered essential during business hours,
however, is considered nonessential once the business is closed.
PARTIALLY SHIELDED: The bulb of the fixture is shielded by a translucent siding and the bulb is not visible at all. Light may be emitted at the horizontal
level of the bulb.
PLANNING ADMINISTRATOR: The city of Sandpoint planning director or a designated member of the city of Sandpoint planning department staff.
RECESSED: When a light is built into a structure or portion of a structure such that the light is fully cut off and no part of the light extends or protrudes
beyond the underside of a structure or portion of a structure.
SHIELDED: When the light emitted from the fixture is projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point of the fixture where light is
emitted. The bulb is not visible with a shielded light fixture, and no light is emitted from the sides of the fixture. Also considered a full cutoff fixture.
TEMPORARY LIGHTING: Lighting that is intended to be used for a special event for seven (7) days or less.
UPLIGHTING: Lighting that is directed in such a manner as to shine light rays above the horizontal plane. (Ord. 1155,10-18-2006)
8-10-3: CRITERIA:
The building official and/or the planning administrator shall have the authority to require new lighting and existing lighting pursuant to subsection 8-10-1C1
of this chapter, to meet the recommendations, guidelines, and requirements of this chapter.
A. Applications To Include Lighting Plans: All applications for design review, conditional use, subdivision, and/or building permit shall include lighting plans
showing location, type, height, and lumen output of all proposed and existing exterior lighting fixtures. The applicant shall provide enough information to
verify that lighting conforms to the provisions of this chapter. The planning administrator, commission, and/or building official shall have the authority to
request additional information in order to achieve the purposes of this chapter.
B. Exceptions To Exterior Lighting Criteria: All exterior lighting shall be full cutoff fixtures with the light source fully shielded, with the following exceptions:
1. Luminaries that have a maximum output of two hundred sixty (260) lumens per fixture (equal to one 20-watt incandescent light), regardless of
number of bulbs, may be left unshielded provided the fixture has an opaque top to keep light from shining directly up.
2. Luminaries that have a maximum output of six hundred forty (640) lumens per fixture (equal to one 60-watt incandescent light), regardless of number
of bulbs, may be partially shielded, provided the bulb is not visible from other properties, and the fixture has an opaque top to keep light from shining
directly up.
3. Floodlights with external shielding may be angled provided that no light escapes above a twenty five degree (25°) angle measured from the vertical
line from one center of the light extended to the ground, and only if the light does not cause glare or light to shine on adjacent property or public
rights of way. Floodlights with directional shielding are encouraged. Photocells with timers that allow a floodlight to go on at dusk and off by eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. are also encouraged.
4. Holiday lights as defined in section 8-10-2 of this chapter are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
5. Sensor activated lighting may be unshielded provided it is located in such a manner as to prevent direct glare and lighting onto properties of others
or onto public rights of way, and provided the light is set to only go on when activated and to go off within five (5) minutes after activation has ceased,
and the light shall not be triggered by activity off the property.
6. Vehicular lights and all temporary emergency lighting neededby the fire and police departments and other emergency services shall be exempt from
the requirements of this chapter.
C. Light Trespass: It is the intent of this chapter to eliminate and prevent light trespass through the proper installation of lighting fixtures. All existing and/or
new exterior lighting shall not cause light trespass and shall be installed or altered to protect adjacent properties from glare and excessive lighting.
D. IESNA Guidelines: All new lighting or existing lighting shall meet the standards for foot-candle lighting as established by the IESNA.
E. Lights Turned Off: All nonessential exterior commercial and residential lighting is encouraged to be turned off after business hours and/or when not in
use. Lights on a timer are encouraged. Sensor activated lights are encouraged for security purposes.
F. Area Lights: All area lights, including streetlights and parking area lighting, shall be full cutoff fixtures and are encouraged to be ninety degree (90°) full
cutoff type fixtures. Streetlights shall be in accordance with Avista and Northern Lights franchise agreements and/or with a light conformance schedule
adopted by resolution of the city council. Streetlights shall be high pressure sodium or metal halide, unless otherwise determined by the council that
another type is more efficient. Streetlights along residential streets shall be limited to a one hundred (100) watt high pressure sodium (hps) light.
Streetlights along nonresidential streets or at intersections shall be limited to two hundred (200) watts hps, except that lights at major intersections on
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 190/303
state highways shall be limited to two hundred fifty (250) or three hundred twenty (320) watts hps (as per state design). If the city permits a light type
other than high pressure sodium, then the equivalent output shall be the limit for the other light type, for example, a two hundred (200) watt high
pressure sodium lamp or a two hundred (200) watt metal halide lamp. Parking area lights are encouraged to be greater in number, lower in height, and
lower in light level as opposed to fewer in number, higher in height and higher in light level. Parking lot lighting shall not exceed IESNA recommended
foot-candle levels. All freestanding area lights within a residential zone, except streetlights, shall be mounted at a height equal to or less than the value
of 3 = (D/3), where D is the distance in feet to the nearest property boundary.
G. Luminaire Mounting Height: Freestanding luminaries shall be no higher than twenty feet (20') above the stand/pole base, except that luminaries used
for playing fields shall be exempt from the height restriction provided all other provisions of this chapter are met and the light is used only while the field
is in use, and except that streetlights used on major roads may exceed this standard if necessary as determined by the city engineer. Building mounted
luminaries shall be attached only to walls, and the top of the fixture shall not exceed the height of the parapet or roof, whichever is greater.
H. Uplighting: Uplighting is prohibited in all zoning districts, except in cases where the fixture is shielded by a roof overhang or similar structural shield from
the sky and an Idaho licensed architect or engineer has stamped a prepared lighting plan that ensures that the light fixture(s) will not cause light to
extend beyond the structural shield, and except as specifically permitted in this chapter.
I. Service Stations: The average foot-candle lighting level for new and existing service stations is required to be no greater than thirty (30) foot-candles as
set by the IESNA for urban service stations.
J. Canopy Lights: Such as service station lighting, shall be recessed sufficiently so as to ensure that no light source is visible from or causes glare on
public rights of way or adjacent property.
K. Landscape Lighting: Lighting of vegetation is discouraged and shall be in conformance with this chapter.
L. Towers: All radio communication and navigation towers including airport and hangars which require lights shall conform to federal regulations, and if in
any conflict with this chapter, the federal regulation shall preempt this chapter.
M. Temporary Lighting: Temporary lighting that is nonconforming will be permitted only if the public safety and welfare will benefit as a result of the
temporary lighting. (Ord. 1155, 10-18-2006)
8-10-4: NOTIFICATION:
A. The city of Sandpoint permit process shall include a statement asking whether the subject property of the proposed work includes any exterior lighting.
B. Within thirty (30) days of the enactment of this chapter, the planning department shall send a summary of this chapter to all local electricians, local
electric suppliers and sign companies listed in the local 2006 and 2007 telephone books, as well as to the Sandpoint chamber of commerce. (Ord.
1155, 10-18-2006)
8-10-5: CITY'S ROLE:
A. The city of Sandpoint shall commit to changing all lighting including streetlights within the city rights of way and on city owned property to meet the
requirements of this chapter within ten (10) years of the enactment of this chapter.
B. The city of Sandpoint may assist property owners and/or occupants to correct any nonconforming lighting through consulting with city planning or public
works staff or a designee. (Ord. 1155, 10-18-2006)
8-10-6: VIOLATIONS, LEGAL ACTIONS, AND PENALTIES:
A. Violations And Legal Actions: If, after investigation, the building official finds that any provision of this chapter is being violated, the building official shall
give notice of violation to the owner, occupant, lessee, contractor or other representative of such premises. This notice shall identify the violation,
location of the violation and date by which the violation must be abated, generally between ten (10) and sixty (60) days of the date of hand delivery or
mailing. The abatement violation can be by hand delivery or by mail, properly addressed and deposited in the United States mail. The city staff, if
available, may assist in working with the violator to correct said violation. If the violation is not abated within the specified time, the city may institute
actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, to enjoin, retain, or abate any violations of this chapter and to collect the penalties for such
violations.
B. Penalty: Any person, including an owner, occupant, lessee, contractor or other representative, who, after being given notice as set forth in subsection A
of this section, fails to correct the violation as required by the notice of violation abatement shall be guilty of an infraction. Thereafter, an infraction
citation or complaint may be filed in the magistrate division of the district court. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues after the abatement deadline. The penalty for such an infraction shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) or the
maximum allowed under Idaho Code 18-113A (infraction penalty) for each violation. (Ord. 1155, 10-18-2006)
Title 9
ZONING
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 191/303
Chapter 1
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
9-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and designated as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SANDPOINT, IDAHO. (Ord. 180, 2-5-1941)
9-1-2: PURPOSE:
The mayor and city council have determined, and do hereby determine, that for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the citizens of Sandpoint; to lessen congestion in the streets thereof; to better secure its citizens from the dangers of conflagration, panic and other
dangers; to provide adequate light and air for its inhabitants; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate
and make adequate for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; to encourage the most appropriate use of land in
the city; to make adequate provision for the future construction and repair of buildings in the city; and to provide safety measures for traffic on its streets by
limiting the distance from street lines of buildings hereafter constructed, it is to the best interests of the city, its property owners, and all persons concerned
to provide a zoning ordinance and to carry out the powers delegated to the city under the provisions of the Idaho Code1. (Ord. 180, 2-5-1941)
9-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
Words not defined herein shall be given the meanings ordinarily applied to such words. The word "structure" shall include the word "building", and the
word "lot" shall include the word "plot".
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: A subordinate building or use, which is located on the same parcel on which the main building or use is situated and
which is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such building or to the main use.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU): A habitable living unit added to, created within, or detached from a single-family dwelling that provides basic
requirements for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
ACREAGE: Any tract or parcel of land which has not been subdivided or platted.
AIRPORT: The Sandpoint Airport property, including all land covered by the Sandpoint Airport master plan.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet from sea level. The elevation of the Sandpoint Airport is two
thousand one hundred twenty seven feet (2,127') above mean sea level.
ALLEY: A street or way shown on the official plat of the city or its additions and designated thereon as an alley.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a housekeeping unit for
a single family.
AUTO WRECKING OR JUNKYARD: Any place where two (2) or more motor vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and
are not being restored to operation; any land, building or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof and including any
farm vehicles or farm machinery or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition; and including the commercial salvaging
and scavenging of any other goods, articles or merchandise.
AUTOMOBILE: A passenger vehicle.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR: General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and
repair; overall painting of motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: An establishment where automotive fuels and lubricants, accessories and services are sold at retail; however, where
the sale of such is only incidental, the establishment or premises shall be classified as a public garage.
BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground. Where more than one-half (1/2) of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground, a
basement shall be counted as a story for purpose of height measurement.
BED AND BREAKFAST: An owner occupied dwelling where rooms are available for transient lodging and where a morning meal is provided.
BILLBOARD: Any structure or portion thereof upon which are placed signs or advertisements used as an outdoor display. This definition does not include
any bulletin boards used to display official court or public office notices, or a sign advertising the sale or lease of the premises on which the sign is located.
BOARDING, LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE: A building where lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation for not fewer than four (4)
nor more than twelve (12) persons in addition to members of the family occupying such building.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, and designed or intended for the shelter, support, enclosure or protection of
persons, animals or chattels.
BUILDING AREA: The buildable area of a lot is the space remaining after adherence to the minimum open space requirements of this chapter.
BUILDING FOOTPRINT: The horizontal area, measured from the outside of all exterior walls and supporting columns. It includes all attached and covered
components of a structure including residences, garages, covered carports, and covered patios, decks and porches.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distances measured from the sidewalk level or its equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof. Where buildings are set back from the street line, the height of the building may be measured from the average
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 192/303
elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building.
BUILDING LINE: For the purpose of this title, the building line is the same as a front yard setback line.
CARPORT: A structure attached or made a part of the main structure which is open to the weather on at least two (2) sides, intended for the use of
sheltering not more than two (2) motor driven vehicles.
CHURCH: A nonprofit organization, that is or would be recognized by the internal revenue service as such, which uses buildings, structures, or land for the
teaching or practice of religious doctrine or related social functions.
COMMISSION: For the purposes of this title, "commission" shall mean the planning and zoning commission.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: An official document pursuant to Idaho Code 67-6508 that includes land within the jurisdiction of the governing board which
considers previous and existing conditions, trends, desirable goals and objectives, or desirable future situations for each planning component. The plan
with maps, charts, and reports shall be based on the following components unless the plan specifies reasons why a particular component is unneeded:
population; economic development; land use; natural resource; hazardous areas; public services, facilities and utilities; transportation; recreation; special
areas or sites; housing; community design and implementation.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use listed in a particular zone which is compatible with its surrounding area and permitted if approved by the planning commission
or by a hearing body.
CONDOMINIUM: A multiple-family dwelling, duplex, or single unit, in which the dwelling units are individually owned, with each owner having a recordable
deed enabling the unit to be sold, mortgaged, or exchanged independently.
COURT: An open unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building and bounded on two (2) or more sides by such building.
CURB GRADE: The established elevation of the curb measured at the center of the front of a building. Where no curb grade has been established, the city
shall establish such curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this chapter.
DANCE HALL: A large room used mainly for dancing. (Synonyms: ballroom, dance palace.)
DAYCARE CENTER: A place or facility providing daycare for compensation for thirteen (13) or more children.
DISTRICT: A section or sections of the incorporated area of the city for which the regulations and provisions governing the use of buildings and land are
uniform for each class of use permitted therein.
DUPLEX: A two-family dwelling where neither unit contains less than twenty five percent (25%) of the total habitable floor area of the structure.
DWELLING, APARTMENT OR MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently
of each other.
DWELLING, DUPLEX OR TWO-FAMILY: A building, including modular housing, containing two (2) dwelling units with a common wall.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: An individually owned single-family attached dwelling, such as a townhouse.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY OR ONE-FAMILY: A detached building, other than a mobile home or modular home, containing one dwelling unit and not
including timeshare ownership of that dwelling unit.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed for occupancy by one family for living purposes and having only one cooking facility, but not including
motel units.
FACADE: The entire area of a building facing or side extending from the roof or parapet to the ground and from one corner of the building to another but
does not include any structural or nonstructural elements which extend beyond the roof of a building.
FAMILIAL STATUS: One or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years) being domiciled with:
A. A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or
B. The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person.
The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of
securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years.
FAMILY: A single individual or two (2) or more persons living together as one housekeeping unit using one kitchen.
FAMILY DAYCARE HOME: A home, place or facility providing daycare for six (6) or fewer children.
FRONTAGE: All property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets, or natural barriers.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building for the storage of not more than three (3) motor driven vehicles of which not more than one shall be a
commercial vehicle of not more than two (2) tons' capacity.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building other than a private garage used for the care, repair of equipment or automobiles, or for vehicles parked or stored for
remuneration, hire or sale.
GATED COMMUNITY: A residential neighborhood where accessibility is controlled by means of a gate, guard, barrier or other similar improvement within
or across a privately maintained right of way.
GROUP DAYCARE FACILITY: A home, place, or facility providing daycare for seven (7) to twelve (12) children.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 193/303
GUESTHOUSE: A structure for human habitation, containing one or more rooms with bath and toilet facilities, but not including a kitchen or facilities which
would provide a complete housekeeping unit.
HARD SURFACING: A surface constructed of asphalt, concrete, polymer blocks or other like substance recognized in the industry as providing a
pavement like surface which like substance is approved by the city engineer or public works director.
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION: An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable
airspace.
HEIGHT: See definition of Building Height.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation, profession or business activity including family daycare (6 or fewer children), where the primary location of business
and/or the official business address is at the home which results in a product or service for gain, is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the
premises as a dwelling unit and does not change the character thereof. Examples of permissible uses include tutoring and music lessons that occur one
on one or similar types of uses.
HOSPITAL, SANATORIUM, HOSPICE: An institution open to the public, in which sick patients or injured persons are given medical or surgical care; or for
the care of contagious diseases or terminally ill patients.
HOTEL: A building designed for occupancy as the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without meals, in which there
are six (6) or more guestrooms, and in which no provisions are made for cooking in any individual room or suite.
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public or semipublic use.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs, at least four (4) months of age, are kept.
LABORATORY: A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing. Manufacturing of a product or products is not to be permitted within
this definition.
LOADING SPACE: An off street space or area on the same lot with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials and which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
LOT: A parcel or plot of land occupied or suitable for occupancy by one main building or use, with accessory buildings, including the open spaces required
by this title, and having its principal frontage upon a public street or highway.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a public street; and for a corner lot the front shall be the shorter lot boundary along
a street.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT OF RECORD, SUBSTANDARD ORIGINAL: Any legally created individual nonconforming lot or parcel that does not meet the minimum lot width or
area requirements of the district in which it is located. Such lot or parcel may be utilized for those uses permitted within its zoning district if all other
requirements of this title are met. For the purpose of this definition, residentially zoned lots or parcels must have been created prior to March 10, 1980, and
industrially zoned lots or parcels must have been created prior to April 20, 2011, or they must have existed prior to their annexation into the city of
Sandpoint, whichever occurred first. Residential development of substandard original lots of record is subject to section 9-4-6 of this title.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot the rear of which abuts upon the side of another lot whether across an alley or not.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines.
MOBILE HOME: A vehicle or structure constructed for movement on the public highways, that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, is intended for
human occupancy and is being used for residential purposes.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more occupied mobile homes are located.
MOBILE HOME SPACE: A plot of ground within a mobile home park designated for the accommodation of one mobile home.
MODULAR HOUSING: A dwelling unit manufactured off site, built to be used for permanent residential occupancy, to be set on a permanent foundation
and conforming to the applicable building code.
MOTEL: A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units where a majority of such units open individually and
directly to the outside, and where a garage is attached or a parking space is conveniently located to each unit, all for the use by automobile tourists or
transients, and such words include motor lodges, motor inns, and similar terms.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any building, structure or land lawfully occupied by a use or lawfully situated which does not conform to the regulations of this
title.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or
planned.
NURSING HOME OR REST HOME: A private hospital for the care of children, the aged or infirm or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but
not including facilities for the treatment of sickness or injuries or for surgical care.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE: An open area for the parking of privately owned automobiles and not for public use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 194/303
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: An open area, other than street, used for the temporary parking of more than four (4) automobiles and available for public use
whether free, for compensation or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE: An area, enclosed or unenclosed, which has adequate access to a public street or alley, sufficient in size to store one automobile.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or governmental entity; includes a trustee, a receiver,
an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: An area of land pursuant to Idaho Code 67-6515 in which a variety of residential, commercial, industrial and other land
uses are provided for under single ownership or control.
PORCH: A roofed entrance to a building, projecting out from the wall or walls of the main structure and commonly open in part to the weather.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY APPROACH ZONE: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is
one thousand feet (1,000') wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of sixteen thousand feet (16,000') at a horizontal distance of
fifty thousand feet (50,000') from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
PRESCHOOL: An institution primarily engaged in child training and academic instruction prior to the mandatory first grade.
PRIMARY SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface
extends two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has not specially prepared hard surface, or
planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in the airport overlay zone district.
The elevation on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
RUNWAY: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.
SCHOOL: An institution primarily engaged in academic instruction, public, parochial or private and recognized or approved by the state.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the lateral lines of the roadway and the adjacent property lines set apart for use by pedestrians.
SITE PLAN REVIEW: The process whereby the planning department shall review the site plans, maps and other studies to assist in determining the
manner in which the applicant intends to make use of his property to assure that they meet the stated purposes and standards of the zoning district and
provide for the necessary public facilities associated with the development.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or if there be no floor above it, then
the space between such floor and the ceiling next above.
STREET: The entire width between the right of way lines of every way for vehicular and pedestrian traffic and includes the terms "road", "highway", "lane",
"place", "avenue", and "alley", and other similar designations.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls,
columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some finite manner.
TERRACE, OPEN: A level and rather narrow plain or platform which, for purposes of this title, is located adjacent to one or more faces of the main
structure and which is constructed not more than four feet (4') in height above the average level of the adjoining ground.
TIMESHARE CONDOMINIUM: A condominium in which units are individually owned by a family or group of persons for a variable amount of time during
the year, and in which part or all of the units may be available to transients for rent or on an exchange basis. For the purposes of this title, timeshare
condominium or unit shall be considered a motel.
TOURIST HOME: A residence, including a single-family unit or a multi-family unit, which is rented for the purpose of overnight lodging for a period of not
less than two (2) days and not more than thirty (30) days. Rentals must be for a period of two (2) or more days and only one rental during a five (5) day
period is permitted. Rentals for less than two (2) days shall be considered a motel or bed and breakfast use and regulated accordingly. Tourist homes are
also commonly referred to as vacation homes or vacation rentals.
TOWNHOUSE: An attached dwelling, designed for residence by a single family or household, that shares a party or common wall and occasionally a
single roof with at least one other similar residence. Townhouses and the land they rest upon are usually individually owned with a proportional interest in
the common areas of the development.
TRAILER: A vehicle without motive power used for human habitation, including a trailer coach or house trailer designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle.
TRAILER PARK, MOBILE HOME PARK, TRAILER COURT: Any premises occupied or designed to accommodate more than one mobile home or trailer.
USE: The purpose for which land or a building is intended, designed, arranged or maintained.
VACATION HOME RENTAL OCCUPANCY: The use of a dwelling unit by any person or group of persons who occupies or is entitled to occupy a dwelling
unit for remuneration for a period of time less than thirty (30) days but at least two (2) days, counting portions of days as full days. "Remuneration" means
compensation, money, rent or other bargained for consideration given in return for occupancy, possession or use of real property. Home exchanges where
money is not transferred shall be excluded from this definition.
VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures.
YARD: An open space unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, on the same lot with a main building, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of the building.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 195/303
YARD, SIDE: That part of the yard lying between the main building and a side lot line, and extending from the required front yard (or from the front lot line,
if there is no required front yard) to the required rear yard. (Ord. 1084, 6-2-2003; amd. Ord. 1091, 8-20-2003; Ord. 1127, 2-16-2005; Ord. 1135, 7-20-2005;
Ord. 1152, 7-19-2006; Ord. 1178, 8-15-2007; Ord. 1196, 11-19-2008; Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011; Ord. 1281, 5-15-2013; Ord. 1336, 11-2-2016)
9-1-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Boundary Lines: All streets, alleys and railroad rights of way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the
property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets or railroad rights of way. Where the centerline of a street or alley serves as a district boundary,
the zoning of such street or alley to the centerline, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting
property.
B. Permitted Uses: No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be
used for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which the building or land is located.
No building or structure other than a building for conditional use shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered except in
conformity with the area regulations of the zone in which the building is located.
C. Site Plan Review: All improvements requiring a building permit shall be subject to a site plan review except:
1. Residential dwellings of less than four (4) units on a conforming lot (substandard lots require a site plan review); and
2. Expansion of a commercial or industrial building which increases building size by less than two thousand (2,000) square feet where the finished
structure will be permitted outright. This exemption does not apply to subsequent expansions.
Where a proposed development includes four (4) or more dwelling units, the site plan review shall include notice of the development to adjoining
landowners. The notice shall provide at least fifteen (15) days for comments on the application.
D. Appeal: Any interested party may appeal to the planning commission from a site plan review or design review determination. An appeal shall be
submitted in writing within fifteen (15) days after the determination and shall list each issue for appeal with specificity. The planning commission shall
only consider issues properly appealed and shall exclude issues which are subject to a different appellate procedure, e.g., the local land use planning
act, or which are not eligible for modification or waiver, such as items contained in a development agreement. A requirement shall not be waived unless
by an express finding as follows:
1. That the granting of the waiver shall not negatively impact the existing neighborhood and shall enhance the overall design quality of the project;
2. That there is an exceptional circumstance relating to the design or configuration of the property, which is not generally applicable to other properties
or otherwise anticipated by the standards in the district;
3. The granting of such relief will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property, improvements or the
quiet enjoyment of the surrounding properties and neighborhood; and
4. The waiver does not conflict with the intent of the comprehensive plan.
Nothing in this provision shall preclude the planning director from referring issues regarding a proposal to the planning commission for the benefit of
its advice.
E. Open Space: The minimum yards or other open spaces, including lot areas per family required by this title for each and every building existing or for
any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as yard or open space requirements for any other building.
F. One Building Per Lot: Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to provide dwelling units shall be located on a "lot" as herein defined and in
no case shall there be more than one such building on one lot unless otherwise provided in this title.
G. Public Access: No building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot or parcel of land which does not abut upon a public street or have permanent
easement for access to a public street, which easement shall have a minimum width of twenty five feet (25') unless an easement of lesser width was on
record prior to the effective date hereof. The public works director may require additional easement to provide for pedestrian access.
H. Construction Started Prior To Effective Date Hereof: Nothing in this title shall be deemed to require any change in the plans, construction or designated
use of any building upon which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date hereof and upon which building actual construction has
been diligently carried on; and, provided further, that such building shall be completed within one year.
I. Annexation: Any area annexed to the city shall, upon such annexation, be automatically classified "unzoned" until otherwise zoned. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-
2011)
J. Visibility: No wall, fence or shrubbery shall unreasonably obstruct or interfere with traffic visibility. A fence or wall shall be placed no closer than one foot
(1') to the current or future sidewalk location. Earth mounding or any other similar method shall not be used to raise fence height, unless the fence is
adjacent to an arterial, state highway, or industrial or commercial property.
1. On all nonindustrial zoned lots:
a. In the required front yard setback, fences and walls shall be allowed to a maximum height of four feet (4').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 196/303
b. In side and rear yards, fences and walls shall be allowed to a maximum height of seven feet (7').
c. Within residential zones, fences over four feet (4') shall not be allowed in front of the primary facade, regardless of setback.
2. On nonindustrial zoned corner lots:
a. In the required front yard setback, fences and walls shall be allowed to a maximum height of four feet (4').
b. On street facing side yards, fences and walls shall be limited to maximum height of four feet (4') for a depth of not less than twenty feet (20').
Fences beyond the required front yard depth shall maintain the one foot (1') setback, but shall be allowed to the seven foot (7') maximum rear yard
height.
c. Clear vision triangle shall be maintained.
3. On double frontage lots:
a. In cases where a lot extends the full depth of a block between two (2) parallel streets, fences shall maintain the one foot (1') setback along the
street bordering the rear yard but may be allowed to the rear yard height of seven feet (7'). (Ord. 1336, 11-2-2016)
9-1-5: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, REGULATIONS:
Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this title, shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. Where an accessory building is structurally attached to a main building it shall be subject, and must conform to all regulations of this title applicable to
the main building.
B. An accessory building may not be located nearer than five feet (5') to any interior lot line and not nearer than five feet (5') to the rear lot line.
C. No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet (10') to any main building.
D. An accessory building shall not be erected prior to the establishment or construction of the principal use of a building. (1958 Code)
E. In an alley where forty percent (40%) of the properties on a block have constructed accessory buildings on the rear property line, an accessory building
may be constructed on the rear property line upon written approval of the zoning enforcement officer. Where forty percent (40%) of the properties on a
block have constructed accessory buildings nearer than five feet (5') to the side property line, an accessory building may be constructed within
eighteen inches (18") of the interior property line if the adjoining wall has a one hour fire rating and written consent of the adjoining property owner is
filed with the building permit. An accessory building may be constructed on the interior property if in addition to the above, an easement is granted and
recorded allowing access to the wall on the property line for maintenance. (Ord. 734, 9-15-1980; amd. 1983 Code)
F. Nothing in this title shall be construed as prohibiting or interfering with any retail business or other business operated and established within the
boundaries of the foregoing residence zones at the time of the taking effect hereof. (Ord. 627, 7-10-1978)
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved any building or structure into any residence zone, if the construction of such building
or structure within such zone would be prohibited.
H. No commercial trade or occupation shall be conducted, nor shall any structure be used for commercial purposes within any residence zone, except as
is permitted by this provision and the provisions governing the residence zones. (1958 Code)
I. No house trailer or recreational vehicle shall be used for human habitation on any parcel in any zone. (Ord. 1336, 11-2-2016)
9-1-6: CONTINUANCE OF EXISTING USES:
Nothing herein shall prevent the continuance of the present occupancy or lawful use of any existing building, except as may be necessary for the safety of
life and property and except as provided in chapter 7 of this title. (1958 Code)
9-1-7: ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS:
The City Council hereby declares that it is the intention that this title does not repeal any existing laws in regard to fire limits, sanitation or otherwise. (1958
Code)
9-1-8: ACCESSORY DWELLING REGULATIONS:
A. Purpose And Intent: This provision provides standards for accessory dwelling units to detached single-family dwellings. These standards are intended
to encourage diversity in housing types and provide for smaller, more diverse, and often more affordable housing choices that are compatible with
existing neighborhoods.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 197/303
B. Requirements For All Accessory Dwelling Units: All accessory dwelling units must meet the following requirements when they are the result of
converting existing living area, attic, basement, or garage; adding floor area; constructing a detached accessory dwelling unit on a site with an existing
primary dwelling unit, attached primary dwelling unit, or manufactured home; or constructing a new primary dwelling unit, attached primary dwelling
unit, or manufactured home with an internal or detached accessory dwelling unit:
1. Maximum Allowed: Maximum of one accessory dwelling unit, either detached or attached, is allowed per parcel.
2. Conversion Of Primary Dwelling Structure: In cases where an existing primary dwelling structure is to be converted to a secondary dwelling unit or
partially converted to create a secondary dwelling unit within the structure, the area designated for the secondary dwelling unit must be brought up to
current Structural, Electrical and Plumbing Codes, subject to the review and approval of the building official.
3. Location Of Entrances: Only one entrance may be located on the facade of the primary dwelling unit, attached primary dwelling unit, or
manufactured home facing the street, unless the primary dwelling unit, attached primary dwelling unit, or manufactured home contained additional
entrances before the accessory dwelling unit was created. An exception to this regulation would be entrances that do not have access from the
ground such as entrances from balconies or decks.
4. Parking: Parking for the main residential structure must meet the requirements of chapter 5 of this title.
5. Maximum Size: The size of any accessory dwelling unit attached or detached may be no more than six hundred fifty (650) square feet and may
include only one bedroom. Internal stairs leading to an accessory dwelling unit will be counted as half the total square footage of the stairway
enclosure and count as part of the total six hundred fifty (650) square feet.
C. Creation Of Accessory Dwelling Units Through Addition Of Floor Area: Accessory dwelling units created through the addition of floor area to the primary
dwelling unit must meet the following requirements:
1. Exterior Finish Materials: The exterior finish material must be the same or visually match the type, size, and placement of the exterior finish material
of the primary dwelling unit, attached primary dwelling unit or manufactured home.
D. Detached Accessory Dwelling Units: Detached accessory dwelling units must meet the following requirements:
1. Setbacks: Detached accessory dwelling units above a permitted garage will be calculated based on the setbacks for detached garages. In all other
cases, the accessory dwelling unit must be at least:
a. Fifty feet (50') from the front lot line; or
b. Six feet (6') behind the primary dwelling unit, attached primary dwelling unit or manufactured home.
c. All newly created detached accessory dwelling units must meet a minimum of ten feet (10') side and rear setbacks. Property that abuts an alley
may have a rear setback of five feet (5').
2. Height: In the Single Family RS Zone, total height of the accessory dwelling unit shall be no more than twenty six feet (26').
E. Illegal Accessory Dwelling Units: That portion of a single-family residence which meets the definition of accessory dwelling unit which was in existence
prior to November 19, 2008, may continue in existence, provided the following requirements are met:
1. The unit complies with the minimum requirements of the International Building Code.
2. Owners of illegal units who apply for a permit may also be given some leeway on minor violations of ADU size, lot size, setback, parking, and other
requirements where full compliance would be impractical. (Ord. 1346, 8-16-2017)
Chapter 2
COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
9-2-1: COMMERCIAL A, B AND C ZONES:
9-2-1-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of these zones is to foster and strengthen economic vitality in Sandpoint's commercial areas while respecting and enhancing the special
character of the existing development in the downtown core area. The downtown is a compact assembly of storefront buildings, short walkable blocks,
mixed uses, pedestrian amenities, and consolidated on and off street parking. The community's commercial character is especially vulnerable to intrusion
from incompatible uses and physical development practices which are inconsistent with the historical fabric. The purpose of these zones is to establish
requirements for building and site design for new development and for the significant modification of existing developments within the commercial areas.
The city's downtown, designated as commercial A is so important and significant to the city, that it justifies a special set of regulations designed to protect
and enhance its character in light of new development. Considerable opportunity for new infill development adjacent to existing neighborhoods lies north of
this area and is designated as the commercial B zone. The commercial C zone represents a lower intensity commercial area serving adjacent
neighborhoods and residents and preserving the scale of the built environment by restricting height limits. The following principles serve as the foundation
for the commercial A, B and C zones:
A. Efficient use of land and services.
B. A mix of land uses which strengthen opportunities for economic vitality and support pedestrian activity as well as housing opportunities.
C. Provide for community gathering places and pedestrian/visitor amenities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 198/303
D. Establish a distinct storefront character associated with the downtown core area.
E. Provide transitions to adjacent neighborhoods and commercial areas.
F. Maintain and enhance the area's character through design guidelines.
G. Encourage residential development above ground floor.
H. Encourage structured parking in commercial areas.
The commercial zones herein defined, upon their adoption per this chapter, are enforceable and implemented as a set of land use regulations. In this
context, all land use applications for property within the commercial zones are required by this chapter to comply with the provisions of these
commercial zones. (Ord. 1236, 6-23-2010)
9-2-1-2: ZONE AS REGULATION:
The commercial A, B and C zones, as adopted by reference, contain recommended policies and development guidelines that are hereby made mandatory
by adopting them in this chapter. The commercial A, B and C zones, unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, shall be considered as
carrying the weight of law and shall be enforced and abided by as a municipal land use regulation. (Ord. 1236, 6-23-2010)
9-2-1-3: USE LIMITATIONS:
Within the commercial A, B and C zone boundaries, those uses that help facilitate efficient land use and create a unique, dynamic pedestrian oriented
center are encouraged. Such uses generally include retail, services, civic uses, restaurants and dining establishments, professional offices, passive open
spaces, and residences. To further strengthen and encourage development modeling these principles, the city maintains suggested design guidelines for
commercial A, B, and C zones.
A. Permitted Uses: The land uses listed in table 1 of this section are permitted in the commercial A, B and C zone areas as identified and subject to the
provisions of this chapter. Certain land uses have additional restrictions as specified in notes to table 1 of this section.
B. Determination Of Similar Land Uses: Uses that are similar in nature to one or more permitted uses, as determined by the planning director after
consulting the current edition of "The North American Industry Classification System" code, may be permitted within the boundary of the commercial A,
B and C zones.
TABLE 1
USES PERMITTED IN THE COMMERCIAL ZONES
Commercial
A
Commercial
B
Commercial
C
Commercial:
Art and craft galleries Yes Yes Yes
Banks and financial institutions Restricted4 Restricted4 Restricted4
Commercial storage Restricted3 Restricted3 Restricted3
Daycare Yes Yes Yes
Entertainment facilities (theaters, clubs, movies) Restricted5 Restricted5 Restricted5
Hotels, hostels and lodges, and motels Yes Yes Yes
Laundromats and dry cleaners (no dry cleaning using perchloroethylene solvent permitted) Yes Yes Yes
Manufacturing ancillary to a storefront retail sales and services outlet (see section 9-2-1-9 of this
chapter for limitations)
Yes Yes Yes
Medical and dental services including hospitals, clinics and associated laboratories, pharmacies,
optometrists, veterinarians and similar medical uses
Restricted4 Restricted4 Restricted4
Offices Yes Yes Yes
Personal and professional services (e.g., hair salons, day spas, barbershops, tailors, shoe repair,
nail salon, tanning salon, watch and jewelry repair, package wrapping/copying/sending services,
and similar uses)
Yes Yes Yes
Restaurants, catering, taverns, prepared food services for on site consumption, retail bakeries,
candy/ice cream shops (food production allowed in conjunction with retail)
Restricted4 Restricted4 Restricted4
Retail trade and services Restricted4,5
Restricted4,5
Restricted4,5
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 199/303
Vehicle, agricultural and industrial equipment sales Restricted2,7
Restricted2,7
Restricted2,8
Wholesale Yes Yes Yes
Public/institutional:
Clubs, fraternities, sororities, lodges and similar uses Yes Yes Yes
Government offices and facilities, including courthouses Restricted4 Restricted4 Restricted4
Libraries, museums, concert halls, auditoriums, community center, and similar uses Yes Yes Yes
Outdoor bandstand, amphitheater, pavilion Yes Yes Yes
Private utilities Yes Yes Yes
Public parking lots and garages (see chapter 5 of this title, standards for off street parking areas) Yes Yes Yes
Public parks, squares, greens, and recreation facilities Yes Yes Yes
Religious institutions and places of worship Yes Yes Yes
Schools, public and private Yes Yes Yes
Visitors centers and information services Restricted4 Yes Yes
Residential:
Detached single-family residences Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited
Two-family dwellings (duplexes) Restricted6 Restricted6 Restricted6
Single-family attached (townhouses) Yes Yes Yes
Dwellings within a commercial or other nonresidential structure (e.g., residence occupying an upper
floor of a retail store)
Yes Yes Yes
Accessory dwellings which existed on the effective date hereof Yes Yes Yes, new
units also
permitted
Multi-family residential Restricted1 Restricted1 Yes
Residential care homes and facilities Yes Yes Yes
Bed and breakfast inns Yes Yes Yes
Notes:
1.Residential uses are permitted on upper stories above ground floor nonresidential use, on ground floors behind storefront space, or integrated
into a mixed use structure where design is consistent with the storefront character.
2.Subject to conditional use permit provisions as provided in this code.
3.Enclosed in building and on upper stories only.
4.a.In the commercial A zone: Drive-through uses are subject to approval through conditional use permit, drive-through fast food use is prohibited.
b.In the commercial B zone: Drive-through fast food services and/or those using order amplification are subject to an approved conditional use
permit and are prohibited within 150 feet of any residential zone.
c.In the commercial C zone: Drive-through fast food services and/or those using order amplification are permitted adjacent to Highway 2 with an
approved conditional use permit. Drive-throughs within 150 feet of a residential zone are prohibited.
5.Adult use limitation: Commercial establishments are restricted to having less than a 25 percent of gross floor area of its stock in trade offering for
sale for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
a.Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or films, motion pictures, photographs, slides, videocassettes or other visual
representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or
b.Devices, instruments, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities". Adult oriented nightclubs,
entertainment or premises offering erotic dancing or display are prohibited. Unarmed combat as defined by section 54-402 of Idaho Code is
prohibited.
6.Subject to approval through the planned unit development application process with minimum 2 acre area requirement waived. See title 10,
chapter 3 of this code.
7.Fully enclosed in building.
8.Limited to 12 passenger vehicles.
(Ord. 1301, 6-4-2014)
9-2-1-4:BUILDING SETBACKS:
TABLE 2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 200/303
BUILDING SETBACKS
Commercial A Commercial B Commercial C
Minimum
front, rear
and side
yard
setback
See subsection 9-2-1-6B5 of this chapter 0 feet 0 feet
Maximum
front
setback
0 feet 0 feet 0 feet
Buildings shall be constructed to the
property line along their primary frontage. A
10 foot setback allowance shall be
approved when setback areas are
developed as a civic space identified in
subsection 9-2-1-6E of this chapter.
Buildings shall be constructed to the
property line along their primary frontage. A
10 foot setback allowance shall be
approved when setback areas are
developed as a civic space identified in
subsection 9-2-1-6E of this chapter.
Buildings shall be constructed to the
property line along their primary frontage. A
10 foot setback allowance shall be
approved when setback areas are
developed as a civic space identified in
subsection 9-2-1-6E of this chapter.
An additional 15 foot setback for areas
developed as a civic space will require
approval through the CUP process.
An additional 15 foot setback for areas
developed as a civic space will require
approval through the CUP process.
An additional 15 foot setback for areas
developed as a civic space will require
approval through the CUP process.
Setback
from
Sand
Creek
Structures along Sand Creek shall maintain a 25 foot vegetative setback from the high water mark of the creek as established at full
summertime pool elevation of 2,062 feet. Uncovered porches and pervious decks may encroach into this setback a maximum of 15
feet. Structures utilizing this encroachment shall maintain permeable erosion control material on any area encroached upon. A
maximum 5 foot improved pervious sidewalk to any pedestrian pathway connecting to Sand Creek is exempt from the vegetative buffer
requirement.
Setback
from
residential
zone
When a building or group of buildings abuts upon a residential lot, a yard shall be provided abutting the lot, such yard having a width of
not less than 10 feet. There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than 20 feet when no dedicated alley or public way exists at the
rear of the commercial lot. The rear yard may be used for off street parking and loading as provided in this title.
(Ord. 1301, 6-4-2014)
9-2-1-5:BUILDING HEIGHT:
All buildings in the commercial A, B and C zone areas shall comply with the following building height requirements, which are intended to allow for
development of appropriately scaled buildings with a storefront character. Included in maximum height are: bell towers, steeples, roof equipment,
flagpoles, and similar features incorporated into the building design that are not intended or used for human occupancy.
TABLE 3
BUILDING HEIGHT
Commercial A Commercial B Commercial C
Minimum number of
floors1
2 2 2
Maximum height 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet
Maximum height when
structured parking or a
residential component
is included in building
footprint
65 feet when residential use represents
50 percent of floor area exceeding 35
feet or when 50 percent of building
footprint is developed with structured
parking.
55 feet when residential use
represents 100 percent of floor area
exceeding 35 feet or when 51 percent
of required parking is incorporated into
the structure.
45 feet when residential use
represents 100 percent of floor area
exceeding 35 feet or when 51 percent
of required parking is incorporated into
the structure.
Maximum height
adjacent to residential
zone
Maximum height of any portion of a structure within 50 feet of a residential zoning district line shall be 35 feet.
Note:
1.Second floor construction may be developed in phases so long as engineering documentation is submitted at the time of building permit
application confirming all first floor construction is structurally capable of accommodating a future second floor.
Chimneys, not to exceed 5 feet are not included in maximum height.
A. Height Increase For Buildings Containing Residences Or Structured Parking: Habitable floor area utilizing exemption to maximum height outlined in
table 3 of this section shall be developed in a stepped fashion with all enclosed portions of structures along street frontage exceeding thirty five feet
(35') set back from lower portions of the structure by the following:
1. Forty five feet (45') to sixty five feet (65') shall be set back from the exterior perimeter of lower floors by ten percent (10%) of the greater of lot width
or depth, not to exceed twenty feet (20').
Setbacks shall not apply to unenclosed porches or balconies.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 201/303
Government offices, courthouses, libraries, museums, community centers, movie theaters, hotels and hospitals are exempt from the required
residential component but shall conform to other setback standards for area exceeding thirty five feet (35') in height.
B. Method Of Measurement: Building height is measured as the vertical distance from the preexisting grade point of the portion of the lot covered by the
building, measured to the highest point of the roof peak. For the purposes of these regulations, "preexisting grade" is defined as the ground level
elevation at the primary frontage street grade that existed prior to any site preparation related to, or incorporated into, any proposed new development.
In cases where site work such as retaining wall or an earth berm is utilized to create finished grades higher in elevation than preexisting grade, then
preexisting grade shall be used to determine height. (Ord. 1301, 6-4-2014)
9-2-1-6: BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS:
The commercial A, B and C zone design guidelines in this subsection are intended to provide human scale design, while affording flexibility to use a
variety of building styles. These guidelines shall be followed in all new construction in order to ensure that the physical and operational characteristics of
proposed buildings and uses are compatible within the context of the surrounding area. Compatibility shall be achieved through techniques such as
repetition of rooflines, the use of similar proportions in building mass, similar relationships to the street, similar door and window patterns, and the use of
complementary building materials.
A. Building Size, Bulk, Scale, And Mass: New buildings or additions shall either be similar in size and height, or if larger, be articulated and subdivided
proportionally to the mass and scale of other structures on the same block.
B. Building Orientation: If an entry is oriented to a parking lot, it diminishes activity from the street and implies that auto access takes precedence.
Orientation and design of all new building or additions shall be reinforced through the observation of the following standards:
1. Primary Entrance: Buildings have their primary entrance(s) oriented to their primary frontage. Building entrances may include entrances to individual
units, lobby entrances, entrances oriented to pedestrian plazas, or breezeway/courtyard entrances to a cluster of spaces.
2. Corner Building Entrances: Corner building entrances shall be designed in cases where the building is located on a corner lot. Alternatively, a
building entrance may be located away from the corner when the building corner is beveled or incorporates other detailing to reduce the angular
appearance of the building at the street corner.
3. Secondary Entrance: A building may have a secondary entrance facing a side yard when a direct pedestrian walkway is provided between the
building entrance and the street right of way.
4. Off Street Parking: Off street parking, driveways and other vehicular access shall not be placed between a building and the street. On corner lots,
buildings and their entrances shall be oriented to the street corner as feasible.
5. Commercial A Zone: In the commercial A zone, at least fifty percent (50%) of the width of the lot is occupied by a building at the front setback.
6. Accessibility: There shall be provided one zero step entrance to each building from an accessible path at the front, side, or rear of each building. All
the first floor interior doors (including bathrooms) shall provide at least thirty two inches (32") of clear passage.
7. Surface Parking: Parking areas of more than thirty (30) abutting spaces shall be divided into areas of no more than thirty (30) spaces. Division may
be by a building, internal landscaped area with a minimum width of five feet (5'), or landscaped multimodal way having a minimum width of five feet
(5').
C. Storefront Design: All buildings shall contribute toward the storefront character and visual relationships of existing buildings. The building shall be
designed in a way that will reduce the massive scale and uniform and impersonal appearance and will provide visual interest consistent with the
community's identity, character, and scale. The following architectural features should be used along the street frontage building elevations, as
applicable. Minor deviation from the following features may be authorized at the discretion of the planning director so long as the spirit of this code is
maintained:
1. Buildings should have consistent spacing of similar shaped windows with trim or other decorative molding on all building stories.
2. Large display windows should be employed on ground floor storefronts. Display windows should be framed to visually separate the ground floor from
the second floor.
3. All buildings with a flat roof should have a decorative cornice at the top of the building; or eaves, when the building is designed with a pitched roof.
4. Cornices or changes in material can be used to differentiate the ground floor of buildings that have commercial uses from the upper floor(s) that may
have offices or residential uses. Ground floor facades should utilize cornices, signs, awnings, exterior lighting, display windows and entry insets.
5. Facades greater than fifty feet (50') in length shall incorporate recesses and projections with a minimum four foot (4') differentiation along at least
twenty percent (20%) of the length of the facade. Window awnings, arches, or columns must total at least sixty percent (60%) of the facade length
abutting the street.
6. Structures abutting Sand Creek are required to incorporate design features that enhance the visual interest and pedestrian interface with the water
frontage such as patios, decks and expanses of glass that draw pedestrian interest. Additionally, HVAC, garbage and recycling bins and other similar
ancillary equipment shall be buffered through a fence, wall or other similar device so as to strengthen the visual appeal from the waterfront.
D. Building Materials: The exterior finish material on all facades shall be limited to stone, brick and/or finished wood. Materials other than those listed are a
deviation which may be authorized by the planning director.
1. In circumstances where other materials are proposed, such as stucco, characteristics such as scale and proportion, form, architectural detailing,
height, color and texture shall be utilized to ensure that the proposed material is compatible with surrounding buildings and the character of the
commercial area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 202/303
2. Building materials shall not create glare. Highly reflective materials shall not be permitted.
3. Clear glass windows shall be used for commercial storefront display windows and doors. Ground floor window shall be defined as glass, either fixed
or opening windows. Windows cannot be covered permanently on the interior by more than twenty percent (20%). Opaque or severely site obscuring
windows will not be permitted.
4. Architectural treatment, similar to that provided to the front facade shall be provided to the sides and rear of the building to mitigate any negative
view from any location off site and any public area (e.g., parking lots, walkways, etc.) on site. Windows and doors shall be defined with detail
elements such as frames, sills, and lintels, and placed to visually establish and define the building stories and establish human scale and proportion.
5. Exposed unfinished concrete, concrete block, or monotonous walls of concrete or corrugated metal shall not be permitted as a finished exterior.
E. Civic Spaces: Civic spaces serve as informal gathering places for socializing, resting and enjoyment of the area, and contribute to a walkable
environment. Each civic space shall be open to the thoroughfare or street by incorporating at least one access to the thoroughfare or street. Each
building with street frontage shall include two (2) or more of the following features. Civic spaces may be provided within the public right of way when
approved by the local jurisdiction having authority. The following shall be considered civic spaces for incorporation into the building design:
1. A plaza or courtyard next to the building entrance.
2. Sitting space (i.e., dining area, benches, or ledges) between the building entrance and the sidewalk.
3. A building canopy, awning, or similar weather protection, with a minimum four foot (4') projection over the sidewalk or other pedestrian space.
4. Public art as approved by the Sandpoint art commission. (Ord. 1301, 6-4-2014)
9-2-1-7: SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR BUILDINGS WITH FOOTPRINT EXCEEDING FIFTEEN THOUSAND SQUARE FEET:
Buildings with greater than a fifteen thousand (15,000) square foot building footprint require a conditional use permit and shall adhere to the following:
A. Circulation Amenities: A safe and landscaped multimodal circulation system shall be provided on site which connects to public streets and
neighborhoods. Multimodal pathways within the development shall be differentiated from driving surfaces through a change in materials. At least one
substantial amenity as described in subsection 9-2-1-6E of this chapter shall be provided for every two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of
structure footprint.
B. Facades And Exterior Walls Including Sides And Backs: The building shall be designed in a way that will reduce the massive scale and uniform and
impersonal appearance and will provide visual interest consistent with the community's identity, character, and scale. Architectural treatment, similar to
that provided to the front facade shall be provided to the sides and rear of the building to mitigate any negative view from any location off site and any
public area (e.g., parking lots, walkways, etc.) on site.
C. Roofs: The roof design shall include architectural features that contribute to the visual interest at the pedestrian scale and reduce the massive scale of
large buildings. Roof features shall complement the architectural and visual character of adjoining neighborhoods. Roofs shall have the appearance of
two (2) or more roof planes either through architectural features or engineered design. Parapet walls shall be architecturally treated to avoid a plain,
monotonous look. Roofs shall be lightly colored or vegetative.
D. Building Design: All buildings shall provide a direct unencumbered multimodal connection to an abutting street. All buildings shall be designed so that
parking is not located along the primary street of the building. Nonmotorized parking shall be permitted along the primary facade of the building. A
buffer with a minimum width of eight feet (8') will be maintained between parking areas and all bike trails and public sidewalks. Building entrance(s),
windows, roof snow drop areas, and other movable building features shall have an appropriate setback so as not to interfere with the safe movement of
pedestrians and cyclists.
E. Adaptability For Reuse/Compartmentalization: The building design shall include specific elements for adaptation for multi-tenant reuse. Such elements
may include, but are not limited to, compartmentalized construction, including plumbing, electrical service, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning. The
building design shall also allow for: the interior subdivision of the structure into separate tenancies; facades that readily adapt to multiple entrances and
adapt to entrances on all but one side of the building; parking lot schemes that are shared by establishments or are linked by safe and functional
pedestrian connections; landscaping schemes that complement the multiple entrance design; and other elements of design which facilitate the multitenant
reuse of the building and site.
F. Applications: Applications shall include a renewal plan that will afford maximum opportunity, consistent with the sound needs of the municipality as a
whole, for the rehabilitation or redevelopment of the structure in the event of closure or relocation by the original occupant. Such plan will be approved
if the city finds that:
1. A sound and adequate plan exists for said redevelopment; and
2. The plan affords maximum opportunity for rehabilitation or redevelopment of the structure by both private enterprise and the municipality; and
3. The renewal plan provides a maintenance plan for normal repairs and upkeep of property, including, but not limited to, building, parking lot and
surfacing, landscaping, signage, and elimination of "ghost signage".
The city may enter a redevelopment agreement with the owner of the real property and undertake activities, including the acquisition, removal, or
demolition of structures, improvements, or personal property located on the real property, to prepare the property for redevelopment. A
redevelopment agreement entered into in accordance with this section must contain provisions obligating the owner to redevelop the real property for
a specified use consistent with the provisions of this title and offering recourse to the city if the redevelopment is not completed as determined by the
city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 203/303
Government offices, courthouses, libraries, museums, community centers, and hospitals are exempt from the required conditional use permit
requirement of this section but shall conform to all other standards identified in this section. (Ord. 1301, 6-4-2014)
9-2-1-8: SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR PARKING AND LOADING AREAS:
A. Parking, Garages And Driveways: All off street vehicle parking, including surface lots and garages, shall be oriented to alleys, placed underground, or
located in parking areas behind or to the side of the building.
In the commercial A zone no portion of primary lot frontage shall be developed with surface parking.
In the commercial B and C zone in no case shall more than ten percent (10%) of primary lot frontage be developed with surface parking. For the
purpose of this provision, "primary lot frontage" shall be defined as the liner frontage along the primary street having a depth of fifteen feet (15').
Ground floors of parking garages abutting public right of way shall consist entirely of office or retail space excluding drive aisles. Building design
standards articulated in section 9-2-1-6 of this chapter shall apply to all parking structures.
B. Trash And Loading Areas: In order to preserve and enhance the pedestrian orientation of the downtown area, all servicing, loading, and solid waste
collection for new structures shall take place off street away from pedestrian walkways, generally in bays provided in the alleys or in screened, internal,
rear spaces if alleys are not available. (Ord. 1236, 6-23-2010)
9-2-1-9: SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR OTHER USES:
A. Light Manufacturing: Light manufacturing uses are limited in the commercial A, B and C zones. "Light manufacturing" means production or
manufacturing of small scale goods, such as crafts, electronic equipment, candy products, printing and binderies, custom furniture, and similar goods.
All such light manufacturing uses shall comply with the following:
1. Light manufacturing is only allowed when occurring in conjunction with a permitted retail or service use that is in the storefront location.
2. Maximum floor area devoted to light manufacturing is limited to four thousand (4,000) square feet in any individual establishment. Through the
issuance of a conditional use permit, the maximum square footage may be increased, but shall not exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
3. The light manufacturing operations shall be fully enclosed within a building and will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and
conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or the general welfare by reasons of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or
odors.
B. Accessory Uses: Outdoor displays, storage, sales, service, and minor entertainment are regulated. Accessory uses may be permitted provided that they
meet the following:
1. All nonancillary booths, stalls, carts, or other equipment for outdoor display, sales, service or minor entertainment require approval of a conditional
use permit. Customary uses such as holiday sales of Christmas trees and fireworks are excluded from this requirement.
2. All authorized outdoor displays, sales, service or minor entertainment takes place on private property with the written consent of the owner or agent
of said property, or on public property with consent from the city.
3. No display, sales, service or minor entertainment blocks the required pedestrian walkways. A clear area with a minimum width of five feet (5') shall
be left between the street and the building entry or exit.
4. All booths, stalls, carts, or other equipment for outdoor display, sales, service or minor entertainment at the close of business each day shall be
removed or immobilized and secured so as to prevent it from becoming a public safety hazard, nuisance or security risk.
5. Outdoor displays or storage shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the retail floor area of the primary business. (Ord. 1236, 6-23-2010)
9-2-2: MUR MIXED USE RESIDENTIAL ZONE:
The mixed use residential zoning district provisions represent a commercial zoning classification that permits, rather than mandates, a vertical mix of low
intensity commercial and residential uses within the same building. The district is intended to accommodate a physical pattern of development often found
along village main streets and in neighborhood commercial areas of older cities. (Ord. 1305, 10-15-2014)
9-2-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the mixed use residential zoning district is to:
A. Accommodate mixed use buildings with neighborhood serving retail, service, and other uses on the ground floor and residential units above the
nonresidential space;
B. Encourage development that exhibits the physical design characteristics of pedestrian oriented, storefront style shopping streets; and
C. Promote the health and well being of residents by encouraging physical activity, alternative transportation, and greater social interaction. (Ord. 1305,
10-15-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 204/303
9-2-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this section 9-2-2, the following words and terms shall have the meanings specified herein:
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings. Gross floor area does not include basements when at least one-half (1/2) the floor to ceiling height is below
grade, accessory parking (i.e., parking that is available on or off site that is not part of the use's minimum parking standard), attic space having a floor to
ceiling height less than seven feet (7'), exterior balconies, uncovered steps, or inner courts.
HOSTEL: A place, recognized by the International Hostel Association, where travelers may stay for a limited duration.
MIXED USE BUILDING: A building that contains at least one floor devoted to allowed nonresidential uses and at least one floor devoted to allowed
residential uses. (Ord. 1305, 10-15-2014)
9-2-2-3: ALLOWED USES:
Uses are allowed in "mixed use residential" zoning districts in accordance with the use table of this section.
TABLE 1
MIXED USE RESIDENTIAL LAND USE REGULATIONS
Use permitted P
Conditional use permit C
Not permitted -
Use
Zoning District
Mixed Use Residential
Residential:
Assisted living C
Dwelling units located above the ground floor P
Hostel (< or = 20 beds, < 14 night stay in any one month)2,5,6 P
Multi-family4 P
Single-family detached1 P
Townhouse P
Commercial:
Adult entertainment -
Animal hospital -
Athletic club (> 3,000 sq. ft.)6 C
Athletic club (< 3,000 sq. ft.)6 P
Banks (< 3,000 sq. ft.) P
Building or landscape material sales -
Business support services (< 3,000 sq. ft.) P
Community and/or recreation center3,6 P
Drive-through sales (retail or with any food service) -
Emergency medical care -
Equipment rental (outdoor) -
Firearm sales -
Galleries P
Gas stations -
Grocery or convenience store (< 3,000 sq. ft.)6 P
Hospital -
Liquor store -
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 205/303
Mini/self-storage -
Office, government P
Office, medical and dental (< 3,000 sq. ft.) P
Office: sales, administrative, business, professional (< 3,000 sq. ft.) P
Pawnshop -
Payday loan -
Restaurant (< 60 seats)6 P
Retail sales, general (< 3,000 sq. ft.) P
Schools C
Tourist homes P
Vehicle service and repair6 C
Public and civic:
Church or other place of worship P
Clubs, fraternities, sororities, lodges and similar uses -
Daycare, all types P
Libraries and museums P
Postal service P
Public safety facility P
Utilities, public or quasi-public -
Industrial:
Artisan (hand tools only; e.g., jewelry or ceramics) P
Notes:
1. Development standards of residential single-family zone apply.
2. Owner occupation required.
3. Occupancy capacity > 100 requires approval through CUP.
4. Development standards of the residential multi-family zone apply. For mixed use buildings only, the minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 1,000
square feet.
5. Must abut a commercial zone.
6. When adjacent to any residential use, screening of adjacent property lines, utilizing a minimum 6 foot solid, masonry board, or equivalent fence, shall be
provided and maintained in good condition to reduce the trespass of noise and other related business activity.
(Ord. 1305, 10-15-2014)
9-2-2-4: COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT SIZE LIMITS:
Unless otherwise noted, the footprint of new commercial establishments in the mixed use residential district shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square
feet, and the total commercial gross floor area for a structure shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet. (Ord. 1305, 10-15-2014)
9-2-2-5: INDOOR/OUTDOOR OPERATIONS:
All permitted uses in the mixed use residential district must be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, unless otherwise expressly authorized.
This requirement does not apply to off street parking or loading areas, automated teller machines, or outdoor seating areas that are located between the
primary building facade and the street. Commercial delivery within alleys that abut a residential zone shall be prohibited from eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. to
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. 1305, 10-15-2014)
9-2-2-6: NEW CONSTRUCTION FLOOR TO FLOOR HEIGHTS AND FLOOR AREA OF GROUND FLOOR SPACE:
A. All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a mixed use building must have a minimum floor to floor height of twelve feet (12').
B. All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a mixed use building must contain the following minimum floor area:
1. At least eight hundred (800) square feet or twenty five percent (25%) of the lot area, whichever is greater, on lots with street frontage of less than fifty
feet (50'); or
2. At least twenty percent (20%) of the lot area on lots with fifty feet (50') of street frontage or more. (Ord. 1305, 10-15-2014)
9-2-2-7: LOT AREA:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 206/303
Every building erected shall be on a lot having an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet with a frontage on public streets of not less than
fifty feet (50') and shall have a width of not less than fifty feet (50') at the front building line. Any legally created individual nonconforming lot or parcel that
does not meet the minimum lot width or area requirements may be utilized for those uses permitted within this district if all other requirements of this title
are met. (Ord. 1305, 10-15-2014)
9-2-2-8: LOT COVERAGE:
Each lot shall have a maximum seventy percent (70%) impervious surface composed of any ratio of building footprint or impervious surface. (Ord. 1305,
10-15-2014)
9-2-2-9: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No structure shall exceed a building height of forty feet (40') above the average elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building.
A. Exceptions to the maximum height:
1. Chimneys, flagpoles, satellite receiving dishes, roof mounted solar panels and other similar items may extend above the height limit, as long as they
do not exceed five feet (5') above the top of the highest point of the roof.
2. Utility power poles and public safety facilities are exempt from the height limit. (Ord. 1305, 10-15-2014)
9-2-2-10: SETBACKS:
A. The entire building facade must abut street side property lines or be located within ten feet (10') of such property lines. Front building facade setbacks
between ten feet (10') and twenty feet (20') are permitted only when the setback area is developed as a civic space.
B. No setbacks are required in the mixed use residential district, except when property zoned as mixed use residential abuts property zoned as residential,
in which case the minimum side and rear setbacks required in the mixed use residential district shall be the same as required for a residential use on
the abutting residentially zoned lot. When commercial use occurs adjacent to any residential use, screening of adjacent property lines, utilizing a
minimum six foot (6') solid wood or equivalent fence, excluding vinyl or chainlink, shall be provided and maintained in good condition to reduce the
trespass of noise and other related business activity. (Ord. 1305, 10-15-2014)
9-2-2-11: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
A. As prescribed in chapter 5 of this title.
B. No off street parking is required for nonresidential uses in the mixed use residential district, unless such uses exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet
of gross floor area, in which case off street parking must be provided in accordance with city standards for the floor area in excess of two thousand
(2,000) square feet.
C. Off street parking spaces must be located to the rear or side of the principal building and otherwise screened so as not to be visible from public right of
way or residential zoning districts. Locating parking between the building and the street shall be prohibited, except when associated with detached
single-family residential development. (Ord. 1305, 10-15-2014)
9-2-2-12: WINDOW STANDARDS:
A. For new commercial construction, a minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the street facing building facade between two feet (2') and eight feet (8') in
height must be comprised of clear windows that allow views of indoor space or product display areas.
B. The bottom of any window or product display window used to satisfy the transparency standard may not be more than three and one-half feet (3.5')
above the adjacent sidewalk.
C. Product display windows used to satisfy these requirements must have a minimum height of four feet (4'). (Ord. 1305, 10-15-2014)
9-2-2-13: DOORS AND ENTRANCES:
A. Buildings must have a primary entrance facing a public sidewalk. Entrances at building corners may be used to satisfy this requirement.
B. Building entrances may include doors to individual shops or businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian oriented plazas, or courtyard
entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses. (Ord. 1305, 10-15-2014)
9-2-2-14: DRIVEWAY ACCESS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 207/303
Driveways and other vehicular access shall not be placed between a building and the street, unless associated with detached single-family residential
development. Standards for off street parking design found in the RM zone shall apply to single-family residential development. (Ord. 1305, 10-15-2014)
9-2-2-15: BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS:
The commercial mixed use residential zone design guidelines in this section are intended to provide human scale design, while affording flexibility to use a
variety of building styles. These guidelines shall be followed in all new construction in order to ensure that the physical and operational characteristics of
proposed buildings and uses are compatible within the context of the surrounding area. Compatibility shall be achieved through techniques such as
repetition of rooflines, the use of similar proportions in building mass, similar relationships to the street, similar door and window patterns, and the use of
complementary building materials.
A. Building Size, Bulk, Scale, And Mass: New buildings or additions shall either be similar in size and height, or, if larger, be articulated and subdivided
proportionally to the mass and scale of other structures on the same block.
B. Building Orientation: If an entry is oriented to a parking lot, it diminishes activity from the street and implies that auto access takes precedence.
Orientation and design of all new building or additions shall be reinforced through the observation of the following standards:
1. Primary Entrance: Buildings have their primary entrance(s) oriented to their primary frontage. Building entrances may include entrances to individual
units, lobby entrances, entrances oriented to pedestrian plazas, or breezeway/courtyard entrances to a cluster of spaces.
2. Corner Building Entrances: On corner lots, buildings and their entrances shall be oriented to the street corner. Alternatively, a building entrance may
be located away from the corner when the building corner is beveled or incorporates other detailing to reduce the angular appearance of the building
at the street corner.
3. Secondary Entrance: A building may have a secondary entrance facing a side yard when a direct pedestrian walkway is provided between the
building entrance and the street right of way.
4. Off Street Parking: Off street parking, driveways and other vehicular access shall not be placed between a building and the street.
5. Surface Parking: Parking areas of more than ten (10) abutting spaces shall be divided into areas of no more than ten (10) spaces. Division may be
by a building, internal landscaped area with a minimum width of five feet (5') or landscaped multimodal way having a minimum width of five feet (5').
C. Storefront Design: All buildings shall contribute toward the storefront character and visual relationships of existing buildings. New buildings shall be
designed in a way that will reduce the massive scale and uniform and impersonal appearance and provide visual interest consistent with the
community's identity, character, and scale. The following architectural features should be used along the street frontage building elevations, as
applicable. Minor deviation from the following features may be authorized at the discretion of the planning director so long as the spirit of this code is
maintained:
1. Buildings should have consistent spacing of similar shaped windows with trim or other decorative molding on all building stories.
2. Large display windows should be employed on ground floor storefronts. Display windows should be framed to visually separate the ground floor from
the second floor.
3. All buildings with a flat roof should have a decorative cornice at the top of the building (or eaves, when the building is designed with a pitched roof).
4. Cornices or changes in material can be used to differentiate the ground floor of buildings that have commercial uses from the upper floor(s) that may
have offices or residential uses. Ground floor facades should utilize cornices, signs, awnings, exterior lighting, display windows and entry insets.
5. Facades greater than fifty feet (50') in length shall incorporate recesses and projections with a minimum four foot (4') differentiation along at least
twenty percent (20%) of the length of the facade.
D. Building Materials: The exterior finish material on all facades shall be limited to stone, brick and/or finished wood. Materials other than those listed are a
deviation which may be authorized by the planning director.
1. In circumstances where other materials are proposed, such as stucco, characteristics such as scale and proportion, form, architectural detailing,
height, color and texture shall be utilized to ensure that the proposed material is compatible with surrounding buildings and the character of the
commercial area.
2. Building materials shall not create glare. Highly reflective materials shall not be permitted.
3. Clear glass windows shall be used for commercial storefront display windows and doors. Ground floor windows shall be defined as glass, either fixed
or opening, windows. Windows cannot be covered permanently on the interior by more than twenty percent (20%). Opaque or severely site
obscuring windows will not be permitted.
4. Architectural treatment similar to that provided to the front facade shall be provided to the sides and rear of the building to mitigate any negative view
from any location off site and any public area (e.g., parking lots, walkways, etc.) on site. Windows and doors shall be defined with detail elements
such as frames, sills, and lintels, and placed to visually establish and define the building stories and establish human scale and proportion.
5. Exposed unfinished concrete, nonarchitectural concrete block, or monotonous walls of concrete or corrugated metal shall not be permitted as a
finished exterior.
E. Civic Spaces: Civic spaces serve as informal gathering places for socializing, resting and enjoyment of the area and contribute to a walkable
environment. Each civic space shall be open to the thoroughfare or street by incorporating at least one access to the thoroughfare or street. Each
building with street frontage shall include two (2) or more of the following features. Civic spaces may be provided within the public right of way when
approved by the local jurisdiction having authority. The following shall be considered civic spaces for incorporation into the building design:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 208/303
1. A plaza or courtyard next to the building entrance.
2. Sitting space (i.e., dining area, benches, or ledges) between the building entrance and the sidewalk.
3. A building canopy, awning, or similar weather protection, with a minimum four foot (4') projection over the sidewalk or other pedestrian space.
4. Public art, as approved by the Sandpoint arts commission. (Ord. 1305, 10-15-2014)
Chapter 3
INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
9-3-1: DESCRIPTION OF INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
This chapter provides regulations applicable to development and new land uses in the industrial zoning districts established by ordinance 1252. The
purposes of individual industrial zoning districts are as follows:
A. IG (Industrial General) District: The IG district is intended for lands appropriate for light and medium manufacturing and industrial activities with direct
access to major transportation routes, such as arterial roads, air and rail service. The IG district allows a wide range of manufacturing and industrial
uses, which generate little traffic from tourists and the general public and are consistent with the Sandpoint comprehensive plan. Commercial uses are
generally limited to accessory sales of goods produced on site. Residential use is very limited, with a single caretaker unit per property permitted.
B. IBP (Industrial Business Park) District: The IBP district is intended for master planned business and industrial parks in campus like settings. This district
is suitable for administrative and professional offices, research and development parks, limited distribution, light and medium manufacturing, and
assembly operations. Commercial and residential uses are generally permitted, although design standards mirroring the downtown commercial areas
will apply in an effort to develop the area in alignment with the CA-4 definition of the comprehensive plan. CA-4 areas are to become vibrant secondary
centers of commercial, office, and residential development, serving as neighborhood hubs for residents in neighboring districts. The IBP zoning district
is consistent with the land use category of the Sandpoint comprehensive plan in areas generally south of Baldy Mountain Road.
C. ITP (Industrial Technology Park) District: The ITP district is intended for lands suitable for technology production and development, such as data
centers, medical imaging processing, business incubators, biotechnology, software development, engineering, and similar technology related industry.
Sites appropriate for this designation should have readily available utilities and fiber optic availability and be characterized by large contiguous
properties. The ITP district is consistent with the Sandpoint comprehensive plan. (Ord. 1252, 4-20-2011)
9-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: Any adult bookstore, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater, cabaret, sexual encounter center, or
any other business or establishment that offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, but not including those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state
law.
BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES: A subcategory of commercial land use that permits establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to other
business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as advertising and mailing; building maintenance; personnel and employment services;
management and consulting services; protective services; equipment rental and leasing; photo finishing; copying and printing; travel; office supply; and
similar services.
INDUSTRIAL SERVICES: Establishments providing industrial services to individuals or businesses. This classification includes dry cleaning plants; metal,
machine, and welding shops; and similar business engagements in custom fabrication and repair.
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY: An establishment engaged in manufacturing, assembling, fabricating, packaging or other industrial processing of products,
primarily from extracted or raw materials, or the bulk storage and handling of such products and materials. In addition, any use or activity which requires a
significant amount of on site hazardous chemical storage shall be classified under this land use. Heavy manufacturing shall include any packaging of the
product being manufactured on site. Examples include, but are not limited to, the production of the following: using chemical reactions to turn raw
materials, such as coal, oil, salt, acids or chemical blends, into a variety of products for other secondary industries; foundries, forge shops, open air
welding, and other intensive metal fabrication facilities.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: The manufacturing, predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing,
fabrication, assembly, treatment, mixing, packaging including bottling and canning of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such
products. The assembling or packaging shall not produce noise, vibration, hazardous waste materials, or particulate that create significant negative
impacts to adjacent land uses. Odors produced on site shall not negatively affect other businesses or properties in the area. Examples of assembling
include, but are not limited to, the production of the following: clothes; furniture; pharmaceuticals; hardware; toys; mechanical components; electric or
electronic components; vehicle assembly; and computer software. Examples of packaging include facilities for bottling beverages, canning and wrapping
foods, and boxing electronic components.
MANUFACTURING, MEDIUM: The manufacturing of products from processed or unprocessed materials and the bulk storage and handling of such
products, where the finished product is noncombustible and nonexplosive. These activities do not necessitate the storage of large volumes of highly
flammable, toxic matter or explosive materials needed for the manufacturing process. This manufacturing may produce noise, vibrations, illumination, or
particulate that is perceptible to adjacent land users but is not offensive or obnoxious. Odors produced on site shall not have a material negative effect on
other businesses or properties in the area. This use shall include any packaging of the product being manufactured on site. Examples include, but are not
limited to, the production of the following: glass products made from manufactured glass; food and beverages; candy and other confectionery products;
computer hardware; products made from rubber, plastic, or resin; converted paper and cardboard products; fabricated metal products made from
semifinished metals. (Ord. 1252, 4-20-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 209/303
9-3-3: ALLOWED USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permitted Land Uses: The land uses allowed by this zoning ordinance in industrial zoning districts are identified in table 1 of this section as:
1. "Permitted" land uses are indicated by a "P". Permitted land uses are allowed on a property without discretion by the city, subject to compliance with
all applicable provisions of this code.
2. "Conditionally permitted" land uses are indicated by a "C" and are allowed only with the approval of a conditional use permit (section 9-9-6 of this
title). These uses are subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter, as are permitted uses. However, the city has discretion to approve, approve
with conditions, or deny a conditional use permit application. The decision on a conditional use permit is based upon the circumstances of an
individual case and the criteria in section 9-9-6 of this title.
B. Uses Not Permitted Or Not Listed: Land uses not permitted are those indicated by a "-" on the table. Land uses not listed on the tables are not allowed,
except by the determination of the planning director, who will consider whether the use is similar to a permitted use after consulting the current edition
of the North American industry classification system code.
C. Regulations For Specific Uses: Where a column in the following tables includes a reference to a section number or footnote, regulations in the
referenced section or footnote apply to the use. However, provisions in other sections of this zoning ordinance or this code may also apply, along with
the current adopted version of the international building code, international residential code and applicable sections of the uniform fire code and
national fire protection association standards.
D. Ancillary Uses: Ancillary uses are those secondary activities associated with a primary land use directly associated with and supporting said primary
permitted or conditionally permitted land use. Ancillary uses and activities typically require a minor portion of the square footage or space in a business
premises, impose no additional impacts on land use patterns, building design, parking requirements, or outdoor storage. Examples of ancillary uses
include, but are not limited to, small factory stores associated with an active manufacturing plant, on site childcare facilities, etc.
TABLE 1
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT LAND USE REGULATIONS
Use permitted P
Conditional use permit C
Not permitted -
Use
Zoning
District
Additional Regulations
IG5
IBP
ITP
Commercial, offices and financial institutions:
Banks - - -
Data centers, medical imaging processing, business incubators,
software development, engineering and similar technology related
industry
- P P
Office, government - P* P * New construction shall comply with all design
requirements outlined in section 9-3-5-1 of this chapter
Office, medical and dental - P* - * New construction shall comply with all design
requirements outlined in section 9-3-5-1 of this chapter
Office, sales, administrative, business, professional P*
P**
P*
* When associated with a permitted use in the zone
** New construction shall comply with all design
requirements outlined in section 9-3-5-1 of this chapter
Research and development P P P
Retail sales P*
P**
P*
* When associated with permitted use in zone
** New construction shall comply with all design
requirements of section 9-3-5-1 of this chapter
Education and training:
Child daycare center when on site and servicing employees during
their work hours
P P P
School, college or university (private) - P C
School, vocational or technical C P P
Entertainment and recreation related:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 210/303
Adult entertainment business P*
- - * Prohibited within 1,000' of a residential zone or the
centerline of Baldy Mountain Road, and having a 500'
separation from like business
Athletic club - P -
Community and/or recreation center, stadium or arena - P -
Food service:
Cafeteria for employee dining and catering services P P P
Drive-through sales (retail or with any food service) - - -
Grocery or convenience store - P* P*
* New construction shall comply with all design
requirements outlined in section 9-3-5-1 of this chapter
Restaurant, counter service - P* P*
* New construction shall comply with all design
requirements outlined in section 9-3-5-1 of this chapter
Restaurant, table service - P* P*
* New construction shall comply with all design
requirements outlined in section 9-3-5-1 of this chapter
General service:
Aircraft hangars P - P
Auction (indoor) - P -
Business support services - P P
Equipment rental (outdoor) - P -
Hotel/motel - P* - * New construction shall comply with all design
requirements outlined in section 9-3-5-1 of this chapter
Mini/self-storage P C -
Health and veterinary services:
Ambulance service - P -
Animal hospital - P -
Animal kennel P C -
Emergency medical care - P -
Hospital - P -
Industry and manufacturing:
Light P P P See note 1
Medium P P C See note 1
Heavy - - -
Aquaculture <1 acre per business P - P
Cogeneration and other energy production P C C
Industrial services P - -
Industry and manufacturing with outdoor processing or unenclosed
storage of raw materials
P - -
Laboratory P P P
Material resource recovery facility (MRRF) C - - See section 9-3-5-2 of this chapter
Operation of slaughterhouse, glue factory, tannery or similar
operations with more than 2 employees during any shift
- - -
Scrap and salvage operation C - -
Wholesale, storage and distribution, including bulk tank storage of
liquids
P C -
Public, quasi-public, and assembly:
Church or other place of worship - P -
Clubs, fraternities, sororities, lodges and similar uses P P P
Corporation yard P C -
Public safety facility P P P
Utilities, public or quasi-public utilities P C C
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 211/303
Transportation and communication:
Airport P - -
Antenna or communication facility P*
P* C * See airport overlay restrictions
Helipad P P* - * Hospital/medical use
Moving and drayage service P P -
Parking facility, nonresidential P C -
Private transportation service C C -
Transit station or terminal C P -
Truck stop - - -
Vehicle sales and service:
Automobile and vehicles major repair and sales P - -
Large truck and machinery - sales and leasing P - -
Service station C C -
Vehicle storage or impound yard P - - See note 3
Other uses:
Accessory use, nonresidential P P P
Building or landscape material sales P C -
Contractor's yard P C -
Homeless shelter - - -
Residential - P - See note 4
Residential caretaker unit P*
P P*
See note 2
* Residential use is prohibited within the footprint of the
airport overlay zone
Notes:
1.Uses meeting the "manufacturing and assembly, light and medium" definitions shall include biotechnology, software/hardware development,
electronics, and similar technologies, along with artist studios.
2.Only 1 residential caretaker unit shall be permitted per property. The unit shall be located within a principal building on the site and/or completely
screened. The maximum size of a caretaker unit is limited to 1,000 square feet.
3.No vehicle may be stored or displayed on any vacant site or at any vacant commercial/industrial location except when approved as part of an
auto dealership or vehicle storage or impound yard.
4.Residential uses are permitted on upper stories above ground floor nonresidential use, or on ground floors behind storefront space.
5.Permitted IBP uses are allowed in the IG zone 400 feet north of the centerline of Baldy Mountain Road. Section 9-3-5 of this chapter shall be
applicable to development in this area.
(Ord. 1252, 4-20-2011)
9-3-4: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
All new development, subdivisions, establishment of new land uses, and alterations to existing land uses, structures and site improvements, shall be
designed and constructed in compliance with the regulations in table 2 of this section, except those activities and land uses specified in other sections.
Additional zoning ordinance regulations may apply as referenced in the tables, as well as other code regulations, city standards, specifications and details,
or regulations of another local agency or special district.
TABLE 2
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Regulations
* All figures are
minimums
measured from
property lines and
in linear feet,
unless otherwise
indicated
Zoning District
Applicable Sections
IG IBP ITP And Footnotes
Site planning
Maximum lot
coverage
75% 75% 75% Lot coverage up to 90%
allowed when utilizing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 212/303
15% pervious surface
(green roof, pervious
pavement, etc.) approved
by public works director
Lot area (for new
subdivisions only)
1 acre - - See note 1
Lot dimensions:
Minimum width/
frontage
60' 60' 60'
Minimum depth 60' 60' 60'
Landscape areas
Along any
frontage abutting
a roadway
15' 15' 15'
Along interior
property lines:
Adjacent to
residential zoning
district
15' 15' 15'
Between buildings
and vehicle
aisles/parking
0 5' along elevations facing a roadway or
providing the primary entry to a tenant
space; 5' in other areas where parking
or a drive aisle is adjacent to a
building; 0' in loading or service areas
not visible from a roadway
5' along elevations facing a roadway or
providing the primary entry to a tenant
space; 5' in other areas where parking
or a drive aisle is adjacent to a
building; 0' in loading or service areas
not visible from a roadway
Buildings
Minimum front and
street side yard
setback
25' 25'* 25' * See section 9-3-5-1 of
this chapter for design
standards setback
restrictions for specific
uses
Interior side and
rear yard setback
5' 5' 5'
Adjacent to
residential zoning
district setback
25' plus 1' setback for each 1' of building height over 35'
Rear yard setback
abutting roadway
15' 15' 15'
Maximum building
footprint for retail,
commercial or
office use
- 25,000 sq. ft.* 25,000 sq. ft.* * CUP allowance for
larger
Building height
limits
45', 65' when
building sits
greater than
200' from
exterior
boundary of
IG zone*
45'* 45'* * Airport overlay zone
limitations may apply
Note:
1.Parcels within an integrated development may vary from the minimum lot size and dimensions, with recordation of cross easements to guarantee
access and common maintenance of all parking and landscape areas.
A. Minimum Requirements: No use either specifically authorized herein or any other use shall be carried on in a manner which will emit loud noises of
sufficient volume to be disturbing at a distance of three hundred feet (300') from the edge of property lines, nor shall the emission of excessive smoke,
steam or other view obscuring or air polluting substance be allowed.
B. Parking Areas: All parking areas shall be hard surfaced and should be of sufficient size to provide off street parking for all employees, customers and
vehicles used in such operation in accordance with chapter 5 of this title.
C. Storage: All storage of waste material and machinery shall be either within closed buildings or surrounded by a solid board or metal fence not less than
ten feet (10') in height. Such fencing may be surrounded by natural plants or vegetation, and no such storage areas shall take place within twenty five
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 213/303
feet (25') of the street or street to railway intersection. (Ord. 1252, 4-20-2011)
9-3-5: SPECIFIC REGULATIONS:
9-3-5-1: BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS FOR NEW OFFICE, COMMERCIAL AND RETAIL CONSTRUCTION:
Design requirements applicable to certain new construction in the industrial zones. (See section 9-3-3, notes to table 1 of this chapter.)
The design guidelines in this section 9-3-5-1 are intended to provide human scale design, while affording flexibility to use a variety of building styles. These
guidelines shall be applied to all new construction for uses identified in section 9-3-3, notes to table 1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1252, 4-20-2011)
9-3-5-1-1: BUILDING ORIENTATION:
Orientation and design of all new buildings or additions shall be reinforced through the observation of the following standards:
A. Primary Entrance: Buildings have their primary entrance(s) oriented to their primary frontage. Building entrances may include entrances to individual
units, lobby entrances, entrances oriented to pedestrian plazas, or breezeway/courtyard entrances to a cluster of spaces.
B. Secondary Entrance: A building may have a secondary entrance facing a side yard when a direct pedestrian walkway is provided between the building
entrance and the street right of way.
C. Vehicular Access: Off street parking, driveways and other vehicular access shall not be placed between a building's primary facade and the street.
D. Accessibility: There shall be provided one zero-step entrance to each building from an accessible path at the front, side, or rear of each building. All the
first floor interior doors (including bathrooms) shall provide at least thirty two inches (32") of clear passage.
E. Surface Parking: Parking areas of more than thirty (30) spaces shall be divided into areas of no more than thirty (30) spaces. Division may be by a
building, internal landscaped street, or landscaped multimodal way having a total width of fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 1252, 4-20-2011)
9-3-5-1-2: STOREFRONT DESIGN:
The following architectural features should be used along the street frontage building elevations, as applicable. Minor deviation from the following features
may be authorized at the discretion of the planning director, so long as the spirit of this code is maintained.
A. Buildings should have consistent spacing of similar shaped windows with trim or other decorative molding on all building stories.
B. Large display windows should be employed on ground floor storefronts. Display windows should be framed to visually separate the ground floor from
the second floor.
C. All buildings with a flat roof should have a decorative cornice at the top of the building; or eaves, when the building is designed with a pitched roof.
D. Cornices or changes in material can be used to differentiate the ground floor of buildings that have commercial uses from the upper floor(s) that may
have offices or residential uses. Ground floor facades should utilize cornices, signs, awnings, exterior lighting, display windows and entry insets.
E. Facades greater than fifty feet (50') in length shall incorporate recesses and projections with a minimum four foot (4') differentiation along at least twenty
percent (20%) of the length of the facade. Window awnings, arches, or columns must total at least sixty percent (60%) of the facade length abutting the
street.
F. Maximum front setback for commercial, retail and office construction shall be ten feet (10'). (Ord. 1252, 4-20-2011)
9-3-5-1-3: BUILDING MATERIALS:
A. Building materials shall not create glare. Highly reflective materials shall not be permitted.
B. Clear glass windows shall be used for storefront windows and doors. Ground floor window shall be defined as glass, either fixed or opening windows.
Windows shall not be covered permanently on the interior by more than twenty percent (20%). Opaque or severely site obscuring windows will not be
permitted.
C. Architectural treatment, similar to that provided on the front facade shall be provided to the sides and rear of the building to mitigate any negative view
from any location off site and any public area (e.g., parking lots, walkways, etc.) on site. Windows and doors shall be defined with detail elements, such
as frames, sills, and lintels, and placed to visually establish and define the building stories and establish human scale and proportion. (Ord. 1252, 4-20-
2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 214/303
9-3-5-1-4: CIVIC SPACES:
Civic spaces serve as informal gathering places for socializing, resting and enjoyment of the area, and contribute to a walkable environment. Each civic
space shall be open to the thoroughfare or street by incorporating at least one access to the thoroughfare or street. Each building with street frontage shall
include two (2) or more of the following features. Civic spaces may be provided within the public right of way when approved by the local jurisdiction having
authority. The following shall be considered civic spaces for incorporation into the building design:
A. A plaza or courtyard next to the building entrance.
B. Sitting space (i.e., dining area, benches, or ledges) between the building entrance and the sidewalk.
C. A building canopy, awning, or similar weather protection, with a minimum four foot (4') projection over the sidewalk or other pedestrian space.
D. Public art as approved by the Sandpoint art commission. (Ord. 1252, 4-20-2011)
9-3-5-1-5: SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR PARKING AND LOADING AREAS:
A. Parking, Garages And Driveways: All off street vehicle parking, including surface lots and garages, shall be oriented to alleys, placed underground, or
located in parking areas behind or to the side of the building.
B. Frontage Parking: In no case shall more than ten percent (10%) of primary lot frontage be developed with surface parking. For the purpose of this
provision, primary lot frontage shall be defined as the linear frontage along the primary street having a depth of fifteen feet (15').
C. Parking Garages: Ground floors of commercial parking garages abutting public right of way shall consist entirely of office or retail space excluding drive
isles. Building design standards articulated in this section 9-3-5-1 shall apply to all parking structures.
D. Trash And Loading Areas: In order to preserve and enhance the pedestrian orientation of the zone, all servicing, loading, and solid waste collection for
new structures shall take place off street away from pedestrian walkways, generally in bays provided in the alleys or in screened, internal, rear spaces
if alleys are not available. (Ord. 1252, 4-20-2011)
9-3-5-1-6: SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR BUILDINGS WITH FOOTPRINT EXCEEDING TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND SQUARE
FEET:
Buildings with greater than a twenty five thousand (25,000) square foot building footprint require a conditional use permit and shall adhere to the following:
A. Circulation Amenities: A safe and landscaped multimodal circulation system shall be provided on site which connects to public streets and
neighborhoods. Multimodal pathways within the development shall be differentiated from driving surfaces through a change in materials. At least one
substantial amenity, as described in section 9-3-5-1-4 of this chapter, shall be provided for every two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of
structure footprint.
B. Facades And Exterior Walls, Including Sides And Backs: The building shall be designed in a way that will reduce the massive scale and uniform and
impersonal appearance and will provide visual interest consistent with the community's identity, character, and scale. Architectural treatment, similar to
that provided to the front facade, shall be provided to the sides and rear of the building to mitigate any negative view from any location off site and any
public area (e.g., parking lots, walkways, etc.) on site.
C. Roofs: The roof design shall include architectural features that contribute to the visual interest at the pedestrian scale and reduce the massive scale of
large buildings. Roof features shall complement the architectural and visual character of adjoining neighborhoods. Roofs shall have the appearance of
two (2) or more roof planes either through architectural features or engineered design. Parapet walls shall be architecturally treated to avoid a plain,
monotonous look. Roofs shall be lightly colored, vegetative or photovoltaic.
D. Building Design: All buildings shall provide a direct unencumbered multimodal connection to an abutting street. All buildings shall be designed so that
parking is not located along the primary street of the building. Nonmotorized parking shall be permitted along the primary facade of the building. A
buffer with a minimum width of eight feet (8') will be maintained between parking areas and all bike trails, pedestrianways and public sidewalks.
Building entrance(s), windows, roof snow drop areas, and other movable building features shall have an appropriate setback so as not to interfere with
the safe movement of pedestrians and cyclists.
E. Adaptability For Reuse/Compartmentalization: The building design shall include specific elements for adaptation for multi-tenant reuse. Such elements
may include, but are not limited to, compartmentalized construction, including plumbing, electrical service, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning. The
building design shall also allow for: the interior subdivision of the structure into separate tenancies; facades that readily adapt to multiple entrances and
adapt to entrances on all but one side of the building; parking lot schemes that are shared by establishments or are linked by safe and functional
pedestrian connections; landscaping schemes that complement the multiple entrance design; and other elements of design which facilitate the multitenant
reuse of the building and site.
F. Renewal Plan: Applications shall include a renewal plan that will afford maximum opportunity, consistent with the sound needs of the municipality as a
whole, for the rehabilitation or redevelopment of the structure in the event of closure or relocation by the original occupant. Such plan will be approved
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 215/303
if the city finds that:
1. A sound and adequate plan exists for said redevelopment; and
2. The plan affords maximum opportunity for rehabilitation or redevelopment of the structure by both private enterprise and the municipality; and
3. The renewal plan provides a maintenance plan for normal repairs and upkeep of property, including, but not limited to, building, parking lot and
surfacing, landscaping, signage, and elimination of "ghost signage".
G. Redevelopment Agreement: The city may enter a redevelopment agreement with the owner of the real property and undertake activities, including the
acquisition, removal, or demolition of structures, improvements, or personal property located on the real property, to prepare the property for
redevelopment. A redevelopment agreement entered into in accordance with this section must contain provisions obligating the owner to redevelop the
real property for a specified use consistent with the provisions of this title and offering recourse to the city if the redevelopment is not completed as
determined by the city.
H. Exemptions: Government offices, courthouses, libraries, museums, community centers, and hospitals are exempt from the required conditional use
permit requirement of this section but shall conform to all other standards identified in this section. (Ord. 1252, 4-20-2011)
9-3-5-2: MATERIAL RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY (MRRF):
The purpose of this section is to ensure that the establishment of a material resource recovery facility (MRRF) does not adversely impact land uses in the
vicinity of the facility. The intent is to minimize land use conflicts and integrate the MRRF with the surrounding area.
A. Type Of Resource Materials: The facility shall only handle source separated recyclable materials and incoming solid waste. An MRRF shall not be
conducted as a garbage transfer station and shall not collect, process, or sort any raw or wet garbage. Any incoming waste not recycled or recovered
shall be transported to an authorized landfill within forty eight (48) hours.
B. Sorting: Materials shall be sorted only within an entirely enclosed building. Delivery doors shall be located on building walls away from potential or
existing noise sensitive land uses.
C. Outdoor Storage: Height, setbacks, screening, baled, paletted, or otherwise consolidated materials stored outdoors shall be stacked no higher than
sixteen feet (16') and placed no closer than seventy five feet (75') to any front property line. Outdoor storage shall be located out of view from public
streets and highways, or completely screened by a solid masonry wall.
D. Maintenance: The property owner shall undertake adequate measures to ensure that the site is free of wind blown debris at all times. The property
owner shall be responsible for clean up of any wind blown debris on or off site from incoming/outgoing vehicles or outdoor storage. (Ord. 1252, 4-20-
2011)
Chapter 4
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
9-4-1: RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY (RS) ZONE:
9-4-1-1: PURPOSE:
The Single-Family Zone is intended to preserve land for housing and to provide housing opportunities for individual households. The zones implement the
comprehensive plan policies and designations for single-family housing in the CA-2 areas identified in the 2009 comprehensive plan. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-
2011)
9-4-1-2: USE REGULATIONS:
The use regulations are intended to create, maintain and promote single dwelling neighborhoods. They allow for some nonhousehold living uses but not to
such an extent as to sacrifice the overall image and character of the single dwelling neighborhood.
The following regulations shall apply:
P = Permitted use C = Conditional use1 N = Not permitted
Residential:
Accessory dwellings as provided in section 9-1-8 of this title P
Attached housing P2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 216/303
Cottage housing in accordance with section 9-4-7 of this chapter P3
Gated communities N
Manufactured homes subject to the following provisions, conditions, and regulations: P
A. The manufactured home shall be multi-sectional, unless sited in a recognized, existing or newly created manufactured housing
community.
B. The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and backfilled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter in such a manner
that the home is located not more than 12 inches above grade.
C. In addition to the provisions of subsection A of this use, a manufactured home shall be subject to any development standard,
architectural requirements and minimum size requirements to which a conventional single-family residential dwelling on the same lot
would be subjected.
Multi-family dwellings N4
Short term rentals subject to the licensing requirements set forth in title 3, chapter 12 of this Code P
Single-family dwellings, private garages, and such outbuildings as may be incidental thereto. Such outbuildings shall not be used, occupied
or equipped for a permanent dwelling or guesthouse and not more than 1 dwelling shall occupy 1 lot, except as otherwise provided for in
this title
P
Nonresidential:
Cemeteries C
Churches and accessory buildings used for religious teachings C
Community centers, nonmunicipally owned N
Daycare, including homeschooling:
Home (6 or less - home occupation) P
Group (7 - 12) N
Daycare facilities (13+) N
Fire stations N
Home occupations P
Kennels; commercial or private, even as a home occupation N
Libraries C
Municipally owned facilities P
Other uses not specifically listed N
Parks or playgrounds:
Private C
Public P
Police stations N
Public utility facilities P
Recreation buildings, nonmunicipally owned N
Schools, public or private, except those schools of vocational nature which operate similarly to a retail business where a product or products C
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 217/303
may be purchased on the premises
Notes:
1. Any use legally established as a permitted use now subject to conditional use approval shall be subject to conditional use approval to expand such use.
2. Subject to standards set forth for the standards for development of residential original substandard lots of record.
3. Subject to standards set forth for cottage housing development.
4. Development of attached housing units or cottage housing in the RS Zone shall not be restricted by this provision.
(Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011; amd. Ord. 1281, 5-15-2013; Ord. 1336, 11-2-2016; Ord. 1353, 6-6-2018)
9-4-1-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The development standards for the Residential Single-Family Zone preserve the character of single-family neighborhoods and provide flexibility to allow
different densities and development standards. The development standards work together to promote desirable residential areas by addressing
aesthetically pleasing environments, safety, privacy, energy conservation, and recreational opportunities. The site development standards allow for
flexibility of development while maintaining compatibility within the City's various single-family neighborhoods. In addition, the regulations provide certainty
to property owners, developers, and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed.
A. Lot Areas: No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected or maintained unless the following
described yards and lot areas are provided and maintained in connection with said building, structure or enlargement:
Every building erected shall be on a lot having an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet with a frontage on public streets of not less
than fifty feet (50') and shall have a width of not less than fifty feet (50') at the front building line. Lots with frontage on a cul-de-sac shall have a
minimum frontage on a public road of not less than fifty feet (50').
B. Setbacks:
1. Purpose: The setback regulations for buildings and garage entrances serve several purposes:
a. They maintain light, air, separation for fire protection, and access for firefighting;
b. They reflect the general building scale and placement of houses in the city's single-family neighborhoods;
c. They promote a reasonable physical relationship between residences;
d. They promote options for privacy for neighboring properties;
e. They require larger front setbacks than side and rear setbacks to promote open, visually pleasing front yards;
f. They provide adequate flexibility to site a building so that it may be compatible with the neighborhood, fit the topography of the site, allow for
required outdoor areas, and allow for architectural diversity; and
g. They provide room for a car to park in front of a garage door without overhanging the street or sidewalk, and they enhance driver visibility when
backing onto the street.
2. Front Yard Limits: Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than twenty feet (20') in depth from front lot line unless provided for elsewhere in this
code.
3. Side Yard:
a. On interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side of the outer walls of any building constructed thereon of not less than five feet (5').
b. Buildings erected upon corner lots need only comply with the front yard requirement with regard to their primary facade, which is designated as
having the primary entrance. A side yard setback is required for flanking streets on corner lots. Flanking street setbacks may be reduced from
twenty feet (20') to ten feet (10') but shall include design features such as projections, recessions, windows or other architectural treatment to
prevent a blank wall appearance.
4. Rear Yard: Each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than fifteen feet (15').
5. Garage And Parking Entrance Setback: To avoid vehicles parking on the sidewalk, no front entry garage shall be constructed within twenty five feet
(25') of a property line having frontage along a public street. Any uncovered off street parking developed within the front yard setback shall have a
minimum depth of twenty five feet (25').
6. Riparian And Shoreline Setback:
a. Purpose: The purpose of this subsection B6 is to protect scenic and recreational resources, water quality and natural shoreline habitat. In addition,
shoreline setbacks and buffers help avoid damage to development from erosion and flooding. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
The waterfront building setback for new development and redevelopment (tear downs) along waterfront properties within the city of Sandpoint shall
be a minimum of forty feet (40') from the artificial high water mark. For purposes of this subsection B6, the artificial high water mark shall be
considered according to the North American vertical datum of 1988 (NAVD88) as 2,066.4 or 2,062.5 feet using the national geodetic vertical datum
of 1929 (NGVD29). (Ord. 1336, 11-2-2016)
New development adhering to the forty foot (40') setback and/or reconstruction that involves issuance of a building permit for greater than twenty
five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) of improvements, shall be required to plant fifty percent (50%) of the area in the minimum twenty five foot (25')
building setback with native vegetation comprised of a mixture of grasses and shrubs. For the purpose of this subsection B6, building permit
valuation shall be a cumulative aggregate from the date of the adoption hereof forward.
The city shall assist the applicant in determining appropriate native vegetation required, and will coordinate with the applicant on the planting
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 218/303
success the following year.
The building setback can be reduced to twenty five feet (25') if the setback area is revegetated with primarily native vegetation. Establishment of a
tree canopy is encouraged. No constructed structures other than those required for waterfront access/docks are allowed within the twenty five foot
(25') setback. The applicant shall record on the title documentation from the city of Sandpoint confirming that the structure has been built under the
flexible setback option and as such, the structure is conforming and the area within the twenty five foot (25') lakefront setback is to remain planted
primarily with native vegetation (as described above).
A variance may be sought for those projects or activities for which it can be demonstrated that strict compliance would result in a practical difficulty.
City owned property shall be exempt from the required standards.
b. Shoreline Setback Exceptions: Placement of constructed trams, rails, uncovered steps, stairs or walkways, any of which shall be five feet (5') or
less in width and installed to provide access to the shoreline, are permitted within the shoreline setback. Such structures shall not be constructed
in a manner that is parallel to the shoreline that would create a boardwalk along the waterfront (except where steep slopes require switchback
designs).
7. Exceptions To The Required Setbacks: Certain parts of structures may be allowed to encroach into the required setbacks as described herein.
Setbacks are modified further for attached housing, cottage housing and substandard lots.
a. Maximum Encroachment: No part of any structure shall encroach within fifteen feet (15') of the front property line, three feet (3') of the side
property line(s) and ten feet (10') of the rear property line.
b. General Exceptions: The following shall be permitted to encroach up to the maximum encroachment:
(1) Established Building Lines: Sites with legally existing nonconforming development in a required setback are eligible for a onetime reduction to
the required setbacks. The building line created by the nonconforming wall serves as the reduced setback line. At a maximum, the
nonconforming wall may be doubled in length, e.g., a two foot (2') long wall within the side yard setback may be lengthened to four feet (4') total.
The vertical height of the wall shall not be increased, e.g., a second story cannot be placed up to the reduced setback line if the existing
nonconforming wall is only one story high.
(2) Minor Features: Minor features of a building such as eaves, chimneys, water collection cisterns and planters, bay windows, and uncovered
balconies, may extend into the required setback. Bays and bay windows encroaching into the setback also must meet the following
requirements: a) each bay and bay window may be up to twelve feet (12') long, but the total area of all bays and bay windows on a building
facade cannot be more than thirty percent (30%) of the linear total of the facade; b) bays and bay windows must cantilever beyond the
foundation of the building; and c) the bay may not include any doors.
8. Specific Exceptions: The following shall be permitted to encroach up to the maximum encroachment. Any structure shall be limited to fifteen feet
(15') in height above grade for that portion within the setback area.
a. Adjacent Structures: Where both adjacent lots on the primary frontage are developed with structures and both adjacent structures have front yard
setbacks less than the minimum, the subject lot may build within the front setback to the maximum encroachment.
b. Porches: Unenclosed front porches may encroach into the front yard setback up to ten feet (10') from the front property line.
c. Garages: Garages shall not be permitted to encroach on the front yard setback but may be used in calculating adjacent structure setbacks as
described above. Detached garages may encroach on side and rear setbacks up to the maximum encroachment. Detached garages are subject to
additional requirements.
C. Lot Coverage:
1. Purpose: The building coverage standards, together with the height and setback standards control the overall bulk of structures. They are intended
to assure that taller buildings will not have such a large footprint that their total bulk will overwhelm adjacent houses. Additionally, the standards help
define the character of the different zones by limiting the amount of buildings allowed on a site.
2. Building Footprint: Each lot upon which a dwelling, private garage or other outbuilding is constructed shall have a maximum thirty five percent (35%)
building footprint and a maximum thirty percent (30%) impervious surface.
D. Building Height: No structure shall exceed a building height of thirty five feet (35') above the average elevation of the finished grade at the front of the
building.
1. Exceptions To The Maximum Height:
a. Chimneys, flagpoles, satellite receiving dishes, roof mounted solar panels and other similar items may extend above the height limit, as long as
they do not exceed five feet (5') above the top of the highest point of the roof.
b. Utility power poles, and public safety facilities are exempt from the height limit.
E. Garages:
1. Purpose: Together with the main entrance and street facing facade standards, these standards ensure that there is a physical and visual connection
between the living area of the residence and the street. Additionally these standards:
a. Ensure that the location and amount of the living area of the residence, as seen from the street, is more prominent than the garage;
b. Prevent garages from obscuring the main entrance from the street and ensure that the main entrance for pedestrians, rather than automobiles, is
the prominent entrance;
c. Provide for a more pleasant pedestrian environment by preventing garages and vehicle areas from dominating the views of the neighborhood from
the sidewalk; and
d. Enhance public safety by discouraging garages from blocking views of the street from inside the residence.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 219/303
2. Where These Standards Apply: The regulations of this subsection E apply to all attached or detached garages in the residential single-family zone.
On corner lots, only one street facing garage wall must meet the standards of this subsection E.
3. The Standard:
a. Dimensions:
(1) The length of the garage wall facing the street may be up to fifty percent (50%) of the length of the street facing unit facade (see figure 1 of this
section). For attached houses on corner lots, garage walls are limited to twenty five feet (25') in length.
Figure 1
(2) Garages shall be recessed, or may be flush to the primary facade when the primary facade contains an unenclosed porch having a depth of
seven feet (7') or greater and occupying a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the linear primary structure facade.
(3) Garages facing the street having building walls greater than twelve feet (12') in height or facade walls greater than twenty four feet (24') in
length shall include architectural detail to break up and limit the massive appearance of the wall. Doing so requires utilizing at least two (2) of the
following architectural features on street facade:
(A) Dormers;
(B) Gables;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 220/303
(C) Covered porch entries;
(D) Pillars or posts;
(E) Eaves;
(F) Offsets in building face or roof (minimum of 16 inches);
(G) Window trim;
(H) Bay windows;
(I) Balconies;
(J) An alternative feature providing for visual relief, similar to subsections E3a(3)(A) through E3a(3)(I) of this section.
b. Side And Rear Setbacks: In the residential single-family zone, detached garages are allowed in the side and rear building setbacks if all of the
following are met:
(1) The garage is set back at least twenty five feet (25') from a front lot line, and if on a corner or alley accessible lot, it may be constructed one
foot (1') from a flanking street or alley lot line;
(2) Dormers are set back at least five feet (5') from the side and rear lot lines.
(3) Second floor windows facing abutting lots utilize appropriate material (glass block or opaque glass) to maintain privacy of adjacent property.
(4) Maintenance easements are provided by adjacent property owner when utilizing less than a two foot (2') setback from adjacent property line.
(5) Snow drop and stormwater runoff from the structure are contained on site.
4. Existing Detached Garages:
a. Change Of Use: In the residential single-family zone, a detached garage that is in the side or rear setback may be converted to another type of
detached covered accessory structure so long as it is compliant with regulations specified in section 9-1-8 or 9-1-5 of this title. Second floor
windows facing abutting lots utilize appropriate material (glass block or opaque glass) to maintain privacy of adjacent property.
b. Rebuilding: A detached garage that is nonconforming due to its location in a setback, may be rebuilt on the footprint of the existing foundation, if
the garage was originally constructed legally. Where the structure facade faces a street, garages utilizing this provision shall be designed and
reconstructed in a manner to prevent a blank wall appearance through the utilization of projections, recessions, windows or other architectural
treatment.
c. Additions: An addition may be made to a detached garage that is nonconforming due to its location in a setback as follows:
(1) The expanded garage complies with all other standards of this section.
F. Main Entrances:
1. Purpose: These standards:
a. Together with the street facing facade and garage standards, ensure that there is a physical and visual connection between the living area of the
residence and the street;
b. Enhance public safety for residents and visitors and provide opportunities for community interaction;
c. Ensure that the pedestrian entrance is visible or clearly identifiable from the street by its orientation or articulation; and
d. Ensure that pedestrians can easily find the main entrance, and so establish how to enter the residence.
e. Ensure a connection to the public realm for development on lots fronting both private and public streets by making the pedestrian entrance visible
or clearly identifiable from the public street.
2. Where These Standards Apply:
a. The standards of this subsection F apply to houses, attached houses, and manufactured homes, in the residential single-family zone;
b. Where a proposal is for an alteration or addition to existing development, the standards of this subsection F apply only to the portion being altered
or added;
c. On sites with frontage on both a private street and a public street, the standards apply to the site frontage on the public street. On all other sites
with more than one street frontage, the applicant may choose on which frontage to meet the standards.
3. The Standard:
a. Location: At least one main entrance for each structure must:
(1) Either:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 221/303
(A) Face the street;
(B) Be at an angle of up to forty five degrees (45°) from the street; or
(C) Open onto a porch. See figure 2 of this section. The porch must be a covered unenclosed porch with a minimum of twenty five (25) square
feet in area.
Figure 2
G. Street Facing Facades:
1. Purpose: This standard:
a. Together with the main entrance and garage standards, ensures that there is a visual connection between the living area of the residence and the
street;
b. Enhances public safety by allowing people to survey their neighborhood from inside their residences; and
c. Provides a more pleasant pedestrian environment by preventing large expanses of blank facades along streets.
2. Where This Standard Applies: The standard of this subsection G applies to houses, attached homes, and manufactured homes in the residential
single-family zone. Where a proposal is for an alteration or addition to existing development, the applicant may choose to apply the standard either to
the portion being altered or added, or to the entire street facing facade.
3. The Standard: At least fifteen percent (15%) of the square footage area of each facade that faces a street lot line must be windows or main entrance
doors. Windows used to meet this standard must allow views from the building to the street. Glass block does not meet this standard. Windows in
garage doors do not count toward meeting this standard, but windows in garage walls do count toward meeting this standard. To count toward
meeting this standard, a door must be at the main entrance and facing a street lot line.
H. Attached Housing Options:
1. Purpose: The alternative development options allow for variety in development standards while maintaining the overall character of a single dwelling
neighborhood. These options have several public benefits:
a. They allow for development which is more sensitive to the environment, especially in hilly areas and areas with water features and natural
drainageways;
b. They allow for the preservation of open and natural areas;
c. They promote better site layout and opportunities for private recreational areas;
d. They promote opportunities for affordable housing;
e. They promote energy efficient development; and
f. They allow for the provision of alternative structure types where density standards are met.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 222/303
g. They reduce the impact that new development may have on surrounding residential development.
h. Attached housing allows for more efficient use of land and for energy conserving housing.
2. Where This Standard Applies: The regulations of this subsection apply to all attached housing in the residential single-family zone. The alternative
development options listed in this subsection H are allowed by right unless specifically stated otherwise. The project must comply with all of the
applicable development standards of this subsection H. The project must also conform to all other development standards of the base zone unless
those standards are superseded by the standards in this subsection H.
3. The Standard:
a. Area Requirements:
(1) Lot Dimensions: Attached housing must be on a lot that has a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet unless otherwise stated by
this code.
(2) Building Setbacks:
(A) Interior (Noncorner) Lots: On interior lots the side building setback on the side containing the common wall is reduced to zero. The reduced
setback applies to all buildings on the lot and extends along the full length of the lot line that contains the common or abutting wall. The side
building setback on the side opposite the common wall must be ten feet (10').
(B) Corner Lots: On corner lots either the rear setback or nonstreet side setback may be reduced to five feet (5'). However, the remaining
nonstreet setback must comply with the requirements for a standard rear setback.
b. Number Of Units: A maximum of two (2) units are allowed per structure. Attached houses may have a common wall. Accessory dwelling units are
prohibited on lots developed with attached housing.
c. Single-Family Character: Attached housing shall contribute to the single-family character of the neighborhood by utilizing exemplary design and
architecture to seamlessly integrate with other structures in the vicinity. (See figure 3 of this section.)
Figure 3
d. Second Story Design: A second story of any attached housing unit requires additional design standards. Along the street facing facade, the
building shall incorporate features such as offsets, balconies, projections, window reveals, or similar elements to preclude large expanses of
uninterrupted building surfaces. Such features shall occur at a minimum of every twelve feet (12') along the vertical face of the facade, and each
floor shall contain a minimum of offsets or breaks in facade of two feet (2') or greater in depth.
e. Landscape Standards: The following landscape standards must be met on lots in the residential single-family zone to qualify for attached housing
development:
(1) A minimum of three (3) front yard trees with a minimum dbh of two inches (2") shall be planted per unit. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-2: RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY (RM) ZONE:
9-4-2-1: PURPOSE:
Areas zoned as Residential Multi-Family (RM) are intended to preserve land for housing and to provide diversity in housing options. This zone implements
the comprehensive plan policies for those areas identified as CA-3 in the 2009 comprehensive plan. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-2-2: USE REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 223/303
These use regulations are intended to create opportunities for new types of housing that seamlessly integrate with existing neighborhoods in the area. The
regulations allow for a wider range of housing types compared to Residential Single-Family (RS) in order to create a denser neighborhood form.
The following regulations shall apply:
P = Permitted use C = Conditional use1 N = Not permitted
Residential:
Accessory dwellings as provided in section 9-1-8 of this title P
Attached housing P2
Clubs, lodges, fraternal organizations, when not operated for profit P
Cottage housing P3
Gated communities N
Manufactured homes subject to following provisions, conditions and regulations: P4
A. The manufactured home shall be multi-sectional, unless sited in a recognized, existing or newly created manufactured housing
community.
B. The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and backfilled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter in such a manner
that the home is located not more than 12 inches above grade.
C. In addition to the provisions of subsection A of this use, a manufactured home shall be subject to any development standard,
architectural requirements and minimum size requirements to which a conventional single-family residential dwelling on the same lot
would be subjected.
Multi-family dwellings:
7 units or less P
8 units or more C
Short term rentals subject to the licensing requirements set forth in title 3, chapter 12 of this Code P
Single-family dwellings, private garages, and such outbuildings as may be incidental thereto. Such outbuildings shall not be used, occupied
or equipped for a permanent dwelling or guesthouse and not more than 1 dwelling shall occupy 1 lot, except as otherwise provided for in
this title
P
Nonresidential:
Cemeteries C
Churches and accessory buildings used for religious teachings C
Community centers, nonmunicipally owned C
Community garden. No commerce/retail sales permitted on site P
Daycare, including homeschooling:
Home (6 or less - home occupation) P
Group (7 - 12) C
Daycare facilities (13+) C
Fire stations N
Home occupations P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 224/303
Kennels; commercial or private, even as a home occupation N
Libraries C
Neighborhood eatery. Performance standards that apply to neighborhood eatery uses in this zone consist of, but are not limited to, the
following criteria:
C
A. The premises must be owner occupied.
B. Entrances shall be located along the primary street frontage.
C. Hours of operation between 7:00 A.M. - 10:00 P.M.
D. Delivery times shall be limited to hours of operation.
Municipally owned facilities P
Other uses not specifically listed N
Parks or playgrounds:
Private C
Public P
Police stations N
Public utility facilities C
Recreation buildings, nonmunicipally owned N
Schools, public or private, except those schools of vocational nature which operate similarly to a retail business where a product or products
may be purchased on the premises
C
Notes:
1. Any use legally established as a permitted use now subject to conditional use approval shall be subject to conditional use approval to expand such use.
2. Subject to standards set forth for the standards for development of residential original substandard lots of record.
3. Subject to standards set forth for cottage housing development.
4. The recognized, existing communities within the RM Zone at the time of adoption hereof include the 6-unit Lines Mobile Home Park located at the
southeast corner of Division Avenue and Church Street and the 16-unit Wikiup Mobile Home Park located on the east side of Florence Avenue between
Fir and Larch Streets.
(Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011; amd. Ord. 1281, 5-15-2013; Ord. 1336, 11-2-2016; Ord. 1353, 6-6-2018)
9-4-2-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Lot Areas: Every dwelling erected shall be on a lot having an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet and frontage on a public street of
not less than thirty seven and one-half feet (37.5') and shall have a width of not less than thirty seven and one-half feet (37.5') at the front building line.
Lots with frontage on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum frontage on a public road of not less than thirty feet (30').
Additional units may be developed as follows:
AREA INCREASES PER UNIT
Units
Lot Size
Road Frontage
Permitted use:
An additional 1,775 square feet of area, and an additional 12.5 feet, but no more than 130 feet of
frontage
2 6,775 50
3 8,550 62.5
4 10,325 75
5 12,100 87.5
6 13,875 100
7 15,650 112.5
Conditional use:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 225/303
8 17,425 125
9 19,200 130
10 20,975 130
11+ +1,000 each unit
130
B. Setbacks:
1. Purpose: The setback regulations for buildings and garage entrances serve several purposes:
a. They maintain light, air, separation for fire protection, and access for firefighting;
b. They reflect the general building scale and placement of houses;
c. They promote a reasonable physical relationship between residences;
d. They promote options for privacy for neighboring properties;
e. They require larger front setbacks than side and rear setbacks to promote open, visually pleasing front yards;
f. They provide adequate flexibility to site a building so that it may be compatible with the neighborhood, fit the topography of the site, allow for
required outdoor areas, and allow for architectural diversity; and
g. They provide room for a car to park in front of a garage door without overhanging the street or sidewalk, and they enhance driver visibility when
backing onto the street.
2. Front Yard Limits: Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than fifteen feet (15') in depth from front lot line unless provided for elsewhere in this
code.
3. Side Yard:
a. On interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side of the outer walls of any building constructed thereon of not less than five feet (5').
b. Buildings erected upon corner lots need only comply with the front yard requirement with regard to their primary facade, which is designated as
having the primary entrance. A side yard setback is required for secondary frontages on corner lots. Flanking street setbacks may be reduced from
fifteen feet (15') to ten feet (10') but shall include design features such as projections, recessions, windows or other architectural treatment to
prevent a blank wall appearance.
4. Rear Yard: Each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than fifteen feet (15').
5. Garage And Parking Entrance Setback: To avoid vehicles parking on the sidewalk, no street facing garage shall be constructed within twenty five
feet (25') of a property line having frontage along a public street. Any uncovered off street parking developed within the front yard setback shall have
a minimum depth of twenty five feet (25').
6. Riparian And Shoreline Setback:
a. Purpose: The purpose of this subsection B6 is to protect scenic and recreational resources, water quality and natural shoreline habitat. In addition,
shoreline setbacks and buffers help avoid damage to development from erosion and flooding.
The waterfront building setback for new development and redevelopment (tear downs) along waterfront properties within the city of Sandpoint shall
be a minimum of forty feet (40') from the artificial high water mark. For purposes of this subsection B6, artificial high water marks shall be
considered according to the North American vertical datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
New development adhering to the forty foot (40') setback and/or reconstruction that involves issuance of a building permit for greater than twenty
five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) of improvements, shall be required to plant fifty percent (50%) of the area in the minimum twenty five foot (25')
building setback with native vegetation comprised of a mixture of grasses and shrubs. For the purpose of this subsection B6, building permit
valuation shall be a cumulative aggregate from the date of the adoption hereof forward.
The city shall assist the applicant in determining appropriate native vegetation required, and will coordinate with the applicant on the planting
success the following year.
The building setback can be reduced to twenty five feet (25') if the setback area is revegetated with primarily native vegetation. Establishment of a
tree canopy is encouraged. No constructed structures other than those required for waterfront access/docks are allowed within the twenty five foot
(25') setback. The applicant shall record on the title documentation from the city of Sandpoint confirming that the structure has been built under the
flexible setback option and as such, the structure is conforming and the area within the twenty five foot (25') lakefront setback is to remain planted
primarily with native vegetation (as described above).
A variance may be sought for those projects or activities for which it can be demonstrated that strict compliance would result in a practical difficulty.
City owned property shall be exempt from the required standards.
b. Shoreline Setback Exceptions: Placement of constructed trams, rails, uncovered steps, stairs or walkways, any of which shall be five feet (5') or
less in width and installed to provide access to the shoreline, are permitted within the shoreline setback. Such structures shall not be constructed
in a manner that is parallel to the shoreline that would create a boardwalk along the waterfront (except where steep slopes require switchback
designs).
7. Exceptions To The Required Setbacks: Certain parts of structures may be allowed to encroach into the required setbacks as described herein.
Setbacks are modified further for attached housing, cottage housing and substandard lots.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 226/303
8. Maximum Encroachment: No part of any structure shall encroach within ten feet (10') of the front property line, three feet (3') of the side property
line(s) and five feet (5') of the rear property line.
9. General Exceptions: The following shall be permitted to encroach up to the maximum encroachment:
a. Established Building Lines: Sites with legally existing nonconforming development in a required setback are eligible for a onetime reduction to the
required setbacks. The building line created by the nonconforming wall serves as the reduced setback line. At a maximum, the nonconforming wall
may be doubled in length, e.g., a two foot (2') long wall within the side yard setback may be lengthened to four feet (4') total. The vertical height of
the wall shall not be increased, e.g., a second story cannot be placed up to the reduced setback line if the existing nonconforming wall is only one
story high.
b. Minor Features: Minor features of a building such as eaves, chimneys, water collection cisterns and planters, bay windows, and uncovered
balconies, may extend into the required setback. Bays and bay windows encroaching into the setback also must meet the following requirements:
1) each bay and bay window may be up to twelve feet (12') long, but the total area of all bays and bay windows on a building facade cannot be
more than thirty percent (30%) of the linear total of the facade; 2) bays and bay windows must cantilever beyond the foundation of the building;
and 3) the bay may not include any doors.
10. Specific Exceptions: The following shall be permitted to encroach up to the maximum encroachment and any structure shall be limited to fifteen feet
(15') in height above grade for that portion encroaching into the setback area:
a. Adjacent Structures: Where both adjacent lots on the primary frontage are developed with structures and both adjacent structures have front yard
setbacks less than the minimum, the subject lot may build within the front setback to the maximum encroachment.
b. Porches: Unenclosed front porches may encroach into the front yard setback up to the maximum encroachment.
c. Garages: Garages shall not be permitted to encroach on the front yard setback but may be used in calculating adjacent structure setbacks as
described above. Detached garages may encroach on side and rear setbacks up to the maximum encroachment. Detached garages are subject to
additional requirements.
C. Lot Coverage:
1. Purpose: The building coverage standards, together with the height and setback standards control the overall bulk of structures. They are intended
to assure that taller buildings will not have such a large footprint that their total bulk will overwhelm adjacent houses. Additionally, the standards help
define the character of the different zones by limiting the amount of buildings allowed on a site.
2. Building Footprint: Each lot upon which a dwelling, private garage or other outbuilding is constructed shall have a maximum forty percent (40%)
building footprint and a maximum forty percent (40%) impervious surface.
D. Building Height: No structure shall exceed a building height of forty feet (40') above the average elevation of the finished grade at the front of the
building.
1. Exceptions To The Maximum Height:
a. Chimneys, flagpoles, satellite receiving dishes, roof mounted solar panels and other similar items may extend above the height limit, as long as
they do not exceed five feet (5') above the top of the highest point of the roof.
b. Utility power poles, and public safety facilities are exempt from the height limit.
E. Garages:
1. Purpose: Together with the main entrance and street facing facade standards, these standards ensure that there is a physical and visual connection
between the living area of the residence and the street. Additionally these standards:
a. Ensure that the location and amount of the living area of the residence, as seen from the street, is more prominent than the garage;
b. Prevent garages from obscuring the main entrance from the street and ensure that the main entrance for pedestrians, rather than automobiles, is
the prominent entrance;
c. Provide for a more pleasant pedestrian environment by preventing garages and vehicle areas from dominating the views of the neighborhood from
the sidewalk; and
d. Enhance public safety by discouraging garages from blocking views of the street from inside the residence.
2. Where These Standards Apply: The regulations of this subsection E apply to all attached or detached garages in the residential multi-family zone.
On corner lots, only one street facing garage wall must meet the standards of this subsection E.
3. The Standard:
a. Dimensions:
(1) The length of the garage wall facing the street may be up to fifty percent (50%) of the length of the street facing unit facade (see figure 1 of this
section). Garage walls with a depth of not more than fifty feet (50') in length shall include architectural detail to break up and limit the massive
appearance.
Figure 1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 227/303
(2) Garages shall be recessed, or may be flush to the primary facade when the primary facade contains an unenclosed porch having a depth of
seven feet (7') or greater and occupying a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the linear primary structure facade.
(3) Garages facing the street having building walls greater than twelve feet (12') in height or facade walls greater than twenty four feet (24') in
length shall include architectural detail to break up and limit the massive appearance of the wall. Doing so requires utilizing at least two (2) of the
following architectural features on street facade:
(A) Dormers;
(B) Gables;
(C) Covered porch entries;
(D) Pillars or posts;
(E) Eaves;
(F) Offsets in building face or roof (minimum of 16 inches);
(G) Window trim;
(H) Bay windows;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 228/303
(I) Balconies;
(J) An alternative feature providing for visual relief, similar to subsections E3a(3)(A) through E3a(3)(I) of this section.
b. Side And Rear Setbacks: In the residential multi-family zone, detached garages are allowed in the side and rear building setbacks if all of the
following are met:
(1) The garage is set back at least twenty five feet (25') from a front lot line, and if on a corner or alley accessible lot, it may be constructed one
foot (1') from a flanking street or alley lot line;
(2) Dormers are set back at least five feet (5') from the side and rear lot lines.
(3) Second floor windows facing abutting lots utilize appropriate material (glass block or opaque glass) to maintain privacy of adjacent property.
(4) Maintenance easements are provided by adjacent property owner when utilizing less than a two foot (2') setback from adjacent property line.
(5) Snow drop and stormwater runoff from the structure are contained on site.
c. Existing Detached Garages:
(1) Change Of Use: In the residential multi-family zone, a detached garage that is in the side or rear setback may be converted to another type of
detached covered accessory structure so long as it is compliant with regulations specified in section 9-1-8 or 9-1-5 of this title. Second floor
windows facing abutting lots utilize appropriate material (glass block or opaque glass) to maintain privacy of adjacent property.
(2) Rebuilding: A detached garage that is nonconforming due to its location in a setback, may be rebuilt on the footprint of the existing foundation,
if the garage was originally constructed legally. Where the structure facade faces a street, garages utilizing this provision shall be designed and
reconstructed in a manner to prevent a blank wall appearance through the utilization of projections, recessions, windows or other architectural
treatment.
(3) Additions: An addition may be made to a detached garage that is nonconforming due to its location in a setback as follows:
(A) The expanded garage complies with all other standards of this section.
F. Main Entrances:
1. Purpose: These standards:
a. Together with the street facing facade and garage standards, ensure that there is a physical and visual connection between the living area of the
residence and the street;
b. Enhance public safety for residents and visitors and provide opportunities for community interaction;
c. Ensure that the pedestrian entrance is visible or clearly identifiable from the street by its orientation or articulation; and
d. Ensure that pedestrians can easily find the main entrance, and so establish how to enter the residence.
e. Ensure a connection to the public realm for development on lots fronting both private and public streets by making the pedestrian entrance visible
or clearly identifiable from the public street.
2. Where These Standards Apply:
a. The standards of this subsection F apply to houses, attached houses, and manufactured homes, in the residential multi-family zone;
b. Where a proposal is for an alteration or addition to existing development, the standards of this subsection F apply only to the portion being altered
or added;
c. On sites with frontage on both a private street and a public street, the standards apply to the site frontage on the public street. On all other sites
with more than one street frontage, the applicant may choose on which frontage to meet the standards.
3. The Standard:
a. Location: At least one main entrance for each structure must:
(1) Either:
(A) Face the street. Be at an angle of up to forty five degrees (45°) from the street; or
(B) Open onto a porch. See figure 2 of this section. The porch must be a covered unenclosed porch with a minimum of twenty five (25) square
feet in area.
Figure 2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 229/303
G. Street Facing Facades:
1. Purpose: This standard:
a. Together with the main entrance and garage standards, ensures that there is a visual connection between the living area of the residence and the
street;
b. Enhances public safety by allowing people to survey their neighborhood from inside their residences; and
c. Provides a more pleasant pedestrian environment by preventing large expanses of blank facades along streets.
2. Where This Standard Applies: The standard of this subsection G applies to houses, attached homes, and manufactured homes in the residential
multi-family zone. Where a proposal is for an alteration or addition to existing development, the applicant may choose to apply the standard either to
the portion being altered or added, or to the entire street facing facade. PUDs that received preliminary plan approval prior to the adoption of this
section are exempt from this standard.
3. The Standard: At least fifteen percent (15%) of the square footage area of each facade that faces a street lot line must be windows or main entrance
doors. Windows used to meet this standard must allow views from the building to the street. Glass block does not meet this standard. Windows in
garage doors do not count toward meeting this standard, but windows in garage walls do count toward meeting this standard. To count toward
meeting this standard, a door must be at the main entrance and facing a street lot line.
H. Additional Standards Applicable To Multi-Family Development:
1. Purpose And Intent: The following design standards were established to improve the appearance, quality, and functions of multi-family housing. The
standards herein apply to the development of multi-family housing in the "RM" zone of four (4) or more units including, but not limited to, apartments
and condominiums.
2. Conflicting Standards: In the event that other standards of this title conflict with standards in this provision, the standards within this provision shall
prevail.
3. Building Mechanicals, Service Elements, And Resident Amenities:
a. Service areas, utility meters, and building mechanicals shall not be located on the street side of the building, nor on a side wall closer than ten feet
(10') to the street side of the building. Screening of meters and mechanicals is required, regardless of location. Mailboxes are permitted within ten
feet (10') of the front of the building if not visible from the street.
b. Trash and recycling containers, including cans and dumpsters, shall be screened so as not to be visible from the street or from neighboring
properties. Screening shall be one foot (1') higher than the container but not higher than six feet (6'), however roofed enclosures may exceed this
limit.
c. Bike racks shall be provided and shall include space for at least two (2) bikes per unit.
d. Bike racks shall be located near building entries, shall not interfere with pedestrian circulation, and shall be well lit.
4. Pedestrian Circulation:
a. There shall be a hard surfaced (e.g., pavement, pavers, concrete) pedestrian route from the sidewalk or street to the main building entrance and
from the parking area to the nearest building entrance. Buildings with more than one entrance shall provide a designated pedestrian route between
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 230/303
those entrances (e.g., from front to back).
5. Landscaping, Open Space, And Plantings:
a. All portions of the site not covered by buildings, paving material, or other planned approved surfaces shall be considered "landscaped area" and
shall be planted with living plant materials and/or mulches. Overall site landscaping shall include not less than:
(1) One front yard shade tree with a caliper no smaller than two inches (2") dbh per twenty five (25) linear feet of lot frontage.
(2) One tree with a caliper no smaller than two inches (2") and ten (10) shrubs per six hundred (600) square feet of landscaped area.
b. Existing healthy trees shall be preserved to the greatest extent practicable; however, invasive or nuisance trees shall be removed. Existing
damaged, decayed, or diseased trees should be removed to protect remaining trees. Construction near existing trees should follow best
management practices to ensure their survival.
c. Landscaping should reinforce pedestrian circulation routes and obstruct undesired routes of convenience. Bushes, trees, rocks, and other
landscape features should be used to indicate where pedestrians should and should not travel. Native and low water demand plantings are
encouraged.
d. Outdoor seating including elements such as a bench or chair shall be provided at the ratio of one seating area per three (3) units which are to be
incorporated into or adjacent to usable open space.
e. One functional outdoor open space with a minimum dimension of five hundred (500) square feet shall be provided per five (5) units.
6. Neighborhood Scale: The scale of those buildings developed within an existing neighborhood shall conform to the established scale. Appropriate
scale multi-family development shall be achieved through the adherence of the following:
a. The overall height of the multi-family structure shall relate to that of adjacent structures by avoiding construction that varies greatly in height from
adjacent buildings. New multi-family structures shall graduate their maximum height based on adjacent structures using stepped roofs and/or
partial stories. For example, the portion of a multi-family structure constructed adjacent to a single story structure is limited to one and a half
stories, and if constructed adjacent to a one and one-half (11/2) story structure, the adjacent facade would be limited to two (2) stories.
b. Multi-family structures shall utilize a variety of building forms and roof shapes rather than boxlike forms with large, unvaried roofs. The building
design shall provide manipulations to create clusters of units and variations of height, setback and roof shape.
7. Building Entrances:
a. The primary entrance to the building shall be on the front elevation and shall face the street.
b. Building entrances shall be emphasized through projecting or recessing forms, detail, color, or materials.
c. A covering over the main entrance shall extend at least four feet (4') from the main door. Entrance features may encroach into the front yard
setback a maximum of four feet (4').
8. Facade And Articulation:
a. Buildings shall be divided into modules by using articulation or modulation at least every thirty (30) linear feet. Buildings shall use a common,
unifying design theme throughout the project but not repeat the same pattern of architectural elements for more than four (4) consecutive modules.
The use of at least one of the following techniques is required:
(1) Step the front facade building wall back or forward at least four feet (4') and change the roof shape or step the ridgeline to correspond to the
wall change.
(2) Change several of the architectural elements for the width of the module, such as primary siding material, decks, windows, and entry designs.
(3) Break up the roofline and wall heights by use of dormers, gables, and similar variations. When flat roofs are used, add architectural detail such
as cornice or fascia and modulation to reduce the perceived mass of the walls.
b. Buildings shall incorporate architectural details that will provide visual interest at a human scale. At least three (3) of the following shall be utilized:
(1) A one-story porch at entrances.
(2) Decorative details such as columns, bay windows, dormers, multi-lite windows, trim, or moldings to articulate the building facade.
(3) Roof details like brackets, wide (12 inches or more) cornices and wide (16 inches or more) overhangs.
(4) Materials and/or color variations that coordinate with changes in the building modules and differentiate ground floors from upper floors.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 231/303
Source: "Multi-family Residential Design Handbook" Bellingham, WA
c. Architectural treatment, similar to that provided to the front facade shall be provided to the sides and rear of the building to mitigate any negative
view from any location off site and any public area (e.g., parking lots, walkways, etc.) on site.
d. The total area of windows and doors on the street facing facade, including trim, shall not be less than twenty percent (20%) of the total area of the
facade, excluding gables. The first floor facade shall include windows to provide visual interest and visual connection to the street.
9. Parking: All parking areas shall be compliant with chapter 5 of this title. In addition, parking areas shall be designed to avoid their dominance of the
streetscape. Parking shall be provided at the rear or side of the site to allow a majority of the dwelling units to "front on" the street.
a. Parking areas shall be separated from primary buildings by a landscaped buffer of at least fifteen feet (15') in width.
10. Walls And Fences:
a. Walls and fences exceeding fifty feet (50') in length shall provide variety and articulation at intervals not exceeding twenty five feet (25') through at
least one of the following methods:
(1) Expression of structure, such as post, column, or pilaster.
(2) Variation of material.
b. Chainlink fencing is prohibited except in circumstances where fencing is provided for recreational courts (basketball, etc.).
11. Design Standard Waivers: An applicant may request a waiver from one or more of the standards listed above. All requests for waivers shall be
heard and decided by the planning commission or such design review subcommittee as may be created for such purpose. A waiver shall not be
considered a right or special privilege but may be granted to an applicant that can meet the following findings:
a. That the granting of the waiver will not be in conflict with the intent of the multi-family design standards, shall not negatively impact the existing
neighborhood and shall enhance the overall design quality of the project;
b. That there is an exceptional circumstance relating to the design or configuration of the property, which is not generally applicable to other
properties or otherwise anticipated by the standards in the district.
c. The granting of such relief will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property, improvements or the
quiet enjoyment of the surrounding properties and neighborhood.
d. The granting of such relief will not be in conflict with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-3: WATERSHED PROTECTION ZONE:
A. Created: There is hereby created a new zone within the city entitled the watershed protection zone.
B. Affected Parcels: The parcels of real property within the boundaries of the legal description set forth on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified
herein and incorporated herein in its entirety by reference shall be and are hereby included within the watershed protection zone.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 232/303
C. Boundaries And Maps: Attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein by reference is a legible map depicting the boundaries of the
new watershed protection zone, and all properties and parcels of real property within said depicted boundary line shall be and are hereby included
within the watershed protection zone.
D. Compliance With Provisions: All such properties so zoned and contained within the watershed protection zone shall be subject to the hereinafter set
forth regulations, requirements, restrictions and provisions.
E. Procedures: The following procedures shall apply to any division of property, subdivision of property, or development of real property within the
watershed protection zone:
1. The city shall administer and enforce the zoning requirements in the watershed protection zone pursuant to this code and ordinances of the city.
2. Any use proposed within the watershed protection zone which requires a conditional use permit shall be processed by the city pursuant to chapter 9
of this title.
3. Applications for building permits shall be processed by the city upon payment of all appropriate fees. No such building permit shall be approved until
review and approval by the city planning department.
4. All applications for conditional use permits, variances or subdivision shall be processed pursuant to this code.
F. Permitted Uses: The following shall be permitted uses within the watershed protection zone subject to the restrictions and conditions hereinafter set
forth:
Accessory buildings, not including guesthouses as defined in section 9-1-3 of this title.
Single-family dwellings.
G. Conditional Uses: The following shall be conditional uses within the watershed protection zone subject to the restrictions and conditions hereinafter set
forth:
Home occupations in compliance with section 9-1-3 of this title.
Those uses defined as permitted or conditional uses in the residence A zone.
H. Restrictions: The following restrictions shall apply within the watershed protection zone:
1. No parcel of land shall consist of less than twenty (20) acres;
2. All development shall comply with the provisions of this section and the provisions contained within the city "Little Sand Creek municipal watershed
management agreement", identified and adopted by the city council as resolution 47-91, on December 16, 1991. Where provisions of this section
conflict with the provisions of the said watershed management agreement, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
I. Conditions: The following conditions shall apply within the watershed protection zone:
1. Fuel Storage: The size of permanent or temporary storage of fuel, diesel or other petroleum products shall be limited to a maximum of two hundred
fifty (250) gallons. Existing or future storage over fifteen (15) gallons must have impervious containment areas around the storage tanks pursuant to
city standards. Any accident or inadvertent spills must be reported immediately to the city and corrective measures taken by the property owner to
mitigate the occurrence. Since propane is a volatile gas, storage of the same shall be limited to five hundred (500) gallons and no containment area
shall be required. Underground storage of petroleum products is not allowed. All fuel storage shall be locked. The storage of petroleum products in
small, temporary, approved containers, not more than three (3), shall be allowed; provided, they do not exceed five (5) gallons' capacity each.
2. Waste Disposal: Under no circumstances shall garbage, chemicals, oil or other waste material be dumped or buried on the property. Dumping of any
toxic or waste materials shall be reported immediately to the city and appropriate authorities. All waste materials shall be removed immediately by
the property owner. If the property owner is unable to remove or clean up any toxic material or substance that poses a risk to surface or ground water
contamination, the owner shall give the city permission to take whatever actions are reasonably necessary to remove the material, clean up the site
and recover the costs from the responsible party.
3. Chemical Application: Application of pesticides shall be restricted to the minimum amount needed to control unwanted pests or vegetation directly
around the dwelling or garden and shall be applied according to label directions. No chemical applications are allowed within: one hundred feet (100')
of an open body of water, such as a spring, creek, pond or lake; and fifty foot (50') radius around a well. Nitrogen based fertilizers are allowed;
provided, they are applied using best management practices (BMPs) in moderate rates which are consistent with manufacturer's recommendations,
label directions and annual needs. Storage shall be limited to small, approved containers less than one gallon or one hundred (100) pounds of each
product. Products that contain chemicals with a set maximum contaminant level (MCL) or pose a risk to water quality due to certain physical
properties, such as mobility, persistence in the environment, etc., may be restricted or not allowed. This list is available from the city public works
department.
4. Fire Protection: The owner of said property shall adhere strictly to all county, state and federal fire regulations. The use of burn barrels may be
restricted by the city during times of high fire danger. All equipment used on the property shall be equipped with proper spark arresters. No fireworks
or other explosive devices such as dynamite shall be allowed on the property. Welders, torches and ammunition reloading materials are allowed. The
owner shall maintain the property to minimize fire hazards.
5. Septic Systems: All septic systems shall meet the requirements of the Idaho department of health and welfare. These systems shall be properly
maintained. No synthetic or volatile organic chemicals shall be disposed of through the septic system. The system shall be inspected by an Idaho
department of health and welfare sanitarian every four (4) years, or the property owner shall provide the city with written verification that the system
has been pumped by a licensed sewage disposal service business. Cleanout, repair or new installation of a failed system shall be the responsibility
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 233/303
of the property owner. Sewer hookup and sewage disposal and treatment by municipal sewer shall be pursuant to the provisions of this code and
ordinances of the city.
6. Wells: Wells shall be constructed with surface seals, casings and sanitary seals to prevent surface water and other contaminants from entering the
groundwater. All wells shall meet requirements as prescribed by the state. A buffer of fifty foot (50') radius shall be maintained around wells. No
chemicals, fertilizers or fuels shall be used or stored in this buffer area. All abandoned wells shall immediately be permanently sealed as required by
law. Water quality sampling of wells by the city may be required to determine the general overall condition of the groundwater system. The owner
shall give the city permission to conduct water sampling and the city shall provide the property owner with the reason for testing. This information
shall remain confidential between the property owner and the city; however, the city may disclose any information it believes in good faith that it is
required by the public records law to disclose. Any cost of water quality sampling or upgrading of a well above city or state standards shall be solely
at the city's expense. All provisions of this code and ordinances of the city pertaining to domestic water service, distribution and hookups shall be
applied as applicable to such real property.
7. Timber Management And Roadway Construction: All timber management and roadway construction shall be done in compliance with BMP and the
provisions contained within the watershed agreement referenced in this section. In the event anything contained within this section is in conflict with
the provisions of the watershed agreement, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
8. Range Management: All owners of land within this zone shall prohibit grazing of livestock.
J. Application Of Subdivision Provisions: The subdivision provisions of this Code, and the short plat provisions of title 10, chapter 2 of this Code shall apply
to all properties located within this zone.
K. Comprehensive Plan: The comprehensive plan of the City, and as the same may be amended, shall apply to those parcels of property lying within the
Watershed Protection Zone. (Ord. 1236, 6-23-2010; amd. Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-4: RURAL RESIDENTIAL RR-1 ZONE:
A. Permitted Use Regulations: Permitted uses are single-family dwellings, horticultural uses for personal use only and not for profit with the exception of
tree farms, home occupations, a dwelling unit with an attached or detached accessory dwelling unit as provided for in section 9-1-8 of this title, short
term rentals subject to the licensing requirements set forth in title 3, chapter 12 of this Code and parks.
Also permitted are fairground facilities, related events and activities lawfully established prior to the effective date of this section. (A list dated January
13, 1998, of the qualifying facilities, related events and activities which were lawfully established prior to the effective date of this section was provided
by the Fair Association and shall be filed with the Sandpoint City Clerk by Bonner County.)
B. Conditional Uses: Churches, police and fire stations, public utility facilities, schools public or private, except those schools of vocational nature which
operate similarly to a retail business where a product or products may be purchased on the premises, expansion of existing or addition of new
fairground facilities, barns, exhibit buildings, food facilities, storage buildings, indoor or outdoor arenas, similarly classified facilities and accessory
buildings, and events related to the fairgrounds. Provided that a conditional use permit shall not be required to expand an existing event or add a new
one that falls below the following thresholds for both event length and maximum attendance:
Event Length Maximum Attendance For Entire Event
1 day 3,500
2 - 7 days 12,500 total event or 3,500 per day, whichever is less
8+ days 14,000 total event or 3,500 per day, whichever is less
Temporary expansions, structures or parking areas which will be in place for less than thirty (30) days and are directly related to an existing or new event
that falls below the thresholds noted above do not require a conditional use permit. (Ord. 1236, 6-23-2010; amd. Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011; Ord. 1281, 5-15-
2013; Ord. 1353, 6-6-2018)
C. Prohibited Uses: The raising of poultry and animal kennels for commercial purposes.
D. Areas: No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected or maintained unless the following described
yards and lot areas are provided and maintained in connection with said building, structure or enlargement:
1. Yard Limits: Each lot upon which a dwelling, private garage or other outbuilding is constructed shall have a front yard of not less than twenty five feet
(25') in depth from the front lot line. Where lots comprising forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage between two (2) intersecting streets are
developed with buildings having front yards, the average of such front yards shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire frontage;
provided, however, that in no case shall said front yard be less than said twenty five feet (25').
2. Side Yard: On interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side of the outer walls of any building constructed thereon of not less than fifteen feet
(15'). Buildings erected upon corner lots shall comply with the front yard requirement with regard to both streets; provided, however, that in the event
it is impractical or would work great or unusual hardship upon any owner of a corner lot to require him to conform to such front yard requirements
regarding both streets, then the commission may in its discretion permit such property owner to locate such building so that the front thereof
conforms to the front yard requirement on the street upon which said building fronts and the side of such building may be such distance from the
street right-of-way line as the commission may deem desirable; however, no nearer to the street right-of-way line than fifteen feet (15').
3. Rear Yard: Each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than fifteen feet (15').
4. Lot Areas: Every building erected shall be on a lot having an area of not less than one-half (1/2) acre.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 234/303
5. Lot Coverage: Each lot upon which a dwelling, private garage or other outbuilding is constructed shall have not more than thirty five percent (35%) of
the lot occupied by such structures.
6. Building Height: No structure shall exceed a building height of thirty five feet (35') or two and one-half (21/2) stories above the average elevation of
the finished grade at the front of the building. Antennas are excluded from the requirements. (Ord. 1236, 6-23-2010; amd. Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-5: RURAL RESIDENTIAL RR-2 ZONE:
A. Permitted Use Regulations: Permitted uses are single-family dwellings, a dwelling unit with an attached accessory apartment occupying not more than
thirty three percent (33%) of the total floor area of the structure, tree farms, greenhouses and horticultural uses where no retail sales take place on the
premises, bed and breakfast establishments providing not more than three (3) rooms are rented plus one family has a live in tenant, the raising of
livestock for noncommercial purposes providing the livestock density does not exceed one animal for parcels of land totaling one acre or three (3)
animals per two (2) acres and one additional animal per acre thereafter, home occupations, tourist homes and parks.
B. Conditional Uses: Family daycare center, churches, police and fire stations, public utility facilities, schools public or private, except those schools of
vocational nature which operate similarly to a retail business where a product or products may be purchased on the premises. (Ord. 1236, 6-23-2010;
amd. Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011; Ord. 1281, 5-15-2013)
C. Prohibited Uses: The raising of livestock for commercial purposes, kennels for commercial purposes.
D. Areas: No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter erected or maintained unless the following described
yards and lot areas are provided and maintained in connection with said building, structure or enlargement:
1. Yard Limits: Each lot upon which a dwelling, private garage or other outbuilding is constructed shall have a front yard of not less than twenty five feet
(25') in depth from the front lot line. Where lots comprising forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage between two (2) intersecting streets are
developed with buildings having front yards, the average of such front yards shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire frontage;
provided, however, that in no case shall said front yard be less than said twenty five feet (25').
2. Side Yard: On interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side of the outer walls of any building constructed thereon of not less than twenty five
feet (25'). Buildings erected upon corner lots shall comply with the front yard requirement with regard to both streets; provided, however, that in the
event it is impractical or would work great or unusual hardship upon any owner of a corner lot to require him to conform to such front yard
requirements regarding both streets, then the commission may in its discretion permit such property owner to locate such building so that the front
thereof conforms to the front yard requirement on the street upon which said building fronts and the side of such building may be such distance from
the street right of way line as the commission may deem desirable; however, no nearer to the street right of way line than twenty five feet (25').
3. Rear Yard: Each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty five feet (25').
4. Lot Areas: Minimum lot size required shall be not less than two (2) acres.
5. Lot Coverage: Each lot upon which a dwelling, private garage or other outbuilding is constructed shall have not more than twenty five percent (25%)
of the lot occupied by such structures.
6. Building Height: No structure shall exceed a building height of thirty five feet (35') or two and one-half (21/2) stories above the average elevation of
the finished grade at the front of the building. Antennas are excluded from the requirements. (Ord. 1236, 6-23-2010; amd. Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-6: STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF RESIDENTIAL SUBSTANDARD ORIGINAL LOTS OF RECORD:
9-4-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of these provisions is to guide residential development on substandard lots, ensuring that the developments are compatible with the
character and the scale of established housing.
A. Applicability And General Provisions: The following standards and procedures apply to residential development of substandard lots as defined in section
9-1-3 of this title, and apply to:
1. Substandard lots in the residential single-family zone having a lot area of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet and/or a lot width of less than
fifty feet (50'), and
2. Substandard lots in the residential multi-family zone having a lot area of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
3. Development of single substandard corner lots with a width of less than thirty feet (30') shall not be allowed. Reconfiguration of two (2) contiguous
substandard lots where one is a corner lot may be accomplished as provided for in title 10, chapter 2 of this code so long as their lot area is not
reduced.
4. These standards do not apply to lots that are part of a planned unit development and they do not take precedence over any note recorded on a
subdivision plat.
5. These standards do not apply to remodels of or expansions to legally established dwellings previously constructed on such lots, so long as other
area requirements of the district are met. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-6-2: USE REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 235/303
Permitted land uses and building types shall be as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-6-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Design Review Required For Development Of Substandard Lots: Development of three (3) or fewer dwelling units on three (3) contiguous substandard
lots shall be subject to staff level review in conjunction with their building permit application.
Except as otherwise provided herein, design review for the development of four (4) or more dwelling units, as well as the development of units with
front loading garages, shall include referral to the planning commission or such design review subcommittee as may be created for such purpose, in
conjunction with site plan review as provided for in subsection 9-1-4C of this title. Additional design review standards and guidelines are contained
herein.
Adjoining property owners shall be notified of any development proposed under these provisions that is subject to review by the commission as noted
above. Said notice shall inform such owners they may comment on the application during a period of not less than fifteen (15) days after mailing of the
notice and prior to final action on said application.
B. Setbacks:
1. Front Setbacks: The front yard setback for livable space and porches shall be allowed as provided in the property's underlying zone. Adjoining lots
developed at the same time shall contain different setbacks.
2. Side Setbacks: Interior side setbacks shall be in accordance with the applicable zone; street side yard setbacks shall be ten feet (10') for livable
space and porches and twenty five feet (25') for parking, unless one of the following is applied:
a. Common Lot Line Attached Units: Up to three (3) units may be attached at the common lot lines, provided that the exterior setbacks (unattached
side setbacks) adhere to those required by the zone.
b. Detached Units On Contiguous Lots: When two (2) or more single-family units are proposed on contiguous lots, the interior side yard setbacks
may be reduced to three feet (3') provided that the exterior setbacks to the development adhere to the setbacks that are required by the zone.
Such reduced interior side yard setback shall be measured from property line to eave rather than building wall as may otherwise be allowed and may
require compliance with additional building and fire code provisions (i.e., roof designed for higher snow load and provision of snow stops, installation of
residential sprinkler system).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 236/303
3. Rear Setbacks: Rear yard setbacks shall be as required by the zoning district in which the substandard lot is located.
4. Garage: A single-story, detached garage, a maximum of five hundred (500) square feet, accessed off of an alley may have a three foot (3') side
setback. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-6-4: BUILDING HEIGHT:
A. In the RM zone, substandard lot structures shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty feet (30'), whichever is lower.
B. In the RS zone, substandard lot structures shall not exceed twenty feet (20') or one and a half stories, whichever is lower. A one and a half story
structure can be defined as:
1. A structure that includes a daylight basement that is sunk into the ground a minimum of four feet (4').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 237/303
2. A structure that contains the second story within the pitched roofline.
C. In the RS zone, a two-story structure less than twenty five feet (25') may be permitted where:
1. Both adjacent properties are developed with two-story structures; or
2. The development has been designed to minimize impacts to adjoining properties, as determined by the planning director. The factors to consider
shall include: the size and height of the adjacent dwelling units; privacy impacts on adjacent properties; the height, mass, window placement and
roofline pitch of the proposed structure; and the overall design of the upper story of the proposed structure. Upper story limitations or setbacks on the
new building may be an acceptable means of ensuring compatibility with adjacent structures of smaller size.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 238/303
(Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-6-5: PRIVATE OPEN SPACE:
All substandard lots must provide a minimum of three hundred seventy five (375) square feet of private open space in the rear yard. This open space must
be configured as a fifteen by twenty five foot (15 x 25') open space (which includes the required setbacks). Of that required space a minimum dimension of
ten by fifteen feet (10 x 15') shall be open to the sky. Covered unenclosed rear porches are allowed to be calculated as part of the private open space
area. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-6-6: LANDSCAPING:
At a minimum, landscaping for each nonconforming lot of record shall include the planting of one tree of not less than two inches (2") dbh within the front
yard setback. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-6-7: PARKING:
A. Each dwelling shall be provided with off street parking in accordance with chapter 5 of this title.
B. Vehicular access and parking shall be provided according to the following standards:
1. Parking accessed via alleys is encouraged.
2. Units with front loading garages (where access to alley is not available or practical):
a. Any attached, front loading garage shall include design elements that will provide varied rooflines, dormers within the roofline or other architectural
treatments that will avoid the appearance of garage domination. The setback of the garage face shall be twenty five feet (25').
b. Porches, living space, or other projecting features above such front loading garages are required. Structures incorporating such features above a
front loading garage shall not be subject to review by the commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 239/303
c. Attached, front loading garages shall be limited to single car width; two (2) car garages must be designed for tandem parking.
d. The use of a ten foot (10') wide shared driveway providing access to rear yard garages that are attached with a common wall on the property line
is allowed.
e. Where a shared driveway is proposed between two (2) units, each unit may be allowed to reduce the outside side yard setback from five feet (5')
to three feet (3') to provide for a driveway width greater than ten feet (10').
Such reduction is contingent upon approval of a stormwater plan. In addition, the reduced setback shall be measured from property line to eave
rather than building wall as may otherwise be allowed and may require compliance with additional building and fire code provisions (i.e., roof
designed for higher snow load and provision of snow stops, installation of residential sprinkler system).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 240/303
3. The driveway may be designed with concrete wheel strips or grass pavers that are separated by vegetation. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-6-8: ATTACHED HOUSING ARRANGEMENTS:
A. Attached Units Encouraged: Attaching single-family units in multiples of two (2) or three (3) on common lot lines is encouraged as a means of creating
more substantial structures that will be imitative of standard width single-family homes. Such units remain subject to the general design criteria stated
in this chapter and do not require a planned unit development application.
1. In the RS zone, no greater than three (3) attached dwelling units shall be permitted. In the RS zone, attached housing shall contribute to the singlefamily
character of the neighborhood by utilizing exemplary design and architecture to seamlessly integrate with other structures in the vicinity.
B. Additional Requirements For Attached Buildings:
1. Attached buildings shall be constructed to comply with townhouse construction standards in accordance with the building code adopted by the city of
Sandpoint.
2. The city attorney shall review and approve all easement agreements an applicant or builder seeks to obtain for the use and maintenance of common
facilities such as driveways, parking sites and common party walls. All such easements shall be recorded in the records of Bonner County prior to an
applicant or builder seeking a building permit under this chapter.
3. Adjustments to lot lines and reduction in the number of lots within the same parcel are subject to review and approval pursuant to all applicable city
of Sandpoint subdivision and zoning regulations. The applicant shall obtain approval from the city of Sandpoint and record any lot line adjustments or
reduction in lots with the Bonner County recorder prior to submission for a building permit.
4. The first story of a two-story attached building shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the side property line. The second story of a twostory
attached building shall be set back a minimum of eight feet (8') from the side property line; provided, bay windows, pop outs or other
architectural appurtenances may be allowed at the five foot (5') setback line in the residential multi-family zone. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-6-9: DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR SUBSTANDARD LOTS:
Development on substandard lots requires site plan review approval. As applicable to their required review process, city staff and the planning commission
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 241/303
or such design review subcommittee as may be created for such purpose shall take into account the location and design of adjacent buildings,
landscaping and right of way improvements, and shall apply the following criteria as appropriate:
A. Front Facade Design Requirements:
1. Homes shall have a front door that faces the street. When a unit is built on a corner lot, the door shall face the dominant street.
2. In lieu of a street facing front door, the applicant may construct a prominent front porch that is a minimum of six feet (6') in depth and the dwelling
shall have a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the front facade comprised of windows and/or door openings. For homes with front loaded
garages, the garage door shall not count toward the window opening requirements. The garage door shall include design elements such as: panels,
windows, trim features, cross members, or other architectural features as determined by the commission or staff.
3. Detached dwelling units shall provide a facade that substantially differs from the facade of adjacent structures. Variations in materials alone will not
be considered sufficient. The unique facade may be obtained through the use of structural changes or through the use of substantial design
elements. In addition to complying with the preceding design guidelines, the front facade shall include multiple design elements such as: multipaned
windows, varied rooflines, dormers, bay windows, wainscoting, a covered front door, a usable front porch or other elements as approved by the
commission or staff that create a unique facade. Articulated designs may repeat on noncontiguous lots.
4. Attached units shall provide modulation and architectural design features to prevent flat facade wall planes.
B. Orientation Of Buildings: All buildings shall be oriented toward a public street. When buildings cannot be oriented toward a public street due to
inadequate street frontage or similar circumstances, the buildings shall be oriented toward a private street or lane that conforms to city standards.
C. Stormwater Runoff: Stormwater runoff shall be directed to the front or rear yard and shall be treated in accordance with standards of the Sandpoint
stormwater ordinance. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-6-10: DESIGN GUIDELINE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS WAIVERS FOR SUBSTANDARD LOTS:
A. The applicant may request a waiver from one or more of the standards listed in section 9-4-6-9 of this chapter or from the height and parking
requirements of sections 9-4-6-4 and 9-4-6-7 of this chapter. All requests for waivers shall be heard and decided by the planning commission or such
design review subcommittee as may be created for such purpose. A waiver shall not be considered a right or special privilege but may be granted to an
applicant that can meet the following findings:
1. That the granting of the waiver will not be in conflict with the intent of the substandard lot ordinance, shall not negatively impact the existing
neighborhood and shall enhance the overall design quality of the project;
2. That there is an exceptional circumstance relating to the design or configuration of the property, which is not generally applicable to other properties
or otherwise anticipated by the standards in the district.
3. The granting of such relief will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property, improvements or the
quiet enjoyment of the surrounding properties and neighborhood.
4. The granting of such relief will not be in conflict with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-7: COTTAGE HOUSING:
9-4-7-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
This provision provides standards for cottage housing within residential zones. These standards are intended to provide opportunities for a variety of
housing choices including the need for more smaller, more diverse, and often, more affordable housing choices. Providing for a variety of housing types
also encourages innovation and diversity in housing design and site development, while ensuring compatibility with surrounding single-family residential
development. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-7-2: CONFLICTING STANDARDS:
In the event that other standards of this title conflict with standards in this provision, the standards within this provision shall prevail. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-
2011)
9-4-7-3: EXISTING DWELLINGS:
An existing detached single-family dwelling that is incorporated into a cottage housing development as a residence and is nonconforming with respect to
the standards of this section shall be permitted to remain on a site used for a cottage housing development and shall count as one of the allowed units.
However, the extent of the noncompliance may not be increased unless the proposed change is determined by the Planning Director to be consistent in
character, scale and design with the cottage housing development. An existing dwelling may be replaced with cottage units consistent with this section.
(Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-7-4: HOUSING TYPES DEFINED:
CARRIAGE UNIT: A dwelling unit, not to exceed eight hundred (800) square feet in gross floor area, located above a garage structure in a cottage housing
development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 242/303
COTTAGE HOUSING: A tract of land under single ownership or unified control developed with four (4) to twenty four (24) detached dwelling units (each
unit no larger than 1,000 square feet) arranged on at least two (2) sides of a commonly owned courtyard/common area. Parking space is also commonly
owned. Cottage housing development may or may not be condominiums. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011; amd. Ord. 1345, 7-19-2017)
9-4-7-5: AREA ALLOWANCES:
A. Cottage housing meeting the requirements of this section is allowed in zoning areas RS and RM. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-7-6: DENSITY STANDARDS:
The following density standards shall apply to cottage housing developments: (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
A. Cottages (including carriage units) may be built at up to two (2) units per single-family home allowed in the underlying zone. For example, if the
minimum lot size for a single-family home in a zone is five thousand (5,000) square feet, a cottage development of four (4) units could be constructed
on a ten thousand (10,000) square foot lot (5,000/2)* 4 = 10,000. (Ord. 1345, 7-19-2017)
B. Existing single-family dwellings will count toward total units.
C. Minimum units: Four (4). (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
D. Maximum units: Twenty four (24). (Ord. 1345, 7-19-2017)
E. Carriage house units may be built on top of a common garage, when the garage is located adjacent to the common open area. No more than twenty
five percent (25%) of the total number of units may be located above a common garage. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-7-7: COTTAGE HOUSING DISPERSION REQUIREMENT:
The dispersion requirement is designed to disallow cottage developments from clustering in any one area so that housing diversity is retained.
A. In the RS Zone, developments containing cottage/carriage homes may not be located closer than seven hundred fifty feet (750') to another
development approved under the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
9-4-7-8: COMMUNITY BUILDINGS AND COMMUNITY SPACE IN COTTAGE DEVELOPMENTS:
Community buildings and community space are encouraged in cottage developments.
A. Community buildings or space shall be clearly incidental in use and size to the dwelling units.
B. Building height for community buildings shall be no taller than the height restrictions for the underlying zone. Building heights and roof standards for
cottage units shall apply per section 9-4-7-10 of this chapter.
C. Where the community space is located above another common structure, such as a detached garage or storage building, buildings heights and roof
standards for carriage units shall apply (see section 9-4-7-10 of this chapter).
D. Community buildings must be located on the same site as the cottage housing development, and be commonly owned by the residents. (Ord. 1263, 12-
29-2011)
9-4-7-9: ACCESS AND PARKING:
The intent of these access and parking standards is to minimize the visual impact of vehicles and parking areas for residents of the cottage housing
development and adjacent properties and to provide for adequate off street parking for cottage housing developments.
A. Minimum Number Of Off Street Parking Spaces:
1. The minimum number of parking spaces shall be one per dwelling unit.
B. Parking Design: The intent of these parking design standards is to create unobtrusive parking, by screening and disguising parking structures and
spaces from surrounding properties, including screening by architectural design and/or vegetation, and by minimizing the number of contiguous
spaces.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 243/303
1. Parking areas or common garages shall be limited to no more than five (5) contiguous spaces separated by a minimum of five feet (5') of sidewalk,
landscaping, or open space.
2. Shared detached garage structures may not exceed five (5) garage doors per building and a total of one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet.
Carriage units located above these parking structures shall not be factored into this square footage.
3. Parking shall be separated from the common open area, adjacent properties, and public streets by landscaping and/or architectural screening. Solid
board fencing shall not be allowed as an architectural screen. Exception: One parking structure may be adjacent to the common open area, if
carriage house units are placed on top and the garage includes architectural features to make it look consistent with the units and community assets.
4. Parking shall be set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from a public street.
5. The design of garages and carports, including rooflines, shall be similar to and compatible with that of the dwelling units within the cottage housing
development.
6. Parking located between or adjacent to structures, shall be located to the rear of the structure and served by an alley or driveway. (Ord. 1263, 12-29-
2011)
9-4-7-10: COTTAGE HOUSING DESIGN STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES:
A. Cottage Size: Setting a unit size helps ensure that the overall size of cottages remains small and causes less visual impact than standard sized singlefamily
dwellings, particularly given the increased density of cottage dwellings, and to provide variety in cottage housing developments through a
mixture of building sizes and footprints.
1. The total floor area of each cottage shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet. The total square foot area of a cottage dwelling unit may not
be increased. A note shall be placed on the title to the property for the purpose of notifying future property owners that any increase in the total
square footage of a cottage is prohibited for the life of the cottage or duration of city cottage regulations.
2. The footprint of each cottage shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet.
3. There shall be no minimum size requirements for the individual units.
4. The second floor area cannot exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the first floor area.
5. Cottage areas that do not count toward the gross floor area or footprint calculations are:
a. Interior spaces with a ceiling height of six feet (6') or less, such as in a second floor area under the slope of the roof;
b. Unheated storage space located under the main floor of the cottage;
c. Basements;
d. Attached unenclosed porches;
e. The first two hundred (200) square feet of an attached enclosed porch (square footage utilized for attached porches beyond 200 square feet shall
be counted toward total square footage allowance for each cottage);
f. Garages or carports; or
g. Architectural projections (i.e., bay windows, fireplaces or utility closets) no greater than twenty four inches (24") in depth and six feet (6') in width.
h. The planning director may approve other exemptions similar in nature provided the intent of this section is met.
B. Cottage Height And Roof Standards:
1. A cottage shall have a gable roof or a hipped roof. Dormers are allowed.
2. Maximum height of cottage units with a minimum roof slope of six to twelve (6:12) shall be twenty five feet (25'), subject to all parts of the roof above
fourteen feet (14') shall be pitched.
3. Maximum height shall be eighteen feet (18') for cottages without a roof slope of six to twelve (6:12) and for all accessory structures.
4. Deviation from the roof standards may be considered through the CUP process.
C. Orientation Of Dwelling Units: Dwellings within a cottage housing development should be oriented to promote a sense of community, both within the
development, and with respect to the larger community, outside of the cottage project. A cottage development should not be designed to "turn its back"
on the surrounding neighborhood.
1. Each dwelling unit shall be oriented toward a common open area, and sixty five percent (65%) of the units shall abut the common open area.
2. Lots in a cottage housing development are not required to abut a public street.
3. Each facade facing a public street (not including alleys) shall have at least two (2) of the following enhancements: secondary entrance, porch, bay
window, or other architectural enhancement approved by the planning director that is oriented to the public street in order to prevent a blank,
monotonous wall facing the street and surrounding neighborhood.
D. Cottage Setbacks:
1. The minimum setbacks between all structures and exterior property lines (including cottages, parking structures and community buildings) in a
cottage housing development shall be ten feet (10'). Eaves may project into the required setback up to eighteen inches (18").
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 244/303
2. Cottage units abutting an external street shall use the front yard setback requirements for the zone they are within in order to determine how far the
unit must be set back from the public right of way.
3. No part of any structure in a cottage housing development (including, but not limited to, cottages, parking structures, and community buildings) shall
be more than one hundred fifty feet (150'), as measured by the shortest clear and open route, from legally compliant fire department vehicle access.
E. Fencing And Screening: The intent of internal decorative fencing and screening is to delineate private yards and screen parking structures, community
assets and unit walls. A cottage housing development shall internally be an open community sharing common areas.
1. Decorative fencing may be used for delineating private yards.
2. Fencing or shrubbery may be used to screen parking areas, community assets, and unit walls.
3. Fencing and shrubbery used for fencing may not exceed thirty six inches (36") in height, except directly adjacent to a parking structure or as allowed
in subsection E5 of this section.
4. Chainlink fencing shall not be allowed. Solid fencing is allowed on the exterior boundary, except bordering an external street.
5. Rear yards not bordering an external street may be delineated using solid fencing and may not exceed four feet (4') in height.
F. Required Common Open Space: Common open space should provide a sense of openness, visual relief, and community for cottage developments. The
space must be outside of wetlands, streams and their buffers, and developed and maintained to provide for passive and/or active recreational activities
for the residents of the development.
1. There shall be a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of common open space per cottage.
2. Each area of common open space shall be in one contiguous and usable piece with a minimum dimension of twenty feet (20') on all sides.
3. Land located between dwelling units and an abutting right of way or access easement greater than twenty one feet (21') in width may not serve as
required common open space, unless the area is reserved as a separate tract, and does not contain pathways leading to individual units or other
elements that detract from its appearance and function as a shared space for all residents.
4. Required common open space may be divided into no more than two (2) separate areas per development.
5. Common open space shall be located in a centrally located area and be easily accessible to all dwellings within the development.
6. Landscaping located in common open space areas shall be designed to allow for easy access and use of the space by all residents, and to facilitate
maintenance needs. Where feasible, existing mature trees should be retained.
7. Unless the shape or topography of the site precludes the ability to locate units adjacent to the common open space, the following standards must be
met:
a. The open space shall be located so that it will be surrounded by cottages or two/three-unit homes on at least two (2) sides;
b. At least fifty percent (50%) of the units in the development shall abut a common open space. A cottage is considered to "abut" an area of open
space if there is no structure between the unit and the open space.
(1) Surface water management facilities shall be limited within common open space areas. Conventional stormwater collection and conveyance
tools, such as flow control and/or water quality vaults are permitted if located underground.
G. Carriage Units Within Cottage Projects: Carriage units may be included within a cottage housing development. Design of these units should be
compatible with that of the cottages included in the project.
1. The maximum size of a carriage unit shall be eight hundred (800) square feet.
2. Carriage units, including roof, shall be no taller than thirty feet (30').
3. Carriage units shall not have roofs less steep than four to twelve (4:12).
H. Variation In Unit Sizes, Building And Site Design: Cottage projects should establish building and site design that promotes variety and visual interest
that is compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
1. Projects should include a mix of unit sizes within a single development.
2. Proposals are encouraged to provide a variety of building styles, features and site design elements within cottage housing communities. Dwellings
with the same combination of features and treatments should not be located adjacent to each other.
I. Private Open Space:
1. Each cottage shall have a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of private, contiguous usable open space adjacent to each dwelling unit, for
the exclusive use of the cottage resident.
J. Pedestrian Flow Through Development: Pedestrian connections shall link all buildings to the public right of way, common open space and parking areas.
K. Exterior Design Standards For Cottages: This subsection K is intended to ensure cottage design is based on a coherent architectural concept, to ensure
cottages possess architectural finish, to ensure they contribute positively to the architectural character of the neighborhood, and to provide flexibility in
design and contrast among individual cottages while assuring attention to design amenities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 245/303
1. Character Compatibility: Cottage housing developments shall utilize building and site design that promotes variety and visual interest and that is
compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
2. Variety In Building And Site Design: Cottage housing developments shall avoid the repetitive use of the same combination of building size, styles,
features, and site design elements within the entire residential development and between adjacent dwellings. Dwellings with the same combination of
features and treatments shall not be located adjacent to each other.
3. Site Design Requirements: The overall site design for all common areas must include a minimum of five (5) points from the following table:
SITE DESIGN OF COMMON AREAS
(Minimum Of 5 Points)
Mixture of grass areas and garden areas 3 points
Incorporate additional site and architectural features such as special paving, ornamental gate and/or fence, seating, functional accent
lighting, artwork near entry, and/or special landscape treatment with seasonal color, flowering trees, and trees with interesting bark or
branching structure
1 point per
type of
feature
4. Exterior Design Requirements: No blank walls are allowed, and each cottage in a cottage housing development must be designed to include a
minimum of thirty four (34) points from the following table, including the specified minimum number of points from each category:
Totals by category as determined by tables below:
Facade Minimum of 12 points
Roof Minimum of 8 points
Windows and doors Minimum of 10 points
Landscaping and groundwork Minimum of 4 points
Facade (minimum of 12 points):
Stucco, cedar shingle siding, board and batten, or horizontal lap siding (wood or hardiplank. Exposed siding must be between 4
inches and 7 inches in width)
4 points
Change of plane of front elevation 3 points
Architectural detailing on porch railings and posts 2 points
Decorative gable vents 2 points
Exterior stonework, masonry, stone, rock, cultured, stone, woodwork, or brickwork 2 points
Gable detailing 2 points
Gable detailing on porch roof 2 points
3-tone paint on exterior walls trim and roof 2 points
Bay window 1 point
Roof (minimum of 8 points):
Architectural metal roof (must be commercial quality with hidden fasteners) 3 points
Architectural shingle roof 3 points
Gable dormer (shall not also be used for gabled porch roof or porch roof overhang) 3 points
Gabled or modified porch roof 3 points
Porch roof overhang to cover stairs (shall not also be used for a change of plane of front facade or as a gable dormer or gabled porch
roof)
2 points
Roof brackets 2 points
Soffit detailing (exposed rafter tail painted or decoratively cut; soffit finished in shiplap or similar treatment) 2 points
Rooftop cupola 1 point
Windows and doors (minimum of 10 points):
Mullioned windows (minimum of 2) 3 points
Skylights or clerestory windows 3 points
Window placement offset for privacy 3 points
Decorative window(s) on front facade 2 points
Front door lights or sidelights, glass front doors, transoms, glass borders, or split front door 2 points
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 246/303
Window trim (must include cornice molding, jamb molding, and sill for all windows) 2 points
Front door trim (must have cornice molding, parting bead, and plinth blocks) 1 point
Landscaping and groundwork for each cottage's private area (minimum of 4 points):
Architectural fence around cottage (not less than 2, or more than 3 feet high) 2 points
Front yard landscaping (must include at least 1 dozen perennial bushes and/or trees native to the area or tolerant of local climate
conditions. Landscaping does not include lawns)
2 points
Incorporate additional architectural features such as special paving, ornamental gate and/or fence, seating, planter boxes or pots,
functional accent lighting, artwork near entry, and/or special landscape treatment with seasonal color, flowering trees, and trees with
interesting bark or branching structure
1 point per
type of
feature
(Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011)
Chapter 5
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES
9-5-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces Provided: No building or structure shall be erected, substantially altered (requiring a building permit), or its use
changed unless permanently maintained off street parking and loading spaces have been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Additional Parking After Enlargement Or Change: Whenever a building or structure existing prior to the effective date of this chapter changes use or is
enlarged up to fifty percent (50%) in floor area, number of employees, seating capacity, number of dwelling units, or otherwise, to create a need for an
increase in the number of existing parking and loading spaces, additional parking spaces must be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change.
C. Buildings Enlarged Meet Requirements: Whenever a building or structure existing prior to the effective date of this chapter is enlarged to the extent of
fifty percent (50%) or more in floor area, number of employees, seating capacity, number of dwelling units, or otherwise, to create a need for an
increase in the number of existing parking and loading spaces, said building or structure must then and thereafter comply with the full parking
requirements set forth herein.
D. Buildings With Other Changes Meet Requirements: Whenever a building or structure constructed after the effective date of this chapter changes use or
is enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity, or otherwise, to create a need for an increase in the number
of existing parking and loading spaces, said building or structure must then and thereafter comply with the full parking requirements set forth herein.
E. Parking Demand Analysis: Minimum or maximum parking space requirements may be reduced or expanded by the Planning Director upon completion
of a Parking Demand Analysis demonstrating the actual demands of the project are less than the minimum or more than the maximum requirements of
this Code. A Parking Demand Analysis must be prepared by a registered professional traffic engineer licensed in the State of Idaho and must include
analysis of multi-modal transportation and proximity to transit.
F. Exemptions: Buildings within the boundaries of First Avenue, Cedar Street, Fifth Avenue and Pine Street plus one-half (1/2) block extending outward are
exempt from the parking minimum requirements of this chapter.
G. Exempted Non-Residential Use Boundaries: Non-residential uses within the following boundaries are exempt from the parking minimum requirements
of this chapter: Beginning at the intersection of Short Ave and Poplar St; thence East to the intersection of Poplar St and Third Ave; thence South to the
intersection of Alder St and Third Ave; thence East to the high water mark of Sand Creek; thence Southerly along the artificial high water mark of Sand
Creek (defined as 2,066.4' using the NAVD88 vertical datum or 2062.5' using the NGVD29 vertical datum) to its intersection with Lake St; thence West
to the intersection of Lake St and Euclid Ave; thence West one-half block; thence North to the intersection of Sixth Ave and Alder St; thence East to the
intersection of Alder St and Short Ave; thence north to the point of beginning.
H. Map Of Exempted Areas: Map of exempted minimum parking space requirements per subsections F and G of this section:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 247/303
I. Construction And Repaving: Construction and the repaving of parking lots must be in accordance with title 11, chapter 3, "Stormwater Management
Ordinance", of this Code. (Ord. 1360, 12-5-2018)
9-5-2: LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES:
The following regulations shall govern the location of off-street parking spaces and areas:
A. Parking spaces for all residential dwelling units with a density of less than ten (10) units per acre must be located on the same site as the use which
they are intended to serve.
B. Parking spaces for apartments, dormitories, or similar residential uses with a density of greater than ten (10) units per acre must be located not more
than three hundred feet (300') from the principal use.
C. Parking spaces for commercial, industrial or institutional uses must be located not more than one thousand feet (1,000') from the principal use. (Ord.
1360, 12-5-2018)
9-5-3: SHARED PARKING REDUCTION:
A. Shared Parking Or Parking Facilities Approval: Subject to compliance with other applicable requirements of City codes, the Planning Director may
approve shared development or use of parking facilities for two (2) or more uses if:
1. A convenient pedestrian connection between the properties or uses exists; and
2. The properties are within one thousand feet (1,000') of each other.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 248/303
B. Parking Requirements; Hours: Where the uses to be served by shared parking do not overlap their hours of operation, the property owner or owners
must provide parking stalls equal to the greater of the applicable individual parking requirements. Where a use change occurs within the development
causing an overlapping of use hours, parking requirements must be reassessed. For the purposes of this provision, residential parking use hours shall
be from five o'clock (5:00) P.M. to sixty thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. daily.
C. Parking Stall Reduction: Where the uses to be served by shared parking have overlapping hours of operation, the Planning Director may approve a
reduction of the total required parking stalls if the reduction is supported by a parking demand analysis performed by a registered professional traffic
engineer licensed in the State of Idaho.
D. Documentation Required: Prior to establishing shared parking or any use to be served thereby, the property owner or owners must file with the County
Recorder's Office or its successor agency, a written agreement approved by the Planning Director providing for the shared parking use. A copy of the
written agreement must be retained by the Planning Director in the project file. The agreement must be recorded on the title records of each affected
property. (Ord. 1360, 12-5-2018)
9-5-4: ACCESS AND MANEUVERING AREA:
A. Any parking area must be designed in such a manner that any vehicle entering or leaving the parking area from or onto a public or private street must
be traveling in a forward motion. Residential uses with a density of less than ten (10) units per acre are exempt from this requirement.
B. Access of driveways for parking areas or loading spaces must be located in such a way that any vehicle entering or leaving such lot must be clearly
visible for a reasonable distance to any pedestrian or motorist approaching the access or driveway from a public or private street.
C. All maneuvering areas, ramps, access drives, etc., must be provided on the property on which the parking facility is located; however, if such facility
adjoins an alley, such alley may be used as a maneuvering area. (Ord. 1360, 12-5-2018)
9-5-5: MINIMUM DISTANCE AND SETBACKS:
A. No portion of any parking facility, except driveways and approaches, shall be located within five feet (5') of the front or side property lines. Commercial
and industrial uses are exempt from this requirement.
B. No portion of any parking facility shall obstruct the visibility, for a reasonable distance, of motorists using any public or private street. (Ord. 1360, 12-5-
2018)
9-5-6: SURFACING:
A. Hard surfacing of all parking facilities shall be required. All hard surfacing must comply with all other applicable City codes including the Stormwater
Management Code.
1. All hard surfacing must be completed before a certificate of occupancy is issued. In the event that hard surfacing cannot be timely completed due to
inclement weather, the City may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy if an agreement secured by a bond or other security acceptable to the
City in an amount of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the costs of the hard surfacing is provided to the City. In the event a cash security is
provided, no interest shall accrue to the party providing the cash. All agreements must include such terms as may be reasonable in the
circumstances including a requirement that the paving be completed within six (6) months of the agreement and if not that the City in the City's sole
discretion use the security to complete the hard surfacing.
B. Driveways and approaches to a parking facility abutting a street improved with curbs and gutters must be paved with hard surfacing to their full width for
a minimum of twenty feet (20') in depth from the street right-of-way, or where there is a lesser setback, the hard surfacing must be from the street to the
parking facility.
C. Any building lot in a Commercial Zone used in whole or in part as a parking facility and which abuts a City street with curbs and gutters must be
improved with sidewalks in accordance with City specifications.
D. Exceptions to hard surfacing requirement of parking spaces:
1. Within the Industrial General (IG) Zone, the hard-surfacing requirement may be waived, with certain conditions, by the City Engineer.
2. Detached single family homes, duplexes, accessory dwelling units and any residential parking area within a Residential Zone not accessed from a
street shall be exempted from the hard-surfacing requirement. (Ord. 1360, 12-5-2018)
9-5-7: MAINTENANCE:
A. The owner of property used for parking and/or loading shall maintain the facility in accordance with good practice without holes and free of all snow,
dust, trash and other debris.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 249/303
B. Failure to keep the parking lot surfaces reasonably clean of snow and debris, failure to keep storm catch basins properly clean and functioning, and
failure to remove and replace dead plant material or to remove noxious weeds shall be specifically included in the term "failure to maintain the facility in
accordance with good practice" and shall be deemed a violation of this title and therefore subject to the penalties as established. (Ord. 1360, 12-5-
2018)
9-5-8: LIGHTING:
A. Any parking area which is intended to be used during non-daylight hours shall be properly illuminated to avoid accidents. Residential uses are exempt
from this requirement.
B. Any lights used to illuminate a parking lot must be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining property.
C. Parking lot lighting must be designed to provide the minimum lighting necessary to ensure adequate vision and comfort in parking areas while avoiding
glare and direct illumination of adjacent properties or streets. All parking lot lighting requirements must also apply to interior drives and other areas on
the property used by vehicles.
1. Lighting Fixtures: All lighting fixtures providing illumination for parking lots must direct light downward (in keeping with Illuminating Engineering
Society of North America, IESNA, standards).
2. Maximum Mounting Height: The maximum mounting height for all parking lot illuminating light fixtures shall be twenty feet (20').
3. Timers Required: Lighting must be on a timer or utilize photocells which turns off all unnecessary lights when the lot is not in use to reduce glare in
the surrounding neighborhoods and to save energy. (Ord. 1360, 12-5-2018)
9-5-9: WHEEL BLOCKS:
A. Whenever a parking lot extends to a property line, wheel blocks or other suitable devices must be installed to prevent any part of a parked vehicle from
extending beyond the property line.
B. Where parking stalls abut sidewalks or walkways that leave less than a four foot (4') wide pedestrian travel zone due to vehicle overhang, wheel blocks
or other suitable devices may be required by the City in order to maintain accessibility. Wider sidewalks or pathways, however, shall be preferred. (Ord.
1360, 12-5-2018)
9-5-10: SIGNS:
A. The entrances and exits to the parking area must be clearly marked.
B. Parking areas having more than one aisle or driveway must have directional signs or markings in each driveway or aisle.
C. Parking area directional signs must have a maximum size of four (4) square feet. (Ord. 1360, 12-5-2018)
9-5-11: STRIPING:
All parking areas with a capacity over ten (10) vehicles must be striped with double lines, two inches (2") in width and six inches (6") both sides of center
between stalls, to facilitate the movement into and out of the parking stalls. (Ord. 1360, 12-5-2018)
9-5-12: SCREENING AND/OR LANDSCAPING:
A. Parking Lot Minimum Landscaping: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of gross paved areas used for parking lots within the City of Sandpoint must be
landscaped. Slopes and other areas between a parking area and sidewalks, street rights-of-way or property lines must be landscaped with a minimum
five foot (5') buffer containing grass, hardy shrubs, trees or evergreen ground cover and must be maintained in a consistent condition acceptable to the
City. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required buffer yard must be made up of hardy shrubs, fifty percent (50%) of which shall be evergreen and
shall reach a height of four feet (4') within five (5) years. The five foot (5') buffer may be reduced when at least five feet (5') of landscaped area exists
between the sidewalk and curb. Dead landscaping must be replaced. It shall be a violation of this chapter if an owner fails to replace dead landscaping
with the same or other landscaping approved by the City within one month of notification by the City or as is seasonably acceptable.
B. Proximity Standards: Whenever a parking area providing more than ten (10) vehicle spaces is located in or adjacent to a Residential District, dwelling
unit, school, hospital, church or other institution for human care, it must be effectively screened on all sides abutting any such property by a five foot (5')
buffer area with an acceptably designed wall, fence or planting screen. Alternatively, the buffer area may be reduced to three feet (3') if a decorative
screen fence is erected with evergreen shrubs of at least two (2) gallon size planted at the base. Such fence, wall or planting screen must not be less
than four feet (4') nor more than six feet (6') in height and maintained in good condition. The space between such fence, wall or planting screen, and
the lot line of the adjoining premises in any Residential District must be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs, or evergreen ground cover and
maintained in good condition. In the event that terrain or other natural features are such that the erection of such fence, walls or planting screen will not
serve the intended purpose, the Planning Director may waive specifically this requirement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 250/303
C. Parking Facilities Abutting Street Right-Of-Way: Parking facilities which abut a street right-of-way must provide one street tree for every twenty five feet
(25') of property abutting such right-of-way. Should the planting of such a street tree be physically unfeasible, the Public Works and/or Planning
Department may require suitable landscaping abutting the street right-of-way.
D. Material And Planting Requirements: Parking lot landscaping must consist of, but not be limited to, a mix of deciduous trees, evergreen shrubs, and
ground cover. Tree species must be of the types listed on the "City of Sandpoint approved street tree list" (as adopted by resolution), or approved by
the Urban Forester. All trees must be planted with a minimum 1.5-inch caliper. All interior planting beds must have a minimum dimension of six feet (6')
at the narrowest point with a soil depth appropriate for the trees selected.
E. Parking Lots Between Twenty To Thirty Spaces: One tree for every ten (10) parking spaces or the larger fraction thereof must be provided.
F. Parking Lots Exceeding Thirty Spaces: The following additional regulations apply:
1. Parking areas must include a minimum fifteen foot (15') landscaped buffer from Residential Zones, and be divided into smaller areas interconnected
by landscaped aisles to reduce vehicle speed and protect pedestrians. No parking space shall be more than sixty feet (60') from a landscaped area,
and there must be at least one tree for each three hundred (300) square feet of required landscape area.
2. Required shade trees must be of such species and canopy to provide a minimum of thirty percent (30%) canopy cover of the parking area at
maturity. Eligible tree canopy must be directly over parking lot.
3. A timed and automated irrigation system shall be provided for all required landscaping and maintained in a workmanlike manner.
G. Parking Lot Directional Signs: Parking lots not visible from streets must have clearly visible directional signs approved during the site plan review
process.
H. Screening Equipment; Noise: Mechanical equipment, utility facilities, and garbage containers must be screened in such a manner so as not to be visible
from abutting residential property owners. A fence may be used to provide this screening. Mechanical equipment creating noise must be placed as far
from residential uses as practical and in keeping with access and maintenance requirements, and must have noise buffering if placed in the vicinity of
residential uses.
I. Snow Storage: Areas for snow storage must be designated in site plans and provided for in development or redevelopment of property.
J. Pedestrian Access: Parking lots must be designed so that pedestrian and automobile patrons have a clearly marked path from each business entrance
to the nearest sidewalk to each adjacent street. This must be accomplished utilizing decorative pavers or sidewalk type walkways. The Planning
Commission may waive this requirement for lots smaller than thirty (30) spaces when it creates undue hardship.
K. Exemptions:
1. Single-Family Residential: Single-family residential off-street parking areas are exempt from this subsection.
2. Auto And Vehicle Dealers: Auto and vehicle dealers are exempt from providing landscaping within the interior of the sales and display area.
3. Landscaping Requirement Modifications: Landscaping requirements may be modified by the Planning Director for a specific site when soil or slope
limitations make strict adherence impractical, when safety considerations are involved, especially in the clear vision triangle.
4. Industrial General Zone: Parking areas within the Industrial General Zone shall only be required to adhere to the requirements of subsection A,
"Parking Lot Minimum Landscaping", of this section.
5. Existing Parking Lots: Expansions of existing parking lots shall not be exempt. (Ord. 1360, 12-5-2018)
9-5-13: ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES:
All parking facilities must provide accessible parking spaces as required by the ADA Standards for Accessible Design of the Americans With Disabilities
Act. (Ord. 1360, 12-5-2018)
9-5-14: DESIGN AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS:
A. City Standards Mandatory: All parking facilities must be designed to City standards. Plans for parking facilities are required prior to construction and
shall indicate ingress, egress, grade, drainage facilities, location of all plantings, base and surface materials.
B. Bicycle Spaces: All nonresident parking facilities with more than twenty (20) parking spaces shall provide the equivalent of four (4) bicycle spaces for
every twenty (20) parking spaces included in the facility, for the temporary storage of bicycles. Space for bicycle storage shall be designed to
accommodate bikes parked parallel to the rack and support bicycles upright by their frame at two (2) points of contact. The minimum distance between
side by side racks should be thirty six inches (36") or greater. The minimum distance between end to end racks should be sixty inches (60") or greater.
Racks shall be permanently anchored into a hard surface. Bicycle spaces shall be located within fifty feet (50') of the building entrance and well lit.
C. Minimum Standards: Letters in the following chart are referenced in subsection D of this section. Off street parking spaces must be provided in
accordance with the following minimum standards:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 251/303
For standard vehicles:
0° 8 feet 23 feet 8 feet 23 feet 12 feet 21 feet
30° 9 feet 18 feet 16 feet,
10 inches
18 feet 15 feet 18 feet
45° 9 feet 12 feet,
9 inches
19 feet,
1 inch
18 feet 15 feet 20 feet
60° 9 feet 10 feet,
5 inches
20 feet,
1 inch
18 feet 17 feet 22 feet
90° 9 feet 9 feet 19 feet 19 feet 23 feet 23 feet
For compact vehicles:
0° 7 feet,
6 inches
18 feet 7 feet,
6 inches
18 feet 12 feet 21 feet
30° 7 feet,
6 inches
15 feet 14 feet 15 feet 15 feet 18 feet
45° 7 feet,
6 inches
10 feet,
7 inches
15 feet,
11 inches
15 feet 15 feet 20 feet
60° 7 feet,
6 inches
8 feet,
8 inches
16 feet,
9 inches
15 feet 15 feet 22 feet
90° 7 feet,
6 inches
7 feet,
6 inches
15 feet 15 feet 23 feet 23 feet
D. Diagram, Parking Space Minimum Design And Dimensions (For Standard Vehicles):
E. Additional Standards For Compact Car Parking:
1. If the total number of required parking spaces is less than ten (10), no compact car spaces shall be provided.
Parking
Angle
A
Parking Space
Width
B
Curb Length Per
Stall
C
Stall Depth From Curb
Edge
D
Parking Space
Depth
E
1-Way Driveway
Width
F
2-Way Driveway
Width
F
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 252/303
2. If the total number of required parking spaces equals ten (10), then one parking space may be for compact cars. For each four (4) spaces in excess
of ten (10), one space for compact cars may be provided.
3. Each compact car parking space shall be marked for such use. (Ord. 1360, 12-5-2018)
9-5-15: MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM SURFACE PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
A.
Residential: Values shall be held as the minimum:
Accessory dwelling units 1 for each unit
Apartments, duplexes, townhouses or
multi-family dwellings over 1,200
square feet of living space per unit
1.4 for each unit
Apartments, duplexes, townhouses or
multi-family dwellings under 1,200
square feet of living space per unit
1 for each unit
Boarding, lodging, or rooming house 1 for each sleeping room
Cottage developments in accordance
with chapter 4 of this title
1 for each unit
Detached single family homes with
more than 3 bedrooms
2 for each unit
Detached single family homes with 3
bedrooms or less
1 for each unit
Group homes 2 for each unit
B.
Commercial: Values shall be held as the minimum. The maximum amount of parking spaces allowed shall be no more than 20 percent above
the minimum requirement. Structured parking shall be exempt from the parking maximum requirements.
Banks, financial institutions and similar
uses
1 for every 500 square feet of floor area
Bowling alleys 2 for each alley
Dance floors, skating rinks 1 for every 500 square feet of floor area
Dining rooms, restaurants, taverns,
nightclubs, etc.
1 for every 300 square feet of floor area
Funeral parlors, mortuaries 1 for every 100 square feet of floor area open to the public
Hostels 1 for every 4 beds
Hotels, motels 1 space for each room or unit; plus, as required for accessory uses, such as restaurants, meeting
halls, etc.
Medical or dental clinics 1 for every 500 square feet of floor area of examination, treatment, office, and waiting rooms
Offices, public or professional
administration and services
1 for every 500 square feet of floor area
Retail sales and services of large
items, such as appliances, furniture
and equipment
1 for every 800 square feet of floor area
Retail stores 1 for every 350 square feet of floor area
Service stations providing repair,
public garages
1 for each 2 gasoline pumps and 2 for each service bay
All other types of business or
commercial uses permitted in any
Commercial Zone
1 for each 350 square feet of floor area
C.
Entertainment And Recreation: Values shall be held as the minimum. The maximum amount of parking spaces allowed shall be no more than
20 percent above the minimum requirement. Structured parking shall be exempt from the parking maximum requirements:
Auditoriums, sport arenas, theaters
and similar uses
1 for each 5 seats; 20 inches of bench shall be considered 1 seat
Fitness centers 1 for every 400 square feet of floor area
Private clubs or lodges 1 for every 350 square feet of floor area
Type Of Use Parking Spaces Required
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 253/303
Swimming pools, public or community
clubs
1 for each 5 persons' capacity plus 1 for each 4 seats or 1 for each 30 square feet of floor area
used for seating purposes, whichever is greater
D.
Institutional: Values shall be held as the minimum:
Churches and other places of religious
assembly
1 for each 5 seats; 20 inches of bench shall be considered 1 seat
Hospitals 1 for each bed
Libraries, museums, art galleries 1 for each 500 square feet of floor area
Sanatoriums, homes for the aged,
nursing homes, children's homes and
similar uses
1 for each 2 beds
E.
Schools (Public, Private Or Parochial): Values shall be held as the minimum:
Business, technical and trade schools 1 for each 2 students
Colleges, universities 1 for each 4 students
Elementary, high schools 1 for every teacher and employee, 1 for every 4 students normally enrolled that are over the legal
driving age, and 1 for every 4 seats in auditoriums, gymnasiums or stadiums. Parking spaces
provided for the school may be considered as parking for the public assembly areas
Kindergartens, daycares, childcare
centers, nursery schools and similar
uses
Where the number of children plus employees is less than 13, 2 off street parking spaces shall be
provided. Where the number of children is equal to or greater than 13, 1 off street parking space for
each 5 children or a fraction thereof shall be provided
F.
Industrial: Values shall be held as minimum:
All types of manufacturing, storage,
wholesale and freight uses permitted
in any Industrial District
1 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area
Parking spaces for other permitted or conditional uses not listed in this section shall be determined by the Planning Director. (Ord. 1360, 12-5-2018)
9-5-16: PARKING CREDITS:
A. Bicycle Parking: For every six (6) nonrequired bicycle parking spaces created within any Commercial or Industrial Zone which adhere to the standards
set forth in section 9-5-14, "Design And Dimensional Standards", of this chapter, motor vehicle parking space requirements may be reduced by one
space; up to a maximum of two (2) off street parking spaces.
B. Motorcycle Parking: For every two (2) motorcycle parking spaces provided for any multifamily, commercial or industrial project, the number of standard
vehicle spaces may be reduced by one space up to a maximum of two (2) spaces. Motorcycle parking spaces must be at least four feet (4') wide and
ten feet (10') deep with a minimum of ten feet (10') of backup space provided.
C. Affordable Housing Deed Restrictions: The minimum parking space requirements for developments that contain a deed restriction for affordable
housing shall be reduced by twenty percent (20%). Such development must adhere to the following standards:
1. At least fifty percent (50%) of the units must be deed restricted to provide for affordable rental housing.
2. At a minimum, the deed restriction must accommodate households making less than eighty percent (80%) of area median income according to the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Such accommodation must provide affordable units such that no more than forty percent
(40%) of tenant household income shall go towards the payment of rent. The deed restriction must remain in effect for a minimum of ten (10) years.
3. Applicants awarded this credit must submit annual reports verifying the standards above to remain in good standing of this provision. (Ord. 1360, 12-
5-2018)
9-5-17: LOADING AREAS:
A. The required number of loading spaces are as follows:
Gross Floor Area (Square Feet) Quantity Type
14,000 - 36,000 1 A
36,001 - 60,000 2 A
60,001 - 100,000 2
1
A
B
Type Of Use Parking Spaces Required
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 254/303
Gross Floor Area (Square Feet) Quantity Type
For each additional 75,000 or fraction thereof 1 B
B. The size of off-street loading spaces shall not be less than the following, exclusive of access platform and loading area:
Type A spaces: Length 35 feet
Width 12 feet
Height clearance 15 feet
Type B spaces: Length 65 feet
Width 12 feet
Height clearance 15 feet
C. Convenient access to loading spaces shall be provided and shall not be less than twelve feet (12') in width.
D. Loading spaces may be located in required yards, providing such space is not roofed.
E. Loading spaces shall be located entirely on the property they are intended to serve. (Ord. 1360, 12-5-2018)
9-5-18: IN LIEU PARKING FEES:
A. Purpose: The purpose of these provisions is to allow businesses to reduce the number of on-site parking spaces through payment so as to meet the
requirements set forth in this chapter. These businesses will be allowed to make payments into a special dedicated fund the City will use to develop
parking. These provisions may be utilized for parking required for new construction or for an increase in required parking resulting from the change of
use of an existing building.
B. Goals: The in-lieu program is voluntary and has the following goals:
1. To creatively reduce parking requirements where appropriate;
2. To reduce the cost of development by reducing the funds required for building and maintenance of parking lots;
3. To facilitate the construction and improvement of public parking;
4. To improve urban design;
5. To encourage shared parking; and
6. To support historic preservation.
C. Definitions:
IN LIEU PAYMENT: A onetime optional payment made to the City Parking Improvement Fund fulfilling all or part of the parking requirements for a
business within the defined parking in lieu area.
PARKING IMPROVEMENT FUND: A special dedicated fund to collect revenue from in lieu parking payments. Revenue collected is used to improve
general parking in the designated parking in lieu area, to purchase or lease land, to improve City parking facilities, and to offset administrative
expenses.
D. Payment Calculation:
1. The parking requirements set forth in the Parking Code may be satisfied in whole or in part by the payment of a nonrefundable parking improvement
fee of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per space.
2. Payment of fees must be made in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit. Upon payment of in lieu fees, applicant will receive a
nontransferable certificate for each space that would otherwise be required by City parking requirements.
3. The City Council may amend the fee by resolution to approximate increases in costs of providing parking.
E. Parking Fund Use:
1. The "Parking Improvement Fund", a dedicated fund, is hereby created to receive revenue from in lieu payments. The fund shall be used to provide
and enhance public parking facilities, including buying or leasing land, constructing parking facilities, offsetting administrative expenses directly
related to managing the account and the construction of facilities, coordinating parking planning, and erecting signage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 255/303
F. Limitations:
1. In the event a business intends to satisfy more than fifty percent (50%) of the parking requirement by payment of parking fees, such application shall
require review and approval of the Planning Commission. Proposed parking requests shall be reviewed at a regular meeting of the Planning
Commission. Notice of such review shall be sent to all adjacent property owners of the property for which parking is requested and affected property
owners shall have the right to comment. Any such request for parking may be denied or reduced if the Planning Commission finds that permitting
such request would have an adverse effect on the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 1360, 12-5-2018)
Chapter 6
SIGNS
9-6-1: PERMITTED SIGNS1:
A. House Numbers: Signs not exceeding one square foot in area illuminated only by the reflector method and bearing only the house number and the
name of the occupant shall be allowed within any residential zone.
B. Advertising Signs: Such signs shall be a permitted use only in the commercial or industrial zones or for any business use located within a residential
zone that is considered legally nonconforming or is approved through the conditional use permit process. (Ord. 1336, 11-2-2016)
Chapter 7
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
9-7-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter and of the city council to permit and allow nonconforming uses to continue until they are removed or terminated. (Ord. 1229,
4-21-2010)
9-7-2: AVOIDANCE OF UNDUE HARDSHIP:
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which
actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment hereof and upon which a valid building permit exists. (Ord.
716, 7-21-1980)
9-7-3: NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES, LAND:
If a lawful use involving individual structures, or of a structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment hereof that
would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this title, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
A. Nonconforming Use Change: Any nonconforming use of a structure or structure and land may, upon the issuance of a nonconforming use permit by the
city, be changed to another nonconforming use; provided, that the city shall find that all of the following conditions are met:
1. That the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use.
2. That there is no increase in noise, odor, glare, outside storage, vibration or other nuisance causing disturbance.
3. In permitting such changes, the city may require appropriate conditions or safeguards in accordance with other provisions of this title and the
conditional use permit provisions including, but not limited to, placement of signs and lighting, landscaping and screening, dedication and/or
improvement of public rights of way, and hours of operation.
B. Conformance To Regulations Of Zone: Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a
permitted use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zone, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
C. Use Discontinued Or Abandoned: When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for
more than two (2) years (except when government action impedes access to the premises), the structure, or structure and land in combination, shall
not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the zone in which it is located.
D. Voluntary Removal Of Structure: Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, voluntary removal of the structure
shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
E. Expansion Allowance For Nonconforming Structures: Structures that become nonconforming due to the adoption or amendment of this code shall be
entitled to a onetime expansion allowance so long as the cubic expansion conforms to all other provisions of this code. (Ord. 1232, 5-19-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 256/303
9-7-4: REPAIRS, MAINTENANCE AND RESTORATION:
A. On any nonconforming structure, or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or
replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing; provided, that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be
increased. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared
to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety upon order of such official.
B. The restoration of a building destroyed by no fault of the owner shall be permitted, and such building may be reconstructed upon the issuance of a
nonconforming use permit, as stated in subsection 9-7-3A of this chapter. (Ord. 716, 7-21-1980)
9-7-5: USES UNDER CONDITIONAL USE PROVISIONS:
Any use which is permitted as a conditional use in a zone under the terms of this title shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such zone during
compliance with the terms of the conditional use permit. (Ord. 716, 7-21-1980; amd. 1983 Code)
9-7-6: ISSUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE PERMIT:
A nonconforming use permit will be issued by the city to all nonconforming uses which were in existence on the effective date of the zoning ordinance or
any subsequent rezoning or other amendment thereto which makes such use nonconforming. This permit will include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
A. Name and address of owner.
B. Legal description.
C. Type of use.
D. Square feet of building space.
E. Square feet of land area.
F. Number of employees.
G. Hours of operation.
H. Number of deliveries.
I. Location of all loading areas.
J. Sign area and location.
K. Number of parking spaces.
Any change in a nonconforming use shall require the issuance of a new nonconforming use permit. In any residential zone, or property adjacent to a
residential zone, nonconforming use permits shall be processed under the rules and regulations as a conditional use permit. (Ord. 1229, 4-21-2010)
Chapter 8
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS1
(Rep. by Ord. 1162, 12-20-2006)
Chapter 9
ZONING ADMINISTRATION
9-9-1: PURPOSE:
The following procedures have been adopted pursuant to and consistent with Idaho Code title 50, and title 67, chapter 65. These provisions are intended
to provide procedures that assure due process of law when applying for, but not limited to, the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 257/303
A. Annexation;
B. Comprehensive plan change;
C. Conditional use permit;
D. Rezone;
E. Subdivision;
F. Variance.
All applications concerning annexations, comprehensive plan changes, rezones, or subdivisions shall first be considered by the planning commission
and then by the city council. Conditional use permits and variances shall be considered by the planning commission only, except as provided for
elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord. 1061, 10-17-2001)
9-9-2: APPLICATIONS REQUIRED:
All matters concerning annexations, comprehensive plan changes, conditional use permits, rezones, subdivisions, or variances within the city limits or the
area of city impact shall be presented to the planning commission, or the planning commission and city council, as required in this chapter, for
consideration and approval or denial. Applications shall bemade upon an application form furnished by the planning department. (Ord. 1061, 10-17-2001)
9-9-3: APPLICATION AND DEPOSIT FEES:
Applicable fees shall be paid at time of filing a completed application. Application and deposit fees shall be set from time to time by resolution duly passed
and adopted by the city council. Said fees shall be in addition to any other costs incurred in the processing of said application and subsequent actions
complying with the statutes of the state or the Sandpoint code. Said costs shall include, but not be limited to, costs of mailing, postage, certifications and
other costs, which shall be itemized by the city and paid by the applicant upon receipt of a statement for the same. (Ord. 842, 6-15-1987)
9-9-4: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
A. All applications for planning and zoning matters must be completed in full and presented to the planning department in the city hall five (5) weeks prior
to the next regular meeting date of the planning commission.
B. An application review meeting with the planning director is required prior to the consideration of a proposal by the planning commission.
C. Once a completed application has been submitted to the planning department, the following procedures shall take place:
1. The application will be placed on the agenda for the next regular planning commission meeting; or
2. A forty (40) day period may be required by the planning department to assess the application and, if necessary, request additional information from
the applicant. Any additional information requested shall be provided by the applicant within one hundred twenty (120) days of the request, and
before the application is placed on the agenda for the regular planning commission meeting. (Ord. 842, 6-15-1987)
9-9-5: PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURES:
A. The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15)
days prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place and a summary of the proposal shall be published in the official newspaper or paper of general
circulation within the jurisdiction.
In the case of annexations, comprehensive plan changes,conditional use permits, rezones, subdivisions, and variances, notice shall also be provided
to property owners within the land being considered; within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being considered; and
within any additional areas that may be substantially impacted by the proposal as determined by the planning commission.
When notices are required to be sent to two hundred (200) or more property owners, the notice of public hearing published in the paper shall be
considered adequate in lieu of mailed notices. (Ord. 1061, 10-17-2001)
B. Conduct of public hearing before the planning commission or city council as a hearing agency, and maintenance of records.
1. Order Of Public Hearing: Public hearings shall follow the order of events set forth below:
a. Explanation of subject of the hearing by city staff.
b. Presentation by applicant.
c. Testimony from audience in favor and/or against proposal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 258/303
d. Questioning of involved parties by the hearing agency.
e. Closure of oral testimony from applicant.
f. Discussion of hearing subject among hearing agency members. Questions may also be directed to city staff during this period.
g. Conclusion of hearing process.
2. Rules Of Procedures:
a. No person shall be permitted to testify or speak before the hearing agency at a public hearing unless such person has signed his name and written
his residential address on sign up sheets to be provided by the city. This rule shall not apply to staff or technical witnesses directed by the
chairperson to give evidence or information to the hearing agency.
b. No person shall be permitted to speak before the hearing agency at a public hearing until such person is recognized by the chairperson.
c. All public hearing proceedings shall be recorded electronically or stenographically and all persons speaking at such public hearings shall speak
before a microphone in such a manner as will assure that the recorded testimony or remarks will be accurate and complete.
d. At the commencement of the public hearing, the hearing agency shall establish a time limit to be observed by allspeakers. The time limit shall be
established depending on the number of speakers who sign up for each public hearing and shall apply only to the speaker's comments.
e. The hearing agency may suspend or amend any one or more of these rules by vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the number of members of the
hearing agency then in attendance.
3. Standards For Oral Testimony: Oral testimony made at a public hearing shall comply with the following standards:
a. Testimony shall directly address the subject at hand.
b. Testimony shall not be repetitious with other entries into the record.
c. Testimony shall not be personally derogatory.
d. Testimony shall comply with time restrictions established by the hearing agency.
If oral testimony fails to comply with the aforementioned standards, the chairperson may declare such testimony out of order and require it to
cease.
4. Standards For Written Testimony: Written testimony to be admitted at a public hearing shall comply with the following standards:
a. Written testimony containing more than two (2) standard, single-spaced typewritten pages must be submitted at least five (5) days prior to the date
of the pertinent public hearing.
b. Written testimony shall include the signature and address of the submittor.
c. Written testimony shall address the issue at hand.
d. Written testimony shall not be personally derogatory.
e. Written testimony of less than two (2) standard, single-spaced pages may be submitted at the public hearing. The chairperson may require an oral
reading of such written testimony if the chairperson deems it beneficial.
If written testimony fails to comply with the aforementioned standards, the chairperson may declare such testimony inadmissible.
5. Records Maintained: The City Clerk shall maintain records of all public meetings in the following manner:
a. Transcribable verbatim recordings of the proceedings shall be maintained in conformance with Idaho Code 50-907.
b. Originals of written submittals to the hearing record and copies of applications shall be maintained in conformance with Idaho Code 50-907.
c. Minutes which catalog the occurrences at the public hearing shall be maintained as required by applicable sections of the Idaho Code.
6. Copies Of Official Records; Availability: Copies of material submitted for inclusion in the official record of a public hearing shall be available to
interested parties upon payment of charges established by the City Clerk for research and duplicating. (Ord. 842, 6-15-1987)
9-9-6: PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION AND NOTIFICATION:
Conditional use permits and variances may be granted only upon findings by the Planning Commission that the proposal meets all of the following criteria:
A. Conditional Use Permit Procedures:
1. Grant Of Permit: A conditional use permit may be granted to an applicant if the proposed use is listed in the Sandpoint Code as a conditional use,
and if it is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan.
2. Application: Application for a conditional use permit shall be made to the Planning Department as provided for in this Chapter.
3. Contents Of Application: A conditional use permit request shall not be heard by the Planning Commission unless and until an application for a
conditional use permit has been submitted to the Planning Department and the Planning Commission containing the following:
a. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 259/303
b. Legal description of the property.
c. Proof of ownership.
d. Signature of legal title holder approving the application.
e. The name and addresses of all adjoining property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the subject property,
provided on a separate sheet of labels.
f. A vicinity map at the scale of one hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100') showing the current land segregations and existing land use within three
hundred feet (300') of the subject property.
g. Eight (8) copies of the following plans (suggested scale:1" = 20'):
(1) Site plans showing the location and dimensions of all building setbacks, road frontage, curb cuts, circulation patterns, loading service areas,
parking, sidewalks, landscaped areas, signs, lighting, easements, utilities and drainage patterns and listing the total open space area,
impervious surfaces, lot size and total building floor area.
(2) Floor plans, elevations - front, side and rear - and property lines and roof line dimensions.
(3) Narrative stating the previous use of the site and intended use to include hours of operation, number of employees, system for delivery of
materials and nature of business.
h. A narrative statement demonstrating in what ways the request conforms or does not conform to the following standards:
(1) Will, in fact, constitute a conditional use as established on the official schedule of regulations for the zoning district involved.
(2) Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objectives, or with any specific objective of the comprehensive plan and/or
applicable sections of the Sandpoint Code.
(3) Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be harmonious and appropriate with the existing or intended character of the
general vicinity and that such use will not change the essential character of the same area.
(4) Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing neighboring uses.
(5) Will be served adequately by essential public services and utilities such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage systems,
refuse disposal, water and sewer, and schools; or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be
able to provide adequately any such service or utility.
(6) Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public services and utilities and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community.
(7) Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and conditions of operation that will be deterimental to any persons, property
or the general welfare by reasons of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors.
(8) Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be designed so as not to create an interference with trafficon surrounding public
roads.
(9) Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural, scenic or historic feature of major importance.
4. Compliance Required: A conditional use permit shall not be granted or denied unless the Planning Commission makes specific findings of fact based
directly on the particular evidence presented to it as to whether the above-mentioned standards and conditions have been met by the applicant.
5. Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards: In granting any conditional use, the Planning Commission or City Council may prescribe appropriate
conditions, bonds and safeguards in conformity with this Section. Violations of such conditions, bonds or safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Section.
6. Action By The Planning Commission: Upon granting of a special use permit, conditions may be attached to a conditional use permit including, but
not limited to, the following:
a. Minimizing adverse impact on other development.
b. Controlling the sequence and timing of development.
c. Controlling the duration of development.
d. Assuring that development is maintained properly.
e. Designating the exact location and nature of development.
f. Requiring the provision for on-site or off-site public facilities or services.
g. Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required in an ordinance.
Prior to granting a special use permit, studies may be required of the social, economic, fiscal and environmental effects of the proposed special
use. A conditional use permit shall not be considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant other conditional use permits. A conditional use
permit is not transferable from one parcel of land to another.
7. Commencement Of Work: The proposed work shall commence within one year following the date of Planning Commission or City Council approval
of the conditional use permit and shall be diligently pursued or said approval and permit shall be rendered automatically null, void and of no right or
recourse.
8. Payment Of Fees: An application shall not be processed until all required fees are paid in full.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 260/303
B. Variance Permit Procedures:
1. Recommendations: The Planning Commission may recommend in specific cases such variance from the terms of this Code as will not be contrary to
the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the terms and provisions of the Sand point Code would result in
unnecessary hardship. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district and no permitted or nonconforming
uses of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for issuance of a variance. Variances shall not be granted on the
grounds of convenience of profit, but only where strict application of the provisions of this Code would result in unnecessary hardship.
2. Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards: Under no circumstances shall the Planning Commission or City Council grant a variance to allow a use
not permissible under the terms of this Code in the district involved for any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of said ordinance
in said district. Upon hearing a variance request, the Planning Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with
applicable ordinances. Violation of such conditions or safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be
deemed a violation of such ordinances.
3. Contents Of Application: A variance from the terms of this Code shall not be heard by the Planning Commission unless and until an application for a
variance is submitted to the Planning Department and the Planning Commission containing the following:
a. Address, name and telephone number of applicant.
b. Legal description of the property.
c. Description of nature of variance requested, consisting of:
(1) The names and addresses of all adjoining property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the subject property, listed on a separate sheet of
labels.
(2) A copy of a preliminary title report or title insurance policy for the proposed site.
(3) A vicinity map at the scale of one hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100') showing the property owners and existing land use within three hundred
feet (300') of the proposed site.
(4) Nine (9) copies of a site plan drawn to scale which shows the property under consideration, location of all improvements and the specific
information concerning the requested variance.
(5) A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance conforms to the following standards:
(A) That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structures or buildings in the same district.
(B) That a literal interpretation of the applicable sections of this Code would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same district under the terms of this Code.
(C) That special considerations, conditions and circumstances do not result from actions or desires of the applicant, and,
(D) That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privileges that are denied by this Code to other land,
structures or buildings in the same district.
4. Action By The Planning Commission: A variance shall not be granted or denied unless the Planning Commission makes specific findings of fact and
conclusions as to whether the above mentioned standards and conditions have been met by the applicant.
5. Commencement Of Work: The proposed work shall commence within one year following the date of planning commission or city council approval of
the variance or said approval and permit shall be rendered automatically null, void and of no right or recourse.
6. Payment Of Fees: An application shall not be processed until all required fees are paid in full.
C. Notification: Upon granting or denying an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the planning director shall notify the applicant in writing of
the planning commission decision and shall specify the following:
1. The applicable sections of this code and standards used in evaluating the application.
2. The reasons for approval or denial based upon compliance or noncompliance with the established criteria and findings of fact for which the action
was taken.
3. The conditions of approval, if any, which the applicant may take to obtain a permit.
The planning director shall transmit the record of the planning commission's action to the city council within five (5) days after the public hearing.
(Ord. 842, 6-15-1987)
9-9-7: TIME LIMIT FOR PLANNING COMMISSION ACTIONS:
The planning commission shall act on an application within sixty (60) days of filing. The planning commission may continue the public hearing or table an
application for not more than thirty (30) days or until their next regular meeting, whichever comes first, at which time a decision shall be made to approve,
conditionally approve or deny the application. A longer period of time not to exceed six (6) months may be required when climatic conditions make it
necessary to delay the planning commission's decision. In such event, notice shall be provided as specified herein. (Ord. 842, 6-15-1987)
9-9-8: EFFECTIVE DATE OF PLANNING COMMISSION DECISION:
The planning commission's decision shall not become effective until the ten (10) day appeal period has lapsed. No building or other permit shall be issued
during this period. (Ord. 842, 6-15-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 261/303
9-9-9: PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION AND CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
A. Following the hearing for annexations, comprehensive plan changes, zone changes, and subdivisions, the planning commission shall take one of the
following actions:
1. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council at the first regular council meeting following the planning commission's
hearing. The recommendation shall state specifically on what grounds or statutes said recommendation is based; or
2. The commission shall postpone consideration of the application to consult with its advisors and staff to make a recommendation to the city council
within forty (40) days after such hearing.
B. The city council shall review the recommendation and information presented by the planning commission at the first regular council meeting, or a
special council meeting called for that purpose, following the planning commission's hearing. Public hearings in the case of annexations,
comprehensive plan changes, zone changes and subdivisions shall be held according to Idaho Code 67-6509(b) and as provided by this chapter. The
city council shall then take one of the following actions:
1. Concur with the recommendation of the planning commission if said commission's finding is deemed accurate and correct and grant the application,
and, where action requires an ordinance to be adopted by the city council, proceed according to Idaho Code section 50-902.
2. Postpone consideration of the application to consult with the planning commission and its advisors and staff so that, within forty (40) days, after
hearing the planning commission's recommendation, the application shall be approved, conditionally approved, or denied.
3. Deny the application.
C. If the city council declines to follow the recommendation of the planning commission, the council shall provide, in writing to the planning commission,
within fifteen (15) days following the decision, its findings of fact and conclusions by which the recommendation was not followed.
D. Upon granting or denying an application, the city council shall specify the following:
1. The applicable sections of this code and standards used in evaluating the application.
2. The findings of fact and conclusions for approval or denial.
3. The actions, if any, that the applicant may take to obtain a permit.
E. Within fifteen (15) days of the decision of the city council, said council shall provide the applicant with written notice of the action taken on the request.
F. If no action is taken by the city council within forty (40) days of hearing the recommendation of the planning commission or a specified delay has not
been agreed upon by the applicant, the application shall be deemed approved. (Ord. 1061, 10-17-2001)
9-9-10: APPEALS:
A. Appeal From Planning Commission Decision:
1. Notice Of Appeal: An affected person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may file a written notice of appeal with the planning
department or city council. Such notice must be filed within ten (10) days after the planning commission's decision and shall clearly state the basis on
which such person is an affected person as defined in Idaho Code 67-6521, and the grounds for appeal. An appeal from an action of the planning
commission shall automatically stay the issuance of a building or other permit until such appeal has been decided by the city council.
2. Fees For Appeal: The fees for an appeal from the planning commission's decision regarding conditional use permits shall be set from time to time by
resolution duly passed and adopted by the city council.
3. Public Hearing On Appeal: The city council shall hold a public hearing on an appeal pursuant to the procedures as provided in this chapter at the
next regularly scheduled city council meeting, or at a special meeting called for that purpose.
B. Appeal From City Council Decision: The decision by the city council shall constitute the final decision. An affected person aggrieved by the decision
may, within sixty (60) days of the decision rendered, seek judicial review under the procedures provided in section 67-5215(b) through (g) and 67-5216
of the Idaho Code. (Ord. 842, 6-15-1987)
9-9-11: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
A. Purpose: A development agreement (the "agreement") is a discretionary tool to be used by the planning commission (the "Commission") and city
council (the "Council"). The agreement will allow a change in the zoning for a specific project, with a specific use, to be developed on property in an
area which may not be appropriate for all uses permitted outright or conditionally within the proposed zone. Approval of the agreement, pursuant to this
section, would permit the proposed use, with conditions, within the proposed zone.
B. When Permitted Or Required: An agreement may be permitted or required at the discretion of the commission or council when considering a request for
a rezone. An agreement when permitted or required, shall be initiated through one of the following methods:
1. On request by the developer;
2. On recommendation of the planning director (the "Director"); or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 262/303
3. As required by the commission or council.
a. The council or commission may require that an agreement be executed prior to allowing a particular project to proceed. An agreement may be
formulated when approval of the rezone would permit uses within that zone which may not be appropriate to the area, but the specific project
presented may have a value to the community which could otherwise be allowed through the use of an agreement.
b. In the event, during the rezoning process, the Council or the Commission determines that an agreement should be considered;
(1) The Commission shall retain jurisdiction of the matter until its recommendation concerning the agreement is given to the Council. The
Commission shall defer consideration of the rezone and set a time limit for submittal of the agreement. The Commission shall then proceed as
specified in thisSection.
(2) In the event of a determination by the Council that an agreement should be drafted, the Council shall remand the matter back to the
Commission for consideration. The Council may give specific direction to the Commission as part of the remand.
(3) In the event of subsections 9-9-11B3b1 and b2 above, all time limits required by the Sandpoint Code may be stayed, upon affirmative vote of
the Commission or Council.
C. Form Of Agreement: The agreement shall be in a form as required by the Director and shall, as a condition of consideration by the Director,
Commission or City Council, include all of the following:
1. An affidavit by the owner of the property agreeing to submission of the use and property for an agreement.
2. The legal description of the property in question.
3. The specific present use or uses of the property in question.
4. The permitted or conditional use desired and the proposed zone.
5. A concept plan for the property as provided by this Chapter. In addition to those items required by this Chapter, the concept plan shall include but not
be limited to:
a. A description of the density allowed and requested.
b. Maximum height, size, and location of all the structures proposed.
6. The construction schedule, including the projected occupancy date.
7. Type and color of materials used.
8. A statement acknowledging that failure to comply with the agreement shall constitute a consent to rezone the property to the pre-existing zone or; in
the case of the pre-existing zone being an initial zone at annexation, a zone deemed appropriate by the Commission and Council.
9. Any other information as requested by the Council, Commission, or Director.
D. Approval Of The Agreement:
1. The agreement may be approved at the sole discretion of the Council after a public hearing. The public hearing shall follow the public hearing
procedures of this Chapter.
2. The Commission or Council may revise the agreement by adding to it conditions, terms, duties, or obligations to the agreement.
3. The agreement must be approved by the Council as a resolution, only after approval of the agreement by the City Attorney.
E. Procedure After Approval Of The Agreement: Following approval of the agreement by the City Council, the full agreement shall be recorded in the
Bonner County Recorder's office, Bonner County, Idaho, at the expense of the developer. The agreement shall run with the land and shall be
considered continuing obligations of the owner, co-owners or subsequent owners of the property. Use of the property and compliance with the
agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the Director prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.
F. Duty To Comply With Agreement: Each owner, co-owner or subsequent owner of property which is subject to an agreement adopted pursuant to this
Section shall comply with the agreement.
G. Modification Of Agreement:
1. The agreement may be modified only after public hearing by the Council.
2. No modification of the agreement may allow a use or condition on the property that is not permitted within the zone.
H. Amendment Or Termination Of Agreement Upon Breach:
1. In the event of a breach of the agreement by the developer, or the developer's successor in interest, the agreement may be amended or terminated
by the Council without the consent of the breaching party. Such amendment or termination shall take place after a public hearing in compliance with
the public hearing procedures of this Chapter, at which time testimony shall be taken to resolve the issue with the agreement.
2. Upon termination of the agreement, following the public hearing the property shall, upon an affirmative vote of the council, revert to the pre-existing
zone, or in the case of the pre-existing zone being an initial zone at annexation, a zone deemed appropriate by the Commission and Council. All
uses of the property which are not consistent with such pre-existing zone following termination of the agreement shall cease. The owner of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 263/303
property may apply for a conditional use for the property if such use is conditional within such pre-existing zone after compliance with the terms of
this Chapter.
I. Enforcement Of Agreement: The agreement may be enforced by the Council through any means deemed to be appropriate,including but not limited to,
specific enforcement injunctive relief, damages or criminal penalty for violation of this Section. The enforcement options available to the Council shall
be considered cumulative. (Ord. 910, 11-18-1991)
Chapter 10
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
9-10-1: PURPOSE:
Idaho Code section 67-6526 requires that the governing board of the City adopt by ordinance a map identifying an area of City impact within the
unincorporated area of the County surrounding said City. (Ord. 959, 11-29-1994)
9-10-2: CONSIDERATION:
The following factors were considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council in identifying the area of City impact for Sandpoint,
Bonner County, Idaho:
A. Trade area;
B. Geographical factors;
C. Areas that can be reasonably expected to be annexed to the City in the future;
D. Areas where extension of City services are possible and reasonable;
E. Areas where growth is occurring or growth is anticipated to occur;
F. Areas in which to encourage or discourage particular types of growth and development and that which the City may want some form of control over in
the future. (Ord. 959, 11-29-1994)
9-10-3: GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
The official adopted geographic area of City impact is shown in Section 9-10-8 of this Chapter. All parcels of land lying within the area of City impact as
delineated by Section 9-10-8 shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 958, 11-29-1994)
9-10-4: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
The Comprehensive Plan and subsequent amendments thereof as officially adopted by Bonner County shall apply to the unincorporated portion of Bonner
County, lying within the area of City impact for the City. (Ord. 958, 11-29-1994)
9-10-5: ZONING AND SUBDIVISION ORDINANCES:
The Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances and subsequent amendments thereto as officially adopted by Bonner County, shall apply to the unincorporated
portion of Bonner County, lying within the area of City impact. (Ord. 958, 11-29-1994)
9-10-6: REVIEW AND COMMENT:
Any request for development, zone change, conditional use permit, variance or subdivision in the unincorporated portion of Bonner County lying within the
area of City impact shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council of the City for review and comment. The City shall have a
forty (40) day period within which to respond to any request set forth above. If the City does not respond within forty (40) days, the City forfeits its right to
comment on the request and processing shall continue under the County's administration. (Ord. 958, 11-29-1994)
9-10-7: ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION:
The administrative jurisdictions of plans and ordinances which apply to the area of City impact delineated by the map incorporated herein shall be the duty
of Bonner County, which shall apply the same plans and ordinances for the unincorporated areas of the County lying within the areas of City impact as
those areas lying outside the area of City impact. (Ord. 959, 11-29-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 264/303
9-10-8: LEGAL DESCRIPTION AND MAP:
The area of city impact within the area of Bonner County, Idaho, is particularly described in ordinance 1130 on file in the city and also set forth on the map
in that ordinance, which map shall be in effect until amended or modified as allowed by law. This map is attached as exhibit A to ordinance 1130 and
incorporated herein by this reference. (Ord. 1130, 2-16-2005)
Chapter 11
HOME OCCUPATION REGULATIONS
9-11-1: PURPOSE; INTENT:
The city recognizes the need for some citizens to use their place of residence for limited nonresidential activities. However, the city also believes that the
need to protect the integrity and character of its residential areas is of paramount concern. The home occupation regulations are the means used to blend
these two (2) desires. The home occupation regulations seek to balance the need of some individuals to work at home with rights of other individuals to
enjoy the residential character of their neighborhood and their private property. Further, the purpose of the home occupation regulations is to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of neighborhood residents and the preservation of the neighborhood as a comfortable place for the people who live there. (Ord.
1009, 6-22-1998)
9-11-2: APPLICABILITY:
The regulations set forth for home occupations shall apply to all residential dwelling units or residential accessory structures, irrespective of the zoning
district. Should a residential use in the commercial zoning district fail to meet the conditions necessary to qualify as a home occupation, it is then
considered a full commercial business and must comply with all regulations covering commercial establishments.
These regulations do not apply to land uses which require conditional use permits in residential zones which must go through a separate conditional use
permit review process. Clinics, doctors' offices, hospitals, health care practitioners, hair or beauty salons, real estate offices, animal hospitals, kennels,
automobile repair service, body shops, restaurants, warehousing and other similar uses are not considered home occupations and are not permitted to
operate as such in any residential zone. (Ord. 1009, 6-22-1998)
9-11-3: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Home occupations in any zoning district where permitted shall be subject to the following performance standards:
A. Location: A home business shall be carried on wholly within the principal building, provided that inside storage and/or minor assembly associated with
the home occupation may also occur within an accessory structure. No home business nor any storage of goods, materials, or products connected with
a home business shall be allowed outside of the principal building or accessory structure and there shall be no commercial on premises sales in
connection with such home occupation.
B. Number: More than one home business at the residence may be permitted provided the total effect of all occupations shall not exceed the performance
standards for home occupations.
C. Size: No more than thirty five percent (35%) of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling unit may be used for home business(es). There is no
restriction placed upon the usable area within an accessory structure provided no other activity besides inside storage and/or minor assembly activity is
occurring and performance standards relating to maintaining residential character can still be met.
D. Residency: A home business must be conducted by persons who reside in the dwelling unit. No person who does not reside on the premises shall
engage in the business and be located on the premises.
E. Restricted Materials: No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, etiologic, radioactive or other restricted materials in excess of those levels
allowed by the current edition of the fire code in effect in the city of Sandpoint shall be used or stored on the site.
F. Maintaining Residential Character: The business shall be conducted in a manner which will not alter the normal residential character of the premises by
exterior alteration of the property, expansion of parking, construction, creation of a separate entrance, the use of color, materials, lighting, signs (other
than on the applicant's vehicle), exterior storage of materials, garbage, goods or merchandise, or by the emission of sound, electric interference,
vibration, dust, glare, heat, smoke, odors or liquids.
G. Signs: There shall be no signs other than those permitted in the applicable zoning district.
H. Business Traffic: Home occupations shall not impose any additional business traffic (i.e., traffic recruited to travel to or from the business) on the
surrounding neighborhood. This requirement excludes occasional deliveries and any business or personal errands by the owner of the home
occupation.
I. Vehicles: Vehicles associated with the home occupation which are rated by the manufacturer for a maximum gross weightin excess of ten thousand
(10,000) pounds gross weight shall not be operated out of the premises or park on the property or adjacent streets. No more than one vehicle used in
the business may be parked on the premises or operated out of the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 265/303
J. Parking: The home business shall not displace or impede the use of required parking spaces for the primary dwelling unit.
K. Applicable Codes: Structures must meet city building, construction, fire and land use regulations.
L. Motor Vehicle Related Home Businesses: Office only activities for motor vehicle related home businesses may be allowed. (Ord. 1075, 12-18-2002)
9-11-4: HOME OCCUPATION REGISTRATION:
All home occupations wishing to operate within the city limits shall complete and submit a home business registration form. Approval of said registration
form shall constitute as a home occupation permit.
A. Issuance And Terms Of Permit: The planning director, or his or her designee, may issue a home occupation permit that complies with the provisions of
this chapter, on forms prescribed by the city council. Anyone applying for permission to operate a home occupation acknowledges and agrees to
operate the home occupation in accordance with the performance standards contained in this chapter.
B. Fees: Any fee and/or fee schedule associated with a home occupation permit shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council.
C. Revocation Of Permit: The zoning enforcement officer may revoke a home occupation permit and/or recommend assessment of fines as specified in
this chapter, for reasons including, but not limited to:
1. Failure to comply with "notice to cease nonpermitted home occupation activity".
2. Any change in use or any change in extent of use, area of the dwelling unit being used, or mechanical or electrical equipment being used that is
different from that specified in the granted home occupation permit form that is not first cleared and approved by the building official.
3. Any change in use, or any change in extent of use, area of the dwelling unit being used, or mechanical or electrical equipment being used which
violates any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1009, 6-22-1998)
9-11-5: NOTICE TO CEASE NONPERMITTED ACTIVITY:
Should the zoning enforcement officer, at any time during the period in which a home occupation is in operation, receive a written complaint, and after
conducting an investigation, find that the operation, or a portion thereof of such home occupation is in violation of the provisions of this chapter and/or the
terms and conditions subject thereto, the zoning enforcement officer shall serve a notice, by certified mail, return receipt, to cease activities conducted in
violation of the home occupations regulations. Such notice shall be headed "NOTICE TO CEASE NONPERMITTED HOME OCCUPATION ACTIVITY",
shall contain a description of the property, shall describe the ordinance section(s) violated, shall specify the penalty provisions of this chapter, shall specify
how they can remedy the violation and shall specify the appeal process contained in this chapter. (Ord. 1009, 6-22-1998)
9-11-6: APPEALS:
Appeals of administrative decisions made under the Home Occupation Regulations shall be made to the City Council as specified in Section 9-9-10 of this
Title. (Ord. 1009, 6-22-1998)
9-11-7: PENALTY:
A. Violations: Violations of the Home Occupation Regulations may include the following, as well as those specified in Section 1-4-1 of this Code:
Revocation of the permit;
Suspension of permit eligibility for a period not to exceed one year;
Assessment of costs to enforce compliance.
B. Administrative Civil Penalty: Any person(s) who violates an order of the City or who fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter shall be liable to
the City for a civil penalty. The amount of such civil penalty shall not exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) per violation. Each day upon which a
violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Judicial Proceedings: Following entry of any order by the City with respect to the violation of this Chapter, the City may commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate local court and the City shall be entitled to its costs and reasonable attorney fees in the event
the City is the prevailing party. (Ord. 1009, 6-22-1998)
9-11-8: SUNSET CLAUSE:
All home occupations in existence prior to the adoption date of this Chapter shall come into conformance with the provisions contained within this Chapter
within five (5) years. (Ord. 1009, 6-22-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 266/303
Chapter 12
AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE DISTRICT
9-12-1: PURPOSE:
The Airport Overlay Zone District is established for the purpose of preventing the creation or establishment of hazards to air navigation, as defined, or
where such hazards are already created or established, eliminating, removing, altering, mitigating, marking or lighting such airport hazards. The provisions
of this chapter shall be applicable, but not limited to, conditional use permits, variances, preliminary and final plats, lot line adjustments, planned unit
developments, zone changes, site plan review permits, and building permits. (Ord. 1037, 4-19-2000; amd. Ord. 1040, 7-18-2000)
9-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
See section 9-1-3 of this title for the definitions of the following terms used in this chapter:
Airport.
Airport elevation.
Hazard to air navigation.
Height.
Nonprecision instrument runway.
Person.
Precision instrument runway approach zone.
Primary surface.
Runway.
Visual runway. (Ord. 1044, 10-18-2000)
9-12-3: AIRPORT ZONES:
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones for existing and future planned airport conditions
as they apply to theSandpoint airport. The zones include all the land lying within the primary zones, approach zones, transitional zones, horizontal zones
and conical zones. Such zones are shown on the approved Sandpoint airport master plan 1993-2013, as amended from time to time, which by this
reference is incorporated and made a part hereof is if set forth in full. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in
the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
A. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zones: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is
five hundred feet (500') wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of two thousand feet (2,000') at a horizontal distance five
thousand feet (5,000') from the primary surface, its center line being the continuation of the center line of the runway.
B. Transitional Zones: These zones are hereby established as the area beneath the transitional surfaces.
C. Horizontal Zone: The horizontal zone is hereby established by swinging arcs of five thousand feet (5,000') radii from the center of each end of the
primary surface of each runway, and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the
approach and transitional zones.
D. Conical Zone: The conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward there
from the horizontal distance of four thousand feet (4,000'). The conical zone does not include the precision instrument approach zones and the
transitional zones. (Ord. 1037, 4-19-2000)
9-12-4: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained and no tree shall be allowed to grow, in any zone
created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby
established for each of the zones as follows:
A. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zones: Slopes outward twenty feet (20') horizontally for each one foot (1') vertically beginning at the
end of and at the same airport elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000') along the extended
runway center line.
B. Transitional Zones: Slopes outward seven feet (7') horizontally for each one foot (1') vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the
primary surfaceand the approach zones, and extending to a height of one hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation, which is two thousand
one hundred twenty seven feet (2,127') above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping outward seven
feet (7') horizontally for each one foot (1') vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach zones, and extending to the
intersection with the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, height limits sloping
outward seven feet (7') for each one foot (1') vertically shall be maintained beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface,
and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000') measured at ninety degree (90°) angles to the extended runway center line.
C. Horizontal Zone: One hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation or a height of two thousand two hundred seventy seven feet (2,277') above
mean sea level.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 267/303
D. Conical Zone: Slopes outward twenty feet (20') horizontally for each one foot (1') vertically beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one
hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred fifty feet (350') above the airport elevation.
E. Conflicting Limitations: Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail.
F. Excepted Height Limitations: Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any
tree to a height up to forty five feet (45') above the surface of the land if all applicable zone height restrictions can otherwise be met. (Ord. 1037, 4-19-
2000)
9-12-5: USE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this Chapter in such a
manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or
otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the Sandpoint Airport.
B. No change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow or be maintained in any zone hereby
created unless in conformance with this Chapter. (Ord. 1037, 4-19-2000)
C. No use or structure shall be established that would allow the creation of a "hazard to air navigation", as defined, or permit a nonconforming use,
structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than the hazard was on the effective date of this Chapter or any amendments thereto.
(Ord. 1037, 4-19-2000; amd. Ord. 1040, 7-18-2000)
9-12-6: NONCONFORMING USES:
A. The regulations prescribed by this Chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree
not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this Chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing
contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was
begun prior to the effective date of this Chapter, and is diligently pursued. Provided further, that nothing contained herein shall restrict or otherwise
interfere with the use of North Boyer Avenue by vehicular traffic.
B. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this Section, the owner of any existing, nonconforming structure shall not object to the installation, operation,
and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Bonner County Commissioners and subsequently required
by the Sandpoint Planning Commission to indicate the presence of such airport hazards to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport. Notice
of intent to require markers and lights on any nonconforming structure shall be provided to the property owner by the Bonner County Commissioners.
Such markers and lights shall also be installed and maintained at the expense of the Bonner County Commissioners.
1. The owner of any existing nonconforming tree(s) located off airport property shall negotiate, when requested, with the Bonner County
Commissioners to mitigate said airport hazard by one or any combination of the following means:
a. Voluntary removal of the tree(s) by the property owner.
b. Removal of the tree(s) by the Bonner County Commissioners, upon purchase of said tree(s) and/or land containing said tree(s).
c. Purchase of a navigation easement by the Bonner County Commissioners for the purposes of preventing airport obstructions through means
determined necessary by the Bonner County Commissioners.
d. Marking and lighting of the tree(s) by the Bonner County Commissioners to indicate the presence of such obstacles to the operators of aircraft.
2. Grant funding should be investigated to accomplish any of the above options. Any nonconforming tree(s) on Sandpoint Airport property shall be
removed upon the recommendation of the Federal Aviation Administration.
C. Nonconforming uses are subject to the provisions for nonconforming uses as set forth generally in this Chapter. (Ord. 1037, 4-19-2000)
9-12-7: VARIANCES:
A. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance with the
regulations prescribed in this Chapter, may apply to the Planning Commission for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall
be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities
and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this Chapter may be considered by the
Planning Commission unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the Sandpoint Airport Board for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the
variance. If the Airport Board does not respond to the application within fifteen (15) days after receipt, the Planning Commission may act on its own to
grant or deny said application.
B. However, a tree or structure of less than forty five feet (45') of vertical height above the ground is permitted in the horizontal and conical zones or in any
approach and transitional zones beyond a horizontal distance of four thousand two hundred feet (4,200') from each end of the runway except when
such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for the respective zone.
(Ord. 1037, 4-19-2000)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 268/303
C. Any variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this Chapter and be reasonable in the circumstance, be so
conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be
deemed necessary by the Bonner County Airport Commission or other appropriate agencies as necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of a
"hazard to air navigation", as defined. (Ord. 1037, 4-19-2000; amd. Ord. 1040, 7-18-2000)
D. Variance applications required by this Chapter are to be submitted by applicant to the Bonner County Airport Commissionfor its review and
recommendation, and subsequently to the Sandpoint Planning Department for review by the:
1. Federal Aviation Administration for review and recommendation;
2. Other appropriate agencies as necessary; and
3. Sandpoint Planning Commission for its review and final decision. (Ord. 1037, 4-19-2000)
9-12-8: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this Chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or
requirement shall apply. (Ord. 1037, 4-19-2000)
9-12-9: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Planning Commission in the administration of this Chapter, may appeal to the City
Council in accordance with the procedures noted in Section 9-9-10 of this Title. (Ord. 1037, 4-19-2000)
9-12-10: AMENDING THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
Pursuant to section 9-14-2 of this title, the official zoning map of the city is hereby amended as shown on the hereby adopted official supplement zoning
map on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 1037, 4-19-2000)
9-12-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-4-
1 of this code, and a separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day during or which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1037, 4-19-
2000)
Chapter 13
MOBILE HOME PARKS/TRAILER COACH COURTS
9-13-1: ZONING OF MOBILE HOME PARKS/TRAILER COACH COURTS:
Every mobile home park/trailer coach court hereafter constructed shall be regulated by the following provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1236, 6-23-2010)
9-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
DEPENDENT TRAILER COACH: One which does not have a water closet and a bathtub or shower.
INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH: One that has a water closet and a bathtub or shower.
LOCAL ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITIES: The individual official(s), board, department or agency established and authorized by a state, county, city or
other political subdivision created by law to administer and enforce the provisions of the local codes and ordinances as adopted or amended.
MOBILE HOME PARK/TRAILER COURT: Any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more occupied mobile homes/trailer coaches are located.
MOBILE HOME SPACE/TRAILER COACH SPACE: A plot of ground within a mobile home park/trailer coach court designated for the accommodation of
one mobile home/trailer coach.
MOBILE HOME/TRAILER COACH: A vehicle without means of self-propulsion, but licensable as a conveyance on public streets or highways, and which is
constructed to permit occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons.
SERVICE BUILDING: A building housing communal toilet, laundry and other sanitary facilities necessary for the health and convenience of the trailer
occupants. (Ord. 1236, 6-23-2010)
9-13-3: SITE SELECTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 269/303
A. Location: The site must not be: 1) close to swamps or other potential breeding places for insects or rodents; 2) subject to flooding, fire or safety
hazards; 3) exposed to chronic nuisances, such as noise, smoke, fumes and odors. The site should be bounded on at least one side by a public street
or highway.
B. Topography: The topography must be favorable to good site drainage, minimum grading, trailer placement, and ease of maintenance. Initial site grades
exceeding eight percent (8%) or rock formation close to the surface, are likely to cause high development costs. Sparsely wooded sites providing
shade trees are often advantageous.
C. Availability Of Utilities: The site must be readily accessible to public utilities, including water, sewerage and electricity.
D. Necessary Land Area: The area of the mobile home/trailer coach court must be sufficient in size to accommodate: 1) the number of mobile home/trailer
coach spaces desired; 2) roads and parking areas for motor vehicles; 3) service areas, buildings and playgrounds; 4) on site utilities where public
utilities are not available. (Ord. 1236, 6-23-2010)
9-13-4: SITE IMPROVEMENTS:
The physical improvements of the site must be arranged to provide:
A. A convenient means of pedestrian and vehicular access to each mobile home/trailer coach space, parking areas, and accessory buildings.
B. An adequate supply of potable water.
C. A safe method of sewage disposal.
D. Electrical service for lighting and power.
E. Diversion of surface water away from buildings, mobile home/trailer coach spaces, service and recreational areas, and its disposal from the site. (Ord.
1236, 6-23-2010)
9-13-5: SITE PLANNING:
A plan of the proposed mobile home/trailer coach court must be developed for approval of the commission indicating the layout of mobile home/trailer
coach spaces, roads, walks, service buildings, service areas, utilities and necessary grading.
Determination must be made in the initial planning stage on the number of dependent and independent mobile home/trailer coaches to be accommodated.
A. Mobile Home/Trailer Coach Space Sizes: Each mobile home/trailer coach space must be not less than one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square
feet in area and should be at least twenty five feet (25') wide.
B. Spacing Of Trailers: The minimum spacing between mobile homes/trailer coaches and buildings must be:
1. Side to side spacing, fifteen feet (15'); end to end spacing, ten feet (10') (space between end of mobile home/trailer bodies, not chassis).
2. No mobile home/trailer should be located closer than twenty five feet (25') from the right of way line of a main highway, or ten feet (10') from the
mobile home/trailer coach court property line.
C. Roads, Walks And Parking Areas:
1. General Circulation: Safety and convenience must be a major consideration in the layout of roads, walks and parking areas within the mobile
home/trailer coach court. All roads must be continuous.
2. Servicing: Suitable vehicular access for firefighting equipment, delivery of fuel, removal of garbage and refuse, and for other necessary services
must be provided. Minimum service distances as required by local regulations or accepted practice must control.
3. Width Of Roads And Parking Areas:
Main Access Roads, Excluding Parking
Two-lane 20 feet
4. Parking Area: The same number of motor vehicle parking spaces must be provided as the number of mobile home/trailer coach spaces. These must
be provided in special parking areas.
5. Walks: The mobile home/trailer park walk system must include a walk from the entrance of each mobile home/trailer to service facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 270/303
Width Of Walks
Public walks (minimum) 4 feet
Entrance walks (from public walk to mobile home/trailer door) 2 feet
D. Service Buildings: Each mobile home/trailer coach court must be provided with one or more service buildings containing the requisite number of
plumbing fixtures and other service equipment. The service buildings must conform in general to the following requirements:
1. Location: The building should be located not more than two hundred feet (200') from any dependent mobile home/trailer coach space.
2. Construction: The materials and methods used in the construction of service buildings must conform to local building codes for buildings of this
nature1. It must have an interior finish which is moisture resistant and can be easily cleaned. All rooms of service buildings must be ventilated and all
exterior openings provided with screens.
3. Facilities: Separate men's and women's toilet rooms must be provided and distinctly marked. These rooms must be separated by a sound resistant
wall. A vestibule or screen wall must be provided to prevent direct view into the toilet rooms when exterior doors are open.
a. Plumbing Fixtures: Every mobile home/trailer coach court must provide adequate toilet and laundry facilities. In no instance should there be less
than one laundry unit (laundry tray or washing machine); one water closet, one lavatory and one shower for women; and one water closet, one
lavatory and one shower for men. A slop water closet (water closet with seat removed) must be provided in each service building.
The slop water closet should be in a separate room of the service building with a single direct opening to the outside.
The facilities listed above will accommodate any number of independent mobile home/trailer coaches, and up to ten (10) dependent mobile
home/trailer coaches. One water closet must be provided for each sex for every ten (10) additional dependent mobile home/trailer coaches.
(Urinals for men may be substituted for 1/3 of these water closets.)
One lavatory must be provided for each sex for every ten (10) additional dependent mobile home/trailer coaches; and one shower or bathtub for
each sex for every twenty (20) additional dependent mobile home/trailer coaches. A laundry unit must be provided for every twenty (20) additional
mobile home/trailer coach spaces.
All water closets and bathtubs or showers for women, and all water closets and bathtubs for men must be located in separate compartments, with
self-closing doors. Gang type shower compartments may be used for men. Individual shower stalls must be approximately three feet by three feet
(3' x 3'). Showers for women must have a dressing compartment with stool or bench. The room containing the laundry units must be separated
from the toilet rooms, and have an exterior entrance only.
All plumbing installations shall conform to the local plumbing code.
b. Electrical: All electrical installations shall conform to the local electrical code.
c. Heating: Heating facilities capable of maintaining a temperature of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) in cold weather should be provided.
d. Hot Water: Facilities should provide for the continuous supply of three (3) to five (5) gallons of hot water per mobile home/trailer coach space. Hot
water at a temperature of about one hundred eighty degrees Fahrenheit (180°F) should be provided for clothes washing equipment.
E. Laundry Drying Facilities: Mechanical laundry drying equipment or laundry drying yards must be provided. Laundry drying machines must be located in
service buildings. Where laundry drying yards are used, they must be located convenient to service buildings and have an area of approximately fifty
(50) square feet per mobile home/trailer coach space.
F. Refuse Collection: Refuse must be stored in flytight and rodentproof containers. Each coach space will require from four (4) to six (6) gallons of refuse
storage capacity per day. Refuse container stations, where used, should be located a maximum of two hundred feet (200') from any mobile home/trailer
coach space and preferably not more than one hundred fifty feet (150').
G. Recreation Areas: At least one hundred (100) square feet per mobile home/trailer coach space must be made available in one or more areas for
recreational uses. These areas should be located so as to be free of traffic hazards. (Ord. 1236, 6-23-2010)
9-13-6: SITE ENGINEERING:
Grading and drainage must be performed so that water will drain away from mobile home/trailer coach spaces, buildings, service and recreational areas,
and off the site in a manner which will provide reasonable freedom from erosion. Walks, driveways and retaining walls must be so constructed as not to
interfere with drainage.
A. Slopes Of Mobile Home/Trailer Spaces, Roads, Walks And Service Areas:
1. Mobile home/trailer coach spaces must be graded toward abutting roadway to prevent surface water drainage across adjacent coach spaces.
Grading under mobile homes/trailers must be provided to prevent puddling of water.
2. Where swales for the carriage of stormwater are needed between the mobile home/trailer coach space and the roadway, they must be of a shallow
type, generally not to exceed eight inches (8") in depth, to permit the parking of the trailer without damage to the undercarriage.
3. The following minimum and maximum slope values will usually give satisfactory results:
Minimum Percent Maximum Percent
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 271/303
Roads 0.50 8
Walks 0.50 10
Recreation areas and laundry drying yards 0.50 4
Sodded and planted areas 1.00 10
Grade of coach space 0.50 5
B. Construction Of Roads, Parking Areas, Walks And Service Areas:
1. Roads And Parking Areas: Roads must be constructed of concrete or macadam or of gravel, crushed stone, sand-clay, slag or other locally available
suitable materials, with a light bituminous surface treatment, oil coating or other dust preventive material. Roads must be crowned at center to shed
water to drainage facilities.
2. Walks: Walks must be constructed of concrete, macadam, gravel, fine stone, cinders or other materials providing a stable footing. Stepping stones
may be used from main walks to trailers.
3. Recreation Areas And Laundry Drying Yards: Surfacing may be natural ground cover, sand-clay or other suitable local materials. (Ord. 1236, 6-23-
2010)
Chapter 14
ZONING DISTRICTS, MAP
9-14-1: ZONING DISTRICTS DESIGNATED:
For the purpose of this title, the city shall be and is hereby divided into zoning districts as follows:
Zone commercial A Commercial zone
Zone commercial B Commercial zone
Zone commercial C Commercial zone
Zone MUR Mixed use residential zone
Zone IG Industrial general zone
Zone IBP Industrial business park zone
Zone ITP Industrial technology park zone
Zone RS Residence zone
Zone RM Residence zone
Watershed protection zone
Zone RR-1 Rural residential zone
Zone RR-2 Rural residential zone
Zone AO Airport overlay zone
(Ord. 1263, 12-29-2011; amd. Ord. 1305, 10-15-2014)
9-14-2: ZONING MAP:
A. Zoning classification and zoning districts shall be, and the same are hereby established for all real property lying within the city, and all real property is
hereby zoned or rezoned and zoning classification is hereby established for all property lying within the city in accordance with and pursuant to the
official zoning map and the legal descriptions hereinafter referenced.
B. The official zoning map depicting the zoning classifications for the real property located within the city, adopted and made a part hereof by reference, is
hereby declared to be the official zoning map of the city and does hereby create, zone, rezone and/or reestablish zoning classification and the
boundaries surrounding each zoning district for all real property lying within the city.
C. The legal description of the boundary line surrounding each zoning district within the city is established in writing in proper legal description form and
filed in the office of the city clerk. Said description shall be certified by the mayor and the city clerk and at least three (3) certified copies shall be kept
on file in the office of the city clerk. Copies of the same shall be provided to all members of the public and all interested parties upon request.
D. The official zoning map hereby adopted and made a part hereof by reference shall be certified by the mayor and city clerk upon the adoption of said
map and this section and the same shall be recorded with the county recorder of Bonner County, Idaho, and shall become a part of the official records
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 272/303
of Bonner County, and of the official records of the city. Copies of the same shall be made available to the general public and all interested parties upon
request. An official map and at least three (3) certified copies thereof shall be kept on file and filed with the office of the city clerk.
E. Upon adoption hereof, said map shall be referred to as the official zoning map of the city unless and until further amended or modified by appropriate
legal ordinance and shall constitute the legal evidence of the existing zoning classification for each, every, any and all parcels of real property located
within the city.
F. The boundaries of the zones shall be established and clearly marked upon the zoning map as adopted in this chapter; provided, that public hearings
shall be held by the city council before establishment and approval of said zones. (Ord. 1236, 6-23-2010)
Chapter 15
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
9-15-1: PURPOSE:
A. The provisions of this chapter are intended to ensure that telecommunications facilities are located, installed, maintained and removed in a manner that:
1. Minimizes the number of antenna towers throughout the community;
2. Encourages the collocation of telecommunications facilities;
3. Encourages the use of existing buildings, light or utility poles, or other structures for antenna mounting and discourages construction of new antenna
towers;
4. Ensures that telecommunications facilities are located and designed to minimize visual impact on the surroundings; and
5. Ensures that regulation of telecommunications facilities does not have the effect of prohibiting the provision of telecommunications services, does
not unreasonably discriminate among functionally equivalent providers of such services, and allows the provision of adequate area coverage by such
services. (Ord. 1342, 1-18-2017)
9-15-2: PROVISIONS:
A. Conflicting Standards: In the event that other standards of this title conflict with standards in this chapter, unless otherwise indicated the most restrictive
shall prevail.
B. Definitions:
ANTENNA: Any device that transmits and/or receives radio waves, microwaves, or other electromagnetic radiation for voice, data or video
communications purposes including, but not limited to, television, AM/FM radio, microwave, cellular telephone and similar forms of communications.
ANTENNA ARRAY: A single or group of antenna elements and associated mounting hardware, transmission lines, or other appurtenances which
share a common attachment device such as a mounting frame or mounting support structure for the sole purpose of transmitting or receiving
electromagnetic waves.
COLLOCATION: The placement of one or more antenna(s) on an antenna support structure or the placement of an antenna on an antenna tower on
which one or more antennas are already located.
COMMISSION: The federal communications commission ("FCC").
HOST MOUNTED SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any structure or building not constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting an antenna but that
supports an antenna as a secondary or accessory use (e.g., streetlights; traffic light structures; sign structures; or water towers).
LATTICE TOWER: An antenna tower characterized by a framework of lateral or diagonal cross members that stabilize the tower.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE: Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access
services.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES: Facilities for the provision of personal wireless services.
ROOF MOUNTED FACILITIES: Any facility installed on either the roof or side of a building.
SMALL CELLS: Compact wireless base stations containing their own transceiver equipment and function like cells in a mobile network but provide a
smaller coverage area than traditional macrocells. Small cells will meet the two (2) parameters in subsections 1 and 2 of this definition. For purposes
of these definitions, volume is a measure of the exterior displacement, not the interior volume of the enclosures. Antennas or equipment concealed
from public view in or behind an otherwise approved structure or concealment are not included in calculating volume.
1. Small Cell Antenna: Each antenna shall be no more than three (3) cubic feet in volume.
2. Small Cell Equipment: Each equipment enclosure shall be no larger than seventeen (17) cubic feet in volume.
Associated conduit, mounting bracket or extension arm, electric meter, concealment, telecommunications demarcation box, ground based
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 273/303
enclosures, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, and cutoff switch may be located outside the primary
equipment enclosure(s) and are not included in the calculation of equipment volume.
SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A structure that is designed for supporting the installation of one or more antennas (e.g., a tower; roof mount; mounts
attached to a utility pole).
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES OR FACILITIES: Any antenna towers, support structures, antennas and their ancillary facilities that are used
to provide commercial wireless communications or telecommunications services.
TEMPORARY ANTENNA TOWER: An antenna tower established for the purpose of providing telecommunications services on a temporary basis for
a special event or to temporarily replace an antenna tower while it is being repaired.
TOWER: Any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting one or more antennas that are used to provide commercial
telecommunications services.
TOWER HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the base of the tower structure at grade to the highest point of the structure including the
antenna.
VISUAL IMPACT MITIGATION: Technology that minimizes the visual impact of telecommunications facilities by camouflaging, disguising, screening,
and/or blending into the surrounding environment. Examples of visual impact mitigation include, but are not limited to, facilities disguised as trees,
flagpoles, bell towers, and architecturally screened roof mounted antennas.
C. Applicability:
1. The telecommunications facility regulations of this section apply to all telecommunications facilities used to provide commercial telecommunications
services, except those associated solely with the following, which are exempt:
a. Safety services provided by public agencies (e.g., police and fire); and
b. Any facilities that state or federal law prohibits local government from regulating (e.g., satellite television receiving dishes).
2. Any public lands and agencies exemption from compliance with zoning in state law does not apply to private entities utilizing publicly owned lands.
D. Prohibited Locations And Support Structure Types:
1. The following locations and support structures are not permitted:
a. Lattice and guyed tower support structures for telecommunications facilities.
E. Permitted Locations:
1. Collocation On Nonconforming Existing Support Structures: Support structures for telecommunications facilities on the effective date hereof that do
not comply with the regulations of this section are deemed nonconforming structures.
2. Collocation On Legal Existing Support Structures: New telecommunications facilities collocated on support structures in existence on the effective
date hereof are permitted in all zoning districts, subject to compliance with other applicable standards of this section.
3. New Roof Mounted Or Host Mounted Support Structures: New telecommunications facilities located on roof mounted or host mounted support
structures are permitted in all zoning districts, subject to compliance with other applicable standards of this section.
4. New Ground Mounted Support Structures: New ground mounted support structures for telecommunications facilities are permitted in IG, IBP, ITP,
CA, CB and CC zoning districts, subject to compliance with other applicable standards of this section.
F. Code Compliance: All facilities shall at all times comply with all applicable federal, state and local building codes, electrical codes, fire codes and any
other code related to public health and safety.
G. Safety: The structural design for all support structures must be certified by a professional structural engineer licensed to practice in the state of Idaho.
The drawings shall meet the currently adopted building codes in accordance with section 8-1-1, "Building Codes Adopted", of this code.
H. Building Permit Required: A building permit, unless waived by the Sandpoint building department, must be obtained prior to the installation of any
telecommunications facility.
I. Telecommunications Facility Development Permit: A telecommunications facility development permit shall contain the following information:
1. Construction drawings showing the proposed method of installation. Drawings shall be stamped by a licensed engineer and meet the currently
adopted building codes in accordance with section 8-1-1, "Building Codes Adopted", of this code;
2. The manufacturer's recommended installations, if any; and
3. A diagram to scale showing the location of the telecommunications facility, property and setback lines, easements, power lines, all structures, and
any required buffering and screening.
J. Development Standards:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 274/303
1. Schedule: The following standards apply to telecommunications facilities:
Support Type
Permitted
Zones Permitted Height Setback
Screening
Visual
Impact
Mitigation
CUP
Existing support
structures
Existing
location
Existing height Existing setback n/a n/a n/a
Roof mounted
support structures
All zoning
districts
Not to exceed the zoning district
height limit
n/a Not
required
Required1
Yes2
Host mounted
support structures
All zoning
districts
5 feet above host structure n/a Not
required
Required Yes
Ground mounted
support structures
IG, IBP,
ITP
Not to exceed the zoning district
height limit
From property line: building setbacks of zone
for both tower and equipment enclosure3
Required
Required Yes
CA, CB,
CC
Support structure and antenna
together may not exceed 35 feet
From property line: building setbacks of zone
for both tower and equipment enclosure3
Required
Required Yes
Notes:
1. Antennas under 10 square feet in surface area are allowed on roof mounted support structures without having to meet visual impact mitigation
standards for roof mounted facilities, so long as the support structure does not exceed the tallest element of the building to which it is attached.
2. CUP required when total antenna surface area for all antennas exceeds 10 square feet.
3. See subsection M, "Residential Zone Setback", of this section.
2. Screening:
a. Telecommunications facilities located above ground in or directly adjacent to RS, RM, RR-1, RR-2, MUR, CA, CB, CC zones shall be surrounded
by a minimum six foot (6') high decorative wall constructed of brick, stone, or textured concrete block. Telecommunications facilities in all other
zones shall be surrounded by a minimum six foot (6') high wall or solid or slatted fence.
b. The area around the perimeter of ground telecommunications facilities shall be landscaped unless the planning commission determines otherwise.
3. Visual Impact Mitigation:
a. Antenna Towers:
(1) Antenna towers shall be painted a neutral color consistent with the natural or built environment of the subject site and the surrounding area
unless otherwise required by the FAA or any other state or federal agency having such authority.
(2) Antenna towers shall be constructed in a manner that is visually compatible with the surrounding built environment.
b. Roof Mounted Facilities: Facilities mounted on the roof of buildings must be visually incorporated into the building or background by the use of
architectural elements, color, screening or other methods.
c. Host Mounted Support Structures:
(1) Telecommunications facilities mounted on other structures not constructed for the primary purpose of supporting telecommunication services
must be either fully concealed within the host structure or camouflaged to appear to be an integral part of the host structure.
d. Ground Mounted Equipment Enclosures: Aboveground equipment enclosures that are used in or adjacent to residential and commercial zones
must be designed with exterior facade materials of masonry, stucco, or beveled siding and be constructed in a manner that is visually compatible
with the surrounding environment.
e. Antennas And Cables: When visible, antennas and cables shall be of a color identical to or closely compatible with that of the structure to which
they are attached unless otherwise required by the FAA or any applicable state or federal agency.
K. Lighting: Telecommunications facilities may not be artificially illuminated except as required by FAA regulations. All other outdoor lighting must meet the
standards in title 8, chapter 10, "Outdoor Lighting", of this code.
L. Signage: Identification and contact information is permitted on one wall or fence mounted sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in area per site. Other
signage may not be located on telecommunications facilities, unless required by the FCC or FAA.
M. Residential Zone Setback:
1. Antenna towers shall be separated from the property line of any adjacent property zoned RS, RM, RR-1, RR-2, or MUR at least a distance equal to
the height of the antenna tower or one hundred feet (100'), whichever is greater.
N. Noise Reduction:
1. Noise generating equipment shall be sound buffered by means of baffling, barriers, or other suitable means and shall conform to section 5-2-6,
"Noise", of this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 275/303
O. Modification And Removal:
1. Modification Or Removal Of Nonconforming Telecommunications Facilities: Nonconforming telecommunications facilities being demolished or rebuilt
must conform to chapter 7, "Nonconforming Buildings And Uses", of this title.
2. Removal Of Telecommunications Facilities:
a. Providers must notify the city in writing when a telecommunications facility is no longer being utilized. Any facilities that are not utilized for the
provision of telecommunication services for a continuous period of six (6) months or more will be considered abandoned. All abandoned facilities
must be removed within six (6) months of abandonment. If a facility is not removed within six (6) months, the city is authorized to remove the
facility at the landowner's expense.
b. Where multiple users share a support structure, the nonoperational antenna and equipment enclosure must be removed. Any necessary shared
facilities may be retained until all users have terminated the utilization of the support structure.
P. Third Party Review: Adequate review of applications, particularly for new ground mounted support structures, may require the city to retain consultants
or other third party assistance to review an application. In such an event, the applicant must reimburse the city for the reasonable actual costs incurred
by the city for retention of consultants or other third parties prior to issuance of any applicable permit. The city must provide a written scope and cost
proposal to the provider for approval prior to the city entering into an agreement with a third party.
Q. Exceptions:
1. Applicability: In the event that standards of this section cannot be met by an applicant, and there exists no feasible alternative to providing adequate
service by any provider for a particular geographic area, the applicant may apply for conditional use approval in accordance with subsection 9-9-6A,
"Conditional Use Permit Procedures", of this title.
2. Review And Submittal Requirements: Prior to submitting an application for conditional use approval in accordance with subsection 9-9-6A of this
title, the applicant must request in writing a preapplication conference with the planning department. The purpose of the preapplication conference is
to acquaint the participants with the applicable requirements of this section. A conditional use application must provide documentation demonstrating
evidence of all the following:
a. Telecommunications services by any provider are not adequate within a specific geographic area, and cannot be made available unless a new
telecommunications facility is built or erected in a manner or location contrary to the standards of this section;
b. Location on buildings or other structures is not possible because:
(1) No existing or proposed structures adequate to support the proposed antenna are located within the geographic area required to meet the
applicant's engineering and service requirements; or
(2) Property owners or owners of existing structures for smaller scale installations are unwilling to accommodate the applicant's needs; or
(3) The applicant demonstrates that there are other factual and verifiable limiting factors that render rooftops and other sites or monuments
unsuitable for location of telecommunications facilities; and
c. Collocation on existing support structures is not possible because:
(1) Existing or approved support structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering and service requirements and a
combination of smaller scale facilities will not enable adequate service delivery; or
(2) Existing or approved support structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the proposed antenna and related equipment and
cannot be reinforced to provide sufficient structural strength; or
(3) The proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with antenna on existing or approved support structures, or the antenna on
existing or approved support structures would cause interference with the proposed antenna; or
(4) The applicant demonstrates that there are other factual and verifiable limiting factors that render existing or approved structural supports for
telecommunications facilities unsuitable for collocation.
R. Affirmative Duty To Keep City Informed: All telecommunications service providers having facilities in the jurisdiction of the city shall file with the zoning
administrator an annual written statement due by the end of the calendar year verifying continued use of each of their facilities in the city's jurisdiction
as well as continued compliance with the state and federal agency regulations. All telecommunications service providers having telecommunications
facilities in the jurisdiction of the city shall be required to report in writing to the zoning administrator any change in the status of their operations.
Change in status shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
1. Change in or loss of license from the FCC to operate.
2. Receipt of notice of failure to comply with the regulations of any other authority having jurisdiction over the business or facility.
3. Change in ownership of the company that owns the telecommunications facilities or that provides telecommunications services.
4. Loss or termination of lease with the property owner or the owner of the telecommunications facilities.
5. Abandonment of a facility or nonuse of a facility for a period of six (6) months or longer. (Ord. 1342, 1-18-2017)
Title 10
LAND SUBDIVISIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 276/303
Chapter 1
SUBDIVISION AND NEW DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS
10-1-1: PURPOSE AND PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of subdivision and design requirements is to create functional and attractive developments that are consistent with the
community's vision, goals and policies found within the comprehensive plan and land use ordinances. Design goals and standards are intended to
provide direction and ensure that public improvements will be compatible with the city's public utility and transportation systems. To promote this
purpose, subdivisions and other new development shall conform to the general guidance standards contained in this chapter.
B. Plat Approval Required: No land shall hereafter be subdivided and no street or other public spaces shall hereafter be laid out within the city until the
plan or plans of such subdivision or street or other public space shall have been submitted to and approved by the council. Such approval must be in
writing or stamped on such plan or plans. Such plans shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendations to the council.
C. Preliminary Plat Requirements: Applications for preliminary plats must be prepared on forms required by the city and signed by the owner of record. A
title report may be required as proof of ownership. Any person hereafter subdividing any piece or parcel of land, block, lot or any part thereof in the city
shall prepare a plat thereof which satisfies the following requirements:
1. Number Of Copies; Tentative Plat: All preliminary plats submitted for approval shall be in duplicate, prepared to meet the requirements of Idaho
Code 50-1304, essentials of plats, as currently codified. Subdivider shall also supply twelve (12) eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") copies
and a digital copy, in DWG or PDF format of the preliminary plat. A tentative plat may first be submitted for staff review before the formal preliminary
plat is submitted.
2. Contour Map: A contour map at a one foot (1') or two foot (2') contour interval shall show the general topography and record grade of the tract. All
existing and proposed streets and alleys and other public spaces shall be shown, with the width and type of pavement or surfacing, and all other
important features. Sufficient information shall be drawn to scale on the plans to indicate the relation of the proposed streets and other public spaces
to the present street system of the city and also the official city plan, when and after such city plan has been adopted.
3. Dimensions: The dimensions of all lots and subdivisions and resubdivisions of lots shall be shown. All lots shall be sufficiently wide and deep to
permit full conformity with the zoning regulations.
4. North Point And Scale: The north point and scale shall be shown, and the names and addresses of the petitioner and the engineer or surveyor shall
be given on each plat.
5. Proof Of Ownership, Sale Contract: Owner must sign or cosign application. A copy of the subdivider's sale contract or deed showing restrictions
shall be furnished the city before final approval of the subdivision plan. Such contract or deed shall relate that the lot or lots contracted for are subject
to the zoning regulations, building code and subdivision regulations of the city.
6. Proposed Use: The proposed use of each lot, or group of lots or subdivision shall be indicated. No lot shall be proposed for a use of a classification
less restrictive than permitted in the zoning regulations (title 9 of this code), unless the use is approved as part of the planned unit development
process.
7. Improvements: Whenever improvements are proposed within any such subdivision or in any such street or other public space, two (2) sets of plans,
profiles, and at least outline specifications of such improvements shall be submitted for preliminary approval. Such plans and specifications shall
show or indicate required detail of such improvements.
8. Adjoining Property Owners: Applicant shall provide a map of the adjoining property owners and a list of the owners within three hundred feet (300'),
with current addresses.
9. Business Or Industrial Lots: No lots shall be subdivided nor indicated for sale as business or industrial lots except in those areas designated for such
uses in the zoning regulations or comprehensive plan of the city.
10. Wetlands: If the subject property is located within or partially within wetlands or the floodplain, wetlands must be shown on the preliminary plat. A
copy of the application for flood hazard or wetlands development permit shall be submitted along with the preliminary plat for concurrent review by
thecommission or hearing examiner.
11. Additional Information; Expiration: Following submittal of an application, the applicant shall be required to diligently pursue the application by
providing revised plans, plat maps, etc., when requested by city staff, the hearing examiner or the commission, in a timely fashion. Where the
applicant fails to meet this requirement and takes no further action on the application for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months the application
shall automatically expire. When such application has expired, the applicant must reapply and pay any applicable fees.
12. Fee For Alteration: If, after staff review, an applicant substantially alters a proposal (as determined by the planning director), the applicant shall pay
an additional fee of fifty percent (50%) of the regular fee.
D. Final Plats:
1. All final plats shall meet the requirements of Idaho Code 50-1304 as currently codified, and shall show the sidewalk lines, lot lines, easements,
building lines within ten feet (10') of the plat, and all property or subdivision boundaries. Said plats shall show, in accordance with an accurate land
survey, the controlling points and lines around and within the subdivision itself and also by distance, bearings and angles, the relation of such
controlling points and lines to the other controlling survey points within or near the city. All survey monuments shall be indicated, and there shall be at
least one permanent monument placed at each lot corner of the subdivision area. Such monuments shall be placed when the surveys are made and
shall consist of one inch (1") diameter iron pipe driven at least two feet (2') into the ground and embedded in concrete.
2. Four (4) sets of all construction plans for public improvements, including drainage, shall be submitted and approved prior to approval of the final plat.
3. Plats containing townhouse or townhouse duplex lots shall include the following statement on the final plat:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 277/303
Lots of Block are designated for the construction of townhouse (or townhouse duplex) units only.
Each townhouse structure shall be constructed on those lots having the same numerical designation and bearing sequential alphabetic letters for
each townhouse unit. Each unit of the townhouse units shall be placed on lots of the same numerical designation, with the common wall centered on
the dividing line between such lots with the same numerical designation. Separate ownership of each townhouse lot designated by the same number
and sequential lettering as set forth above is allowed.Construction of such units shall proceed simultaneously or be rebuilt simultaneously.
4. No lot, tract or parcel of land within any such subdivision shall be offered for sale nor shall any sale, contract for sale, or option be made or given,
until final plat is filed with the county recorder.
5. All taxes and assessments on property platted must be paid before the plat shall be recorded. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-2006)
10-1-2: NAMING:
In the case of the replatting of part of an existing subdivision, lots may be given a new subdivision name but shall note that it is "The Replatting of Lot(s) ,
Block(s) of addition or subdivision" in the title.
The city reserves the right to reject any confusing or inappropriate name for any subdivision or street. Street names may not be duplicated. (Ord. 1157, 10-
18-2006)
10-1-3: IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Agreement Approval: All required public improvements must be installed prior to city council approval of the final plat. When applicable, a developer
may be required to enter into an agreement setting forth all commitments made by the developer. No such plat of a subdivision shall be approved
unless all street, sidewalk, water and sewer improvements have been installed or the subdivider has entered into an agreement to install the
improvements. The agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the city and include a provision that the improvements be installed no later than three
(3) years from the city council approval of the final plat. To secure performance of said agreement and to guarantee installation of improvements, the
subdivider shall provide a performance bond or other sufficient security acceptable to the city attorney. Such bonding or security shall be for one
hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated construction costs of the improvements, as determined by the city engineer, and shall have a term
acceptable to the city but in no case less than one year beyond the date the installation of improvements is to be complete. If the improvements are
completed and accepted by the city, the city engineer may release the bond or security or a prorated portion thereof. The bonding or security
agreement shall be executed and shall be recorded with the county at the subdivider's expense prior to the signing of the plat by the city engineer. For
small projects, where required improvements may be more efficiently constructed beyond the time of plat recording, as determined by the city engineer,
the developer may be allowed to pay the city for the city estimated cost of the necessary improvements; such funds shall be placed in a dedicated
fundfor that project, and the city will bear the responsibility for constructing those improvements in the future. No improvements, such as water supply,
drainage, sewerage, sewage disposal, gas service, electric service or lighting, or grading, paving or surfacing of streets shall be made within any such
subdivision by any owner or his agent or by any public service corporation at the request of such owner or his agent until the plans for the subdivision
and the plans for such improvements have been formally approved by the city engineer. Such approval shall not be given in any instance herein before
named unless all the plans and specifications and all the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
B. Reduction Of Security: The city engineer may allow a reduction or partial release of improvement securities providing all of the following conditions are
met:
1. A written request for reduction must be submitted by the developer who posted the security.
2. Only two (2) requests for reduction may be considered for any agreement.
3. A detailed estimate of the value of the work remaining to be completed shall be submitted. Upon receipt, the city engineer or the city engineer's
designee shall inspect the improvements completed and verify the value and percentage of work remaining.
4. No reduction shall be made when more than fifty percent (50%) of the work remains to be completed.
5. No reduction shall result in reducing the security to less than ten percent (10%) of the amount of the original security.
6. Reduction of securities shall not apply to warranty or monument security.
7. Reduction of securities shall be construed as formal acceptance of improvements completed at the time of reduction.
8. Applicable fee structure for determinations regarding reduction of security shall be set by resolution of the city council.
C. Maintenance/Warranty Bond:
1. In cases where public improvements have not been bonded for, or as a condition of releasing the performance security and accepting public
improvements, the subdivider shall provide a maintenance/warranty bond or other sufficient security acceptable to the city attorney. The
maintenance/warranty bond or other security must be in an amount approved by the city engineer and represent either twenty percent (20%) of the
amount of the original performancesecurity, or twenty percent (20%) of the estimated cost of the public subdivision improvements, and be provided
prior to acceptance of the public subdivision improvements by the city engineer. Thereafter, the city may release the performance bond or other
posted security at the time the city accepts all required public subdivision improvements. Failure to provide this security shall not affect the
developer's responsibility to repair or replace defective improvements. The commencement date for the maintenance bond shall be the date set for
the completion of the required improvements as stated in the subdivision improvement agreement, or the date of substantial completion as certified
by a professional engineer. If the expiration date of the maintenance bond falls after November 1, the expiration date of the maintenance bond shall
be June 30 of the following year. Maintenance bonds may be in the form of a surety bond, a certificate of deposit (CD), a certified check or an
irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank licensed to do business in the state of Idaho. The maintenance/warranty bond or other security shall have
a term of at least two (2) years from the date of acceptance by the city of all required public subdivision requirements and shall be:
a. For the purpose of a warranty that the required public subdivision improvements shall properly perform free from defects for at least two (2) years;
and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 278/303
b. For the purpose of guaranteeing that sufficient funds will be available to maintain or correct defects for the two (2) year period.
c. Warranty securities may be released by the city engineer upon termination of the two (2) year warranty period; provided, that all defects, if any,
have been satisfactorily completed.
D. Remedy: If improvements have not been installed within the agreed time, the city clerk shall notify the city council and the council may initiate an action
on the bond or other security. If the council chooses to initiate an action on the bond or other security, the city engineer shall administer the installation
of the improvements with the funds made available.
E. Agreement Extension: The city council may grant an extension to the agreement for a term not to exceed one year upon application by the subdivider.
To extend the term of the agreement the city council must find that the subdivider is actively working on the completion of the improvements, and the
city engineer must find that the improvements are within six (6) months of completion.
F. Completion Required For Building Permit Issuance: Building permits will not be issued for construction on more than twenty percent (20%) of the lots in
the subdivision until all plat improvements have been completed and approved, unless thecity engineer is satisfied that improvements will be completed
within a reasonable period of time.
G. Improvements Guaranteed: All improvements required by this chapter shall be guaranteed by the subdivider for a period of two (2) years from the date
of final acceptance by the city. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-2006)
10-1-4: CUSTODY OF FINAL PLAT:
The duplicate of such plat shall be kept on file with the city clerk and no such map or plat shall be approved as aforesaid until the same shall have been
properly certified by a surveyor and acknowledged by the owner. One copy of all final plats shall be filed with the county recorder, and one shall be
preserved in the files of the city, each with the approval or disapproval of the city clearly indicated. Following recordation of a final plat, the developer shall
provide the city with a Mylar copy of the plat documents and a digital copy, in DFX or DWG format. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-2006)
10-1-5: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS:
Subdivisions and new development shall be connected with the sewer and water mains of the city pursuant to title 7, chapters 6 and 7 of this code at the
developer's expense. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-2006)
10-1-6: SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
A. Streets: Rules for streets shall be as follows:
1. Minimum Right Of Way Width: The minimum right of way width for any residential street shall be sixty feet (60'), except for purely local drives or
areas with difficult topography. A decrease to fifty feet (50') for local, residential streets may be allowed within a PUD. Through streets and every
street more than six hundred feet (600') long may be required to be at least sixty six feet (66') wide. Streets which are collectors or arterials must be
dedicated and built to higher standards.
2. Transportation Plan Conformance: All streets and other public spaces and easements shall conform to the transportation plan as adopted by the city
council, both as to location and as to width or size.
3. Right Of Way Adjoining Undeveloped Property: When a right of way adjoining undeveloped or noncompliant property is platted or developed, at least
a half street plus ten feet (10') must be dedicated and constructed. This will not reduce the right of way dedication requirement when the adjoining
undeveloped or noncompliant property is developed.
4. Alley Width: The minimum width of any alley, wherever provided, shall be sixteen feet (16'). Where alleys are not provided, easements may be
required along lot lines of or across lots where necessary for the extension of water mains, sewers and similar purposes.
5. Block Length: Block lengths shall be between three hundred feet and six hundred feet (300' - 600'). The city engineer may approve a longer block if
topography limits side street development. Blocks over eight hundred feet (800') in length may be required to have one crosswalk not less than ten
feet (10') in width, situated near the center of the block.
6. Street Arrangement: The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions or other development shall make provision for the direct continuation of the
principal existing streets in adjoining subdivisions (or their proper projection where adjoining property is not subdivided) insofar as they may be
necessary for public requirements. In general, such streets shall be a width at least as great as the existing streets or meeting the findings of the
transportation plan. The street and alley arrangement must also be such as to provide opportunity for access and use by adjoining property owners.
Wherever a street is stub ended so that it will not at that end open into another street, an adequate turnaround, either circular, hammerhead, or Yshaped,
shall be provided.
7. Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage lots are those created by either public or private streets, but not by driveways or alleys. Double frontage lots
shall be prohibited except where unusual topography, a more integrated street plan, or other conditions make it undesirable to meet this prohibition.
Subdivisions providing a platted common space of twenty five feet (25') or more between any street right of way and any single row of lots shall not
be considered to have platted double frontage lots. Common space provided must be landscaped.
8. Public Utility Easement: No public utility easement shall be less than twenty feet (20') wide; for water and sewer a thirty foot (30') easement shall be
provided.
9. Property Corners: At all corners the property corner shall be rounded to match the curb or cut off.
10. Curb Corners: For residential streets, all curb corners shall have radii of not less than twelve feet (12') and at important corners, as determined by
the city engineer, may be up to twenty feet (20'). For arterial and collector streets, the city engineer may specify radii based on functional
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 279/303
classification.
11. Street Grade: Grades of streets shall be the lowest feasible and no grade shall be in excess of five percent (5%) on through traffic streets nor in
excess of ten percent (10%) for short distances on any other street.
12. Paving/Surfacing: Whenever existing streets or alleys are paved or surfaced, such paving or surfacing shall be of a type and strength suitable for
the volume and character of traffic to be expected. All street construction shall conform to the requirements of the public works department.
13. Conformance With Engineering Standards: All improvements shall conform to the best engineering standards. Due consideration shall be given
throughout to the appearance of the subdivision or other development and the various features thereof within its own boundaries and also in its
environment in the city.
14. Compliance With Regulations: All roads within a proposed subdivision or other development shall be approved by the city engineer and upon
completion of construction shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer that they are in compliance with these regulations.
15. Design Standards: Streets, including private roadways, shall be designed, signed and constructed in accordance with the current edition of the
"Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction", as may be modified by resolution of the city council; development standards of the city of
Sandpoint; "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" and the standards included herein. All streets shall be built with an urban section (curb and
gutter) unless specifically granted a variance by the city council.
Minimum road design standards for local subdivision streets are as follows:
DESIGN STANDARD
Cul-de-sac:
Back of curb radius 45 feet
Right of way radius 50 feet
Minor Arterial Collector Local PUD Local
Right of way 80 feet 60 feet 60 feet 50 feet
Pavement width See note 1 34 feet 32 feet 30 feet
Maximum grade 10 percent 10 percent 10 percent 10 percent
Street section:
Asphalt depth 4 inches 3 inches 3 inches 3 inches
3/4 inch base 6 inches 4 inches 4 inches 4 inches
Subbase2 18 to 24 inches 18 inches 18 inches 18 inches
Fabric Nonwoven for all sections
Notes:
1.To be determined by transportation plan or traffic study.
2.Rock cap.
16. Street Intersections: Street intersections shall meet the following requirements:
a. Streets shall intersect as closely to ninety degree (90°) angles as possible.
b. No more than two (2) streets shall intersect at one point.
c. Distance between street intersections shall be no less than one hundred fifty feet (150') for local streets and two hundred fifty feet (250') for
collectors.
d. Intersections of local streets with arterials shall be minimized and discouraged.
e. Intersection curb radius shall not exceed twelve feet (12') for local streets, twenty feet (20') for collectors. Arterial radii shall be as determined by
the engineer.
f. Intersections shall be designed for a minimum sight distance of one hundred fifty feet (150'). Intersections with arterials shall have a minimum sight
distance of three hundred feet (300').
17. Right Of Way Landscaping: The contractor shall place a minimum of four inches (4") of topsoil within the landscape area. The finished surface of
the topsoil shall provide adequate drainage from the top of the sidewalk to the top of the curb. Topsoil shall be fertile, natural loam surface soil, free
of clay, weeds, roots or stones larger than one inch (1") in any dimension. Right of way landscaping shall be placed in accordance with requirements
adopted by the city.
18. Traffic Analysis: Development contributing three hundred (300) or more vehicle trips per day to the city street system shall require a traffic impact
analysis. An Idaho licensed professional engineer shall submit to the city a traffic impact analysis report meeting the requirements of the current
computerized model adopted by the city. The developer shall be responsible to maintain the level of service of the affected existing street system.
The report shall also take into consideration other forms of transportation including bicycle and pedestrian travel.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 280/303
19. Private Streets: It shall be the general policy of the city not to allow private or gated streets unless required for the safety and welfare of owners,
residents or the general public. Private streets are allowed at the sole discretion of the city council, except that no arterial or major street, or collector
or secondary street may be private. Private streets shall be constructed to all other applicable street standards including paving, and shall be
maintained by an owners' association. All streets shall be built with an urban section (curb and gutter) unless specifically granted a variance by the
city council.
20. Interconnection: Public and private streets, wherever possible, shall provide interconnection with other streets.
B. Parks, Playgrounds, School Sites: In subdividing property, due consideration shall be given to the provision of suitable sites for parks, playgrounds and
schools.
C. Street Trees: Street trees shall be planted (at least 1 every 25 feet) in accordance with a city approved plan. All proposed trees shall be from the city's
currently approved tree list.
D. Dedication: The subdivider shall furnish to the city an effective dedication of all streets and other spaces to be dedicated, and of all easements provided
by the subdivision plan or plans.
E. Signs: The developer shall provide and install the necessary traffic control signs in accordance with the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
Street name signs shall be installed at each intersection.
F. Driveways: The nearest edge of any residential driveway shall be not less than thirty five feet (35') from the edge of the pavement to the nearest
intersecting street. All new driveway locations shall be reviewed and approved by the public works department prior to beginning construction.
G. Construction Standards: Contractors installing water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and streets or any other public improvements shall be subject to the
following requirements:
1. Preconstruction Conference: Prior to any construction start a preconstruction conference shall be held. The public works department, the project
engineer, the owner and the contractor shall be represented.
2. Infrastructure: All water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, and street systems or any other construction of infrastructure within the public right of way
or easement, shall be constructed, inspected and tested in accordance with the current edition of the "Idaho Standards For Public Works
Construction", the water and sewer rules and regulations of the city of Sandpoint and the development standards of the city of Sandpoint.
H. Construction Inspection, Testing And Quality Control: A professional engineer, or his designated representative, shall provide construction inspection
and testing as required. Inspection and testing shall be in accordance with the current edition of the "Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction".
I. Record Drawings And Project Acceptance: Upon project completion and before final acceptance, a professional engineer shall certify to the city that the
construction of the public utilities and roadways meets the requirements of the approved construction documents. The engineer shall submit one set of
record drawings (hard copy and DWG digital format)and one set of all test results as required to the public works department. The city will not accept
the project until record drawings and test results have been approved by the city engineer. The two (2) year maintenance guarantee period will begin
on the date of final acceptance by the city.
J. Two Year Guarantee Inspection: The project engineer, or his designated representative, shall conduct a two (2) year guarantee inspection, to be
attended by a representative from the public works department. The inspection shall take place not less than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration
date of the maintenance bond. The maintenance bond will be released when all deficiencies have been corrected to the satisfaction of the city
engineer.
The city engineer, the project engineer, or his designated representative, shall notify the principal as listed in the maintenance bond of any work found
to be not in accordance with the approved construction documents. The principal shall restore the work to meet the requirements of the approved
construction documents prior to the release of the maintenance bond. The city expressly reserves the right to draw on the maintenance bond for
repairs not completed by the owner, developer, or contractor within thirty (30) calendar days of being advised that repairs are required.
K. Maintenance Bond For New Infrastructure: As a condition precedent to the filing of a final plat, the property owner, developer, or contractor shall provide
the city with a maintenance bond as described in subsection 10-1-3C of this chapter. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-2006)
10-1-7: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
All development within the city shall meet the following requirements unless waived in writing:
A. Conformance With City Standards: All streets and alleys are to be constructed to city standards and must be paved.
B. Surface Water: All surface water shall be drained into approved storm water facilities or storm sewers. A storm water management plan and
construction period erosion control plan, meeting the requirements of the storm water management ordinance, is required.
C. Utilities: All utilities shall be provided underground unless waived by the city engineer due to compliance impracticalities. Existing, adjacent utilities shall
be placed underground at the request of the city engineer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 281/303
D. Water And Sewer Hookup: One water and one sewer hookup shall be paid per equivalent dwelling unit at the time of issuance of the building permit
(see title 7, chapters 6 and 7of this code).
E. Topographic Map: A topographic map shall be submitted showing the contour of all lots contained within the proposed development.
F. Restrictive Covenants Submission: A complete and comprehensive set of restrictive covenants shall be submitted when deemed necessary by the city
attorney, planning department or city council prior to final plat approval by city council.
G. Streetlights: All streetlights shall be installed.
H. Fire Hydrants: All fire hydrants shall be installed.
I. Survey Monuments: Street survey monuments meeting the requirements of the city engineer and the city's GIS system shall be installed where required
by the city.
J. Sidewalks: All sidewalks shall meet the standards adopted by the city.
K. Restrictive Covenant Items: The restrictive covenants governing this property shall include, but not be limited to, items such as setback requirements,
fences, sight restrictions, outbuildings, parking requirements, maintenance of storm water facilities, open space, parking and private streets, noise
regulations, etc.
L. Fencing: Fencing may be required around portions of the exterior boundaries of a subdivision.
M. Preliminary Plat Approval Expiration: Projects with preliminary plat approval which are not submitted for final plat approval within two (2) years shall
have approval expire unless an extension has been granted in writing by the planning department. No extension shall be longer than one year.
N. Final Plat Approval Expiration: Projects with final plat approval which are not constructed within three (3) years shall have approval expire unless an
extension has been granted in writing by the planning department. No extension shall be longer than one year.
O. Fees: Fees for filing subdivision or other development review and approval shall be established by resolution adopted by the city council.
P. Construction Standards:
1. Any existing right of way on which a parcel abuts shall be improved from the centerline of the right of way plus ten feet (10') to the standards set forth
in title 7 of this code, and shall include:
a. Continuation of a sidewalk shall be required along the entire frontage of the parcel.
b. In the case of the continuation of an existing street, the city may require the entire roadbed be paved to the property line.
c. The continuation of curbs and gutters shall be required for the parcel's frontage.
2. Where the entire existing street is unconstructed or unpaved and it would be inequitable to require the owner to construct or pave it, the owner shall
pay the city for future construction of improvements or may be allowed to accept an LID for street improvement at some future date in lieu of
constructing the street.
3. Water mains, sewer mains and storm sewers shall be installed along the entire frontage of the parcel unless specifically exempted by the city
engineer.
4. Water system construction shall be as per the main extension policies and procedures as adopted by resolution. Installation shall conform to the
water master plan as adopted by the city council.
5. Sewer system construction shall be as per title 7 of this code, sewer line extension policies, and such policies as may be adopted by resolution.
Installation shall conform to the sewer master plan as adopted by the city council.
Q. Site Layout:
1. Lot size and frontage shall conform to the zone in which the parcel is located except for lots created as for common wall townhouse or townhouse
duplex construction, as provided below.
2. The new lot lines shall not be closer to buildings on adjoining lots than permitted by the zoning ordinance for required yard size; however, where
duplex or multi-family dwellings up to six (6) units are allowed by the underlying zone, or are approved as part of the planned unit development
process, except for townhouse lots may be created to allow for townhouse construction as follows:
a. Townhouse duplex lots which are designed for common wall construction on a common interior lot line shall contain at least one-half (1/2) of the
required lot size for a duplex and shall have at least one-half (1/2) of the required road frontage.
b. Townhouse lots of three (3) to six (6) units shall each contain a minimum of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet and twenty five feet
(25') of road frontage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 282/303
c. Adjustments to the above area and frontage requirements for townhouse units may be approved as part of the planned unit development process.
3. Curb cuts shall be approved by the city engineer.
4. Utility easements may be required where necessary.
5. Control of storm runoff shall be approved by the city engineer.
R. Parcels Or Unbuildable Lots: No unbuildable lots shall be platted except for parking, open space or other amenities. Platted areas that are not buildable
shall be noted as such and designated as "parcels" on the plat. Open space parcels or tracts shall be clearly designated as such on the plat.
S. Flagpole Lots: A single flag lot may be permitted at the sole discretion of the commission and council, in which the "flagpole" projection is serving as a
driveway as provided herein, providing connection to and frontage on a public or a private street. Once established, a flag lot may not be further
subdivided, but a lot line adjustment of a flag lot is not considered a further subdivision. The "flagpole" portion of the lot shall not be considered in
determining minimum lot area. The "flagpole" shall be of adequate width to accommodate a driveway as required by this title, fire and other applicable
codes, but no less than twenty six feet (26') wide.
T. Mitigation: No subdivision, or other development requiring a permit or special approval, shall be approved which affects the ability of political
subdivisions of the state, including school districts, to deliver services without compromising quality of service delivery to current residents or imposing
substantial additional costs upon current residents, unless the developer provides for the mitigation of the effects of development. Such mitigation,
subject to a takings analysis, may include, but is not limited to, the following:
1. Provision of on site or off site street or intersection improvements.
2. Provision of other off site improvements, including pedestrian and bicycle paths.
3. Dedications and/or public improvements on property frontages.
4. Dedication or provision of parks or green space.
5. Provision of public service facilities.
6. Construction of flood control canals or devices.
7. Provisions for ongoing maintenance.
U. Contiguous Parcels: When the owner of contiguous parcels proposes to subdivide any portion of the contiguous parcels, an area development plan
shall be submitted and approved. The commission and council shall evaluate the following basic site criteria and make appropriate findings of fact:
1. Streets, whether public or private, provide an interconnected system and shall be adequate to accommodate anticipated vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
2. Nonvehicular circulation routes provide safe pedestrian and bicycle ways and provide an interconnected system to streets, parks and green space,
public lands, or other destinations.
3. Water main lines and sewer main lines are designed in the most effective layout feasible.
4. Other utilities including power, telephone, cable, and gas are designed in the most effective layout feasible.
5. Park land is most appropriately located on the contiguous parcels.
6. Grading and drainage are appropriate to the contiguous parcels.
7. Development avoids easements and hazardous or sensitive natural resource areas.
The council may require that any or all contiguous parcels be included in the subdivision.
V. Grading: Grading shall be designed to blend with natural land forms and to minimize the necessity of padding or terracing of building sites, excavation
for foundations, and minimize the necessity of cuts and fills for streets and driveways. A grading permit shall be obtained prior to any excavating, filling,
grading or other earthwork.
W. Pathways: The developer of any subdivision, or any part thereof, shall provide public pathways for all trails and paths identified in the pathway master
plan that are located on the property to be subdivided or on city property adjacent to the property to be subdivided, and sidewalks required by this
chapter. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-2006)
10-1-8: APPROVALS:
Plats, except short plats, shall be approved subject to the following procedure:
A. The preliminary plats shall be set for public hearing before the planning commission or a hearing examiner only after all required documents have been
received and fees paid. Notice of the public hearing shall be sent to the propertyowners within three hundred feet (300') of the development.
Preliminary plats shall also be reviewed by the pedestrian advisory committee. A hearing examiner may be used to conduct public hearings when
directed by the city council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 283/303
B. Following public hearing, the planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
preliminary plat, explaining the reasons for their decision. Any variance from any city standard must be considered at this stage. Should the planning
commission be unable to make a decision, the matter may be tabled or forwarded to the city council without recommendation.
C. The city council shall consider the preliminary plat following receipt of action by the planning commission in a public hearing.
D. The city council may approve, approve with conditions, deny or remand the preliminary plat back to the planning commission. A written reasoned
decision shall be made to reflect the council's decision. If the preliminary plat application is denied, there will not be further consideration of the plat.
E. The final plat must be substantially in accordance with an approved preliminary plat. The council may hold a public hearing on a final plat if requested
by the planning director, mayor or city council. The city council shall approve, approve with conditions, refer the matter back to the planning
commission, or deny the final plat. A written reasoned decision shall be prepared reflecting the city council's decision.
F. Prior to filing of a final plat, a written agreement may be required of the owner, reflecting the commitments made by the owner during this approval
process.
G. Approved plats shall be signed by the mayor, city clerk, planning director and city engineer. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-2006)
10-1-9: MEDIATION:
A. The mediation of land use decisions will be governed by the provisions in Idaho Code section 67-6510 and this title.
B. If mediation occurs after a final decision, any resolution of differences through mediation must be the subject of another public hearing, consistent with
the type of hearing which resulted in the original decision, before the decision making body.
C. The council shall act on the mediation recommendations within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the recommendation. The mediation process shall not
be part of the official recordregarding consideration of the application upon which the mediation is based. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-2006)
10-1-10: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any regulation of this title shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or both. Each day during which a violation continues may be deemed a separate offense. The city
may additionally utilize all available civil remedies to obtain compliance. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-2006)
Chapter 2
SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES FOR SHORT PLATS AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
10-2-1: AUTHORITY:
Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 1 of this title, the city council hereby empowers the mayor to approve or reject short plats. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-
2006)
10-2-2: APPLICABILITY:
A. The short plat procedure can be used in the following circumstances:
1. Where the parcel is within the corporate limits of the city, and
2. Where the parcel is on an existing dedicated right of way, however, additional dedication of land may be required to bring such right of way up to city
standards, and
3. Where no more than four (4) lots result from the division of a parent parcel, with no remainder parcels allowed, or
4. Where six (6) or fewer townhouse lots are created, or
5. For condominium plats.
B. The lot line adjustment procedure may be used:
1. Where parcels or lots are being combined, or
2. Where the adjustment of lot lines are requested and no new buildable lot is being created, or
3. Where the reorientation of existing lots does not increase the number of buildable lots.
4. The procedure may not be used where it creates or expands nonconformity with land use ordinances. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 284/303
10-2-3: RESTRICTIONS:
A. A short plat shall not be divided to create more buildable lots. Lot line adjustments are allowed as set forth in section 10-2-2 of this chapter, and
redevelopment of short plat lots may be allowed so long as the total lots created from a parent parcel do not exceed a total of four (4). However, the
applicant must proceed under the regular subdivision procedures where reconfiguration or redevelopment will result in the creation of five (5) lots or
more from a parent parcel.
B. All unplatted, adjoining land of common ownership must be included in the short plat.
C. All lots of any short plat must comply with the minimum standards for the zone in which they are located, except as provided for the creation of a
townhouse or townhouse duplex lot as provided for in chapter 1 of this title.
D. All public dedications, improvements and other requirements set forth in chapter 1 of this title shall be applied to any short plat, condominium plat, or lot
line adjustment. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-2006)
10-2-4: NAMING:
In the case of the replatting of part of an existing subdivision, lots may be given a new subdivision name but shall note that it is "The Replatting of Lot(s) ,
Block(s) of addition or subdivision" in the title. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-2006)
10-2-5: REQUIREMENTS:
A. Where the short plat is a redivision of existing platted lots, a metes and bounds description using the original subdivision survey as a reference may be
acceptable, as determined by the city. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-2006)
B. An adjustment to the boundary lines of existing platted lots may be allowed by recordation of a plat or record of survey with deed, or other document
acceptable to the city following review and approval of the planning director so long as each portion of the lots as described in the document meet the
minimum lot size of the underlying zone. Where the applicant chooses to utilize recordation of a plat procedure, the fees associated with a short plat
application will apply. (Ord. 1336, 11-2-2016)
10-2-6: FEES:
The application fees for filing a short plat, condominium plat, or lot line adjustment shall be established by resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord.
1157, 10-18-2006)
10-2-7: PROCEDURES:
A. The completed application shall be submitted to the planning director.
B. The planning director shall endeavor to review the application within fifteen (15) days.
C. Notice of the application and an opportunity to comment within fifteen (15) days of mailing date shall be mailed to all adjacent property owners.
D. Written findings of facts shall be presented to the mayor, stating reasons for approval or denial.
E. The mayor shall endeavor to act on the application within thirty (30) days of reviewing findings, setting forth his reasons for approval or denial in a
reasoned written statement.
F. If the application is not acted upon in sixty (60) days, an appeal may be made directly to the city council.
G. The approval or rejection of the final plat can be appealed by an affected person within ten (10) days to the city council. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-2006)
10-2-8: LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
An owner wishing to adjust lot lines in an existing plat, as hereinabove defined in section 10-2-2 of this chapter, shall file an application with the planning
director for administrative review. Additional information reasonably required for thorough review of the application and plat may be required of the
applicant. The planning director shall provide written notice of said application to owners of property immediately adjacent to the subject property. Said
notice shall inform adjacent property owners that they may comment on the application during a period of not less than fifteen (15) days after mailing of the
notice and prior to final action on said application. Following expiration of the said comment period, and upon a finding by the planning director that the
request conforms to the readjustment of lot line definition and is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the planning director shall approve same
or approve with conditions necessary to find same in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Upon a finding by the planning director that the
application does not conform to said definition or is not in compliance with this chapter, the planning director shall deny said application and shall state the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 285/303
reasons therefor in writing. Upon approval of an application and upon satisfaction by the applicant of any conditions attached thereto, the planning director
shall determine if the lot line adjustment requires a plat or may be done with other documentation filed with the county recorder. The owner may be
required to bring adjacent public improvements up to city standards. The approval or rejection of the lot line adjustment can be appealed by an affected
person within ten (10) days to the city council. (Ord. 1157, 10-18-2006)
Chapter 3
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
10-3-1: PURPOSE:
Planned unit development (PUD) is development of land in which the standard land use regulations may be modified or waived in order to promote
beneficial development of an entire tract of land in conformance with an approved planned unit development permit which accentuates usable open space,
recreational uses, public amenities, community housing, and harmonious development with surrounding properties and the city at large.
The purpose of the provisions of this chapter shall be to guide a major development of land and construction by encouraging planned unit developments
so as to achieve the following:
A. A maximum choice of living environments by allowing a variety of housing and building types and permitting an increased density per acre and a
reduction in lot dimensions, yards, building setbacks, and area requirements.
B. A more useful pattern of open space and recreation areas and, if permitted as part of the project, more convenience in the location of neighborhood
commercial uses, recreational uses and services.
C. A development pattern which preserves and utilizes natural topography and geologic features, scenic vistas, trees and other vegetation, and prevents
the disruption of natural drainage patterns.
D. A more efficient use of land than is generally achieved through conventional development, thus resulting in substantial savings through shorter utilities
and streets, while encouraging connectivity.
E. A development pattern in harmony with land use density, multimodal transportation facilities, and community facilities objects of the comprehensive
plan. (Ord. 1162, 12-20-2006)
10-3-2: APPLICATION:
A. Contents Of Application For Approval Of Preliminary Development Plan: An application for preliminary PUD shall be filed with the planning department
by a property owner or person having an equitable interest in the property for which the PUD is proposed. At a minimum, the application shall contain
the following information:
1. Name, address and phone number of applicant.
2. Name, address and phone number of registered surveyor, registered engineer and/or urban planner assisting in the preparation of the preliminary
development plan.
3. Legal description of property.
4. Description of existing use.
5. Zoning districts.
6. A vicinity map at a scale approved by the commission, showing property lines, streets, existing and proposed zoning and such other items as the
commission may require to show the relationship of the PUD to the comprehensive plan and to existing schools and other community facilities and
services.
7. A preliminary development plan at a scale approved by the commission showing topography at two foot (2') intervals; location and type of residential,
neighborhood commercial and recreational land uses; layout, dimensions and names of existing and proposed streets; rights of way; utility
easements; parks and community spaces; layouts and dimensions of lots and building setback lines; preliminary improvement drawings showing
water, fire hydrants, sidewalks, sewer, drainage, electricity, telephone and natural gas and such other characteristics as the commission deems
necessary.
8. Tentative landscaping plans and tentative architecture styles of buildings, showing elevations, interior layout, construction materials, and site
orientation.
9. Proposed schedule for the development of the site.
10. Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the land in question to initiate the proposed development plan within two (2) years.
11. The application for preliminary PUD shall be accompanied by a written statement by the developer setting forth the reasons why it is believed the
PUD would be in the public interest.
B. Contents Of Application For Approval Of Final Development Plan: Upon approval in principle of a preliminary development plan, an application for
approval of the final development planmay be filed with the planning department by at least one property owner or person having a presently existing
interest in the property for which the PUD is proposed. Each application shall be signed by the owner or lessee, attesting to the truth and exactness of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 286/303
all information supplied on the application for final development plan. Each application shall clearly state that the approval shall expire and may be
revoked if construction on the project has not begun within two (2) years from the date of issuance of the approval. For larger projects, a developer may
propose development occur incrementally in two (2) year phases. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
1. A survey of the proposed development site, showing the dimensions and bearings of the property lines, area in acres, topography, existing features
of the development site; including major wooded areas, structures, streets, easements, utility lines and land uses.
2. All the information required on the preliminary development plan; the location and sizes of lots, location and proposed density of dwelling units,
nonresidential building intensity and land use considered suitable for adjacent properties.
3. A schedule for the development of units to be constructed in progression and a description of the design principles for buildings and streetscapes;
tabulation of the number of acres in the proposed project for various uses; the number of housing units proposed by type; estimated residential
population by type of housing; estimated nonresidential population; anticipated timing for each unit and standards for height, open space, building
density, parking areas, population density and public improvements proposed for each unit of the development.
4. Preliminary studies and plans showing, as necessary, water, sewer, drainage, streetlight, electricity, telephone and natural gas installations; waste
disposal facilities; street improvements including sidewalk and bicycle accommodation and nature and extent of earthwork required for site
preparation and development.
5. Site plan, showing buildings, various functional use areas, circulation and their relationship.
6. Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and exterior elevations.
7. Landscaping plans.
8. Deed restrictions, protective covenants and other legal statements or devices to be used to control the use, development and maintenance of the
land, and the improvements thereon, including those areas which are to be commonly owned and maintained.
9. A traffic analysis as provided for in section 10-1-6 of thistitle may be required which may result in requirements for off site improvements to mitigate
impacts.
C. Ownership Requirements: The PUD application shall be filed in the name or names of the recorded owner or owners of property included in the
development. However, the application may be filed by the holder(s) of an equitable interest in such property. Before approval is granted to the final
development plan, the entire project shall be under single ownership or control and legal title must be presented with the final development plan. (Ord.
1162, 12-20-2006)
10-3-3: MINIMUM AREA:
A planned unit development for the following principal uses shall contain an area of not less than:
A. Two (2) acres for residential development.
B. Five (5) acres for residential use with subordinate neighborhood commercial or recreational uses. (Ord. 1162, 12-20-2006)
10-3-4: USES PERMITTED:
A. All uses that may be allowed within the land use district are permitted within a PUD.
B. Uses not allowed in the underlying district may be allowed where appropriate. PUDs seeking multi-family residential buildings in residence A and B
zones shall be limited to no more than six (6) dwelling units in any one building. Such units must reflect the style and character of surrounding
residences.
C. Commercial, professional office, recreational, public or quasi-public uses that are not allowed within the land use district, may utilize up to twenty
percent (20%) of the gross land area in a PUD.
Such uses may be allowed provided there is a favorable finding by the commission that:
1. Any nonresidential uses are compatible with the residential uses in and surrounding the PUD.
2. The uses are planned as an integral part of the PUD.
3. Commercial/professional uses are to be located and so designed as to provide direct access to a collector or an arterial street without creating
congestion or traffic hazards.
4. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the residential development occurs prior to the development of the related neighborhood commercial or
recreational uses. (Ord. 1162,12-20-2006)
10-3-5: INCREASED RESIDENTIAL DENSITY:
To provide an incentive for quality PUD, the commission may authorize an increased residential density, based on the single-family lot size for the zone, of
up to forty percent (40%) of the allowable number of dwelling units. Character, identity, architectural and siting variations incorporated in a development
shall be considered cause for density increases, provided these factors make a substantial contribution to the objectives of the PUD, which are as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 287/303
A. Landscaping, a maximum increase of ten percent (10%); streetscape; open spaces and plazas; use of existing landscaping; pedestrianway treatment;
and recreational areas.
B. Siting, a maximum increase of ten percent (10%); visual focal points; use of existing physical features such as topography; view; sun and wind
orientation; circulation pattern; physical environment; variation in building setbacks; and building grouping, such as clustering.
C. Design features, a maximum increase of ten percent (10%); street sections; architectural styles; harmonious use of materials; parking areas broken by
landscaping features; and varied use of housing types.
D. Workforce/affordable housing, a maximum increase of ten percent (10%) for those projects providing workforce/affordable housing as defined by
resolution of the city of Sandpoint. (Ord. 1162, 12-20-2006)
10-3-6: COMMON OPEN SPACE:
A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross land area developed in any residential planned unit development project shall be reserved for common open
space and recreational facilities for the residents or users of the area being developed.
The required amount of common open space land reserved under a planned unit development shall either be held in corporate ownership by owners of the
project area for the use of each owner who buys property within the development or be dedicated to the public and retained as common open space for
parks, recreation, and related uses. Public utility and similar easements and rights of way for watercourses and other similar channels are not acceptable
for common open space dedication unless such land or right of way is usable as a trail or other similar purpose and approved by the commission.
The responsibility for the maintenance of all open spaces shall be specified by the developer before approval of the final development plan. Every property
developed under the planned unitdevelopment approach should be designed to abut upon common open space or similar areas. A clustering of dwellings
is encouraged. In areas where townhouses are used, there shall be no more than six (6) townhouse units in any contiguous group. Due consideration shall
be given to the provisions of suitable sites for parks, playgrounds and schools for the community. (Ord. 1162, 12-20-2006)
10-3-7: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. The PUD shall be designed to be compatible with the surrounding area.
B. There shall be a twenty five foot (25') building line setback from all exterior boundaries of the property.
C. All parking and driveways shall not be within ten feet (10') of the exterior boundaries.
D. All public improvements required for subdivisions may be required for a PUD.
E. Exterior boundary setback requirements set forth above may be reduced by the commission where such reduction can be shown to be compatible with
surrounding development. (Ord. 1162, 12-20-2006)
10-3-8: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
Fire hydrants, sidewalks, curbs, public safety signs and storm drainage shall be provided as required to adequately service the site. Underground utilities,
including telephone and electrical systems, are required within the limits of all planned unit developments. Appurtenances to these systems which can be
effectively screened may be excepted from this requirement if the commission finds that such exemption will not violate the intent or character of the
proposed planned unit development. All utilities should be placed behind the curb line. (Ord. 1162, 12-20-2006)
10-3-9: ARRANGEMENT OF NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL AND RECREATIONAL USES:
When planned unit development districts may include neighborhood commercial and recreational uses, commercial buildings and establishments shall be
planned as groups having common parking areas and common ingress and egress points in order to reduce the number of potential accident locations at
intersections. Planning screens or fences may be required to be provided on the perimeter of the commercial areas abutting residential areas.
The plan of the project shall provide for the integrated and harmonious design of buildings, and for adequate and properly arranged facilities for internal
traffic circulation for allmodes, landscaping, and such other features and facilities as may be necessary to make the project attractive and efficient from the
standpoint of the adjoining and surrounding noncommercial areas.
All areas designed for future expansion or not intended for immediate improvement or development shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained in a neat
orderly manner. (Ord. 1162, 12-20-2006)
10-3-10: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
A. Approval Of A Planned Unit Development: Approval of a PUD by the commission or city council is purely discretional and not a matter of right.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 288/303
B. Submission Of Planned Unit Development Plan: When the PUD also qualifies as a subdivision, the processing of the PUD permit and subdivision
application shall occur at the same time. The granting of a permit for a PUD shall require a preapplication meeting, the submission of a preliminary
development plan and approval by the city council of a final development plan as specified within this chapter.
C. Preapplication Meeting: The developer shall meet with the city planner prior to the submission of the preliminary development plan. The purpose of this
meeting is to discuss early and informally the purpose and effect of this chapter and the criteria and standards contained herein, and to familiarize the
developer with the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance and such other plans and ordinances as deemed appropriate.
D. Procedure For Public Notice: The same provision for public hearing and legal notification as required for conditional use permits shall be followed.
E. Approval In Principle By The Commission: Within sixty (60) days after the public hearing the commission shall review the preliminary development plan
to determine if it is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter; whether the proposed development advances the general welfare of the
community and neighborhood and whether the benefits, combination of various land uses and the interrelationship with the land uses in the
surrounding area justify the deviation from standard district regulations. The commission's approval in principle shall not be construed to endorse a
precise location of uses, configuration of parcels or engineering feasibility.
F. Consideration Of General Standards Applicable: The commission shall consider the general standards applicable to conditional use permits and criteria
for PUD permits before approving in principle a preliminary development plan (see section 9-9-9 of this code).
G. Approval At Hearing: If it is determined to meet the provisions hereafter set forth, the commission may act on a developer's request for final
development plan approval at the same hearing as a preliminary development plan.
H. Recommendation By Commission: Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the final development plan, the commission shall recommend to the city council
that the final development plan be approved as presented, approved with supplementary conditions, or disapproved. The commission shall then
transmit all papers constituting the record and the recommendations to the city council.
The commission shall find that the facts submitted with the application and presented to them establish that:
1. The proposed development can be initiated within two (2) years of the date of approval.
2. Each individual unit of the development, as well as the total development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an environment of
sustained desirability and stability or that adequate assurance will be provided that such objective will be attained; the uses proposed will not be
detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a beneficial effect which would not be achieved under standard zoning
regulations.
3. The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate to carry anticipated multimodal traffic, that increased densities will not generate
vehicular traffic in such amounts as to overload the street network outside the PUD, and that any impacts have been adequately mitigated.
4. Any proposed commercial development can be justified at the locations proposed.
5. Any exception from standard zoning requirements is warranted by the design and other amenities incorporated in the final development plan, in
accordance with this chapter and the adopted policy of the city council.
6. The PUD is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan.
7. The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the population densities and nonresidential uses proposed.
I. Action By The City Council: Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the final recommendation of the commission, the city council shall either approve,
approve with supplementary conditions, or disapprove the application as presented. Upon granting or denying the application, the council shall specify:
1. The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application.
2. The reasons for approval or denial.
3. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a permit.
J. Approval Of Application: If the application is either approved or approved with conditions, a PUD permit shall be issued in writing. The issuance thereof
shall not be considered a binding precedent for the issuance of other PUD permits. A PUD permit is not transferable from one parcel of land to another.
When applicable, a developer may be required to enter into an agreement setting forth all commitments made by the developer.
If a PUD is being processed in conjunction with a subdivision, approval of construction plans for public improvements shall proceed as noted in
subsection 10-1-1D of this title. If not a subdivision, approval of final utility plans shall be required prior to issuance of a final PUD permit.
K. Failure To Comply: Failure to comply with any condition or term of said PUD permit shall cause said permit to be void. A PUD permit may be revoked at
any time for violation of the permit or any condition thereof by motion of, the city council after a due process hearing upon ten (10) days' written notice
to the hold of the PUD permit.
L. Design Review Approval: All projects receiving a PUD permit, as a condition of said permit, shall be required to submit and receive design review
approval for each structure to be constructed within the project in accordance with the approved final development plan and the supplementary
conditions attached thereto prior to making application for a building permit irrespective of what zoning district or districts within which the project is
located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 289/303
M. Expiration And Extension Of Approval Period: Preliminary approval shall be for a period not to exceed eighteen (18) months. The approval of a final
development plan for a PUD shall be for a period not to exceed two (2) years to allow for preparation and recording of the required subdivision plan and
the development of the project. If no construction has begun within two (2) years after approval is granted and no current building permit exists, the
approved final development plan shall be void. An extension of the time limit, revision of phasing schedule, or modification of the final development
plan may be approved if the commission finds that such extension, revision, or modification is not in conflict with the public interest.
N. Development Of Property Consistent With Application: All development of the property must be consistent with the application and any commitments
made by the developer to the commission or city council. The developer may be required to sign a development agreement setting forth the conditions
of approval.
The certificate of compliance shall not be issued for any part of the project until all of the specified improvements have been completed, or unless a
letter of credit, performance bond, orother sufficient security acceptable to the city attorney is posted for one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the
estimated construction costs of the improvements, as provided for in section 10-1-3 of this title. (Ord. 1162, 12-20-2006)
Title 11
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
PARKLAND DEDICATION
(Rep. by Ord. 989, 7-17-1996)
Chapter 2
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT WATER FEES
(Rep. by Ord. 1080, 2-19-2003)
Chapter 3
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
11-3-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE; DEFINITIONS:
A. Title: These regulations shall be known as the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.
B. Purpose: The purpose of these regulations shall be to require implementation of stormwater management techniques which rely upon natural on site
treatment and recycling of stormwater, as opposed to collection and conveyance of untreated stormwater into groundwater sources or into surface
bodies of water. The underlying purposes to be achieved by implementation of such regulations are the protection of groundwater quality through
pretreatment of stormwater prior to infiltration and protection of surface water resources from the effects of contaminants, sedimentation, and erosion.
C. Definitions: Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): Physical, structural, and/or managerial measures taken that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or
reduce pollution of water.
CATALOG OF STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES FOR IDAHO CITIES AND COUNTIES: A technical guide for construction site
design and the selection of stormwater best management practices. Idaho department of environmental quality, water quality division, and as updated.
CLEARING: The removal of vegetation, trees, structures, pavement, etc., by manual, mechanical, or chemical methods.
CONTAMINANTS OR POLLUTANTS: The introduction of harmful materials, including organic wastes, sediments, minerals, nutrients, thermal
pollutants, toxic chemicals, and other hazardous substances.
CONVEYANCE: A mechanism for transporting water from one point to another, including pipes, ditches, and channels.
CONVEYANCE SYSTEM: The drainage facilities, both natural and manmade, which collect, contain, and provide for the flow of surface water.
DETENTION: A temporary storage of storm runoff in a BMP, which is used to control the peak discharge rates, and which provides for gravity settling of
pollutants and sediments.
DRAINAGEWAYS: A route or course along which water moves or may move to drain an area.
EROSION: Progressive detachment and removal of particles, including soil and rock fragments, from the earth's surface by means of water, wind, ice,
gravity or mechanical processes, including vehicular traffic.
EROSION/SEDIMENT CONTROL: Any temporary or permanent measures taken to reduce erosion, control siltation and sedimentation.
GROUNDWATER: Any water which occurs beneath the surface of the earth in a saturated geological formation of rock or soil.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 290/303
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any surface that has a runoff coefficient greater than 0.8 or a CN greater than 85 (as defined in "Catalog Of Stormwater Best
Management Practices For Idaho Cities And Counties", volume 1 appendix D). Types of impervious surfaces include rooftops, traditional asphalt and
concrete parking lots, driveways, roads, sidewalks and pedestrian plazas.
INFILTRATION: The downward movement of water through the soil. Infiltration capacity is normally expressed in terms of inches/hour.
NUTRIENTS: Essential elements needed by plants or animals for growth. Excessive amounts of nutrients can lead to degradation of water quality and
algae blooms. Some nutrients can be toxic at high concentrations.
QUALIFIED, LICENSED PROFESSIONAL: A registered civil engineer or registered landscape architect, licensed in the state of Idaho.
RAINFALL INTENSITY: Volume of rain for a given amount of time, normally inches/hour.
RETENTION: The holding of runoff in a basin without release except by means of evaporation or infiltration.
RUNOFF: Water flow that occurs when soil is infiltrated to full capacity and excess water from rain, meltwater, or other sources flows over the land.
Frozen ground is considered full capacity.
RUNOFF CURVE NUMBER: An empirical parameter used in hydrology for predicting direct runoff or infiltration from rainfall excess (also called a curve
number, or simply CN).
SECURITY: A surety bond, cash deposit or escrow account, assignment of savings, irrevocable letter of credit or other means acceptable to or required
by the permit authority to guarantee that work is completed in compliance with the project's drainage plan and in compliance with all local government
requirements.
SEDIMENT: Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension or has been or is being moved from its site of origin due to erosion.
SEDIMENTATION: The deposition of sediment.
SHEET FLOW: An overland flow or down slope movement of water taking the form of a thin, continuous film over relatively smooth soil or rock surfaces
and not concentrated into channels larger than rills. A rill is a narrow and shallow incision into soil layers, often seen as the first sign of major soil
erosion.
STORM DURATION: The length of time, expressed in minutes or hours, a storm lasts. Usually equal to the time of concentration.
STORM FREQUENCY: The time interval between storms of predetermined intensity, e.g., a 2-year, 25-year, or 100-year storm.
STORM INTENSITY: Volume of precipitation over time, expressed in inches per hour.
STORMWATER: Runoff as a result of storms, snowmelt or surface water and drainage.
SWALE: A shallow drainage conveyance or infiltration area with relatively gentle side slopes.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION: Time needed for water to flow from the most remote point in a site to the site outlet, a function of the topography,
geology, and land use.
VEGETATED SWALE: A broad, shallow channel with a dense stand of noninvasive vegetation covering the side slopes and bottom. (Ord. 1259, 11-16-
2011)
11-3-2: APPLICABILITY:
Unless otherwise exempted under this chapter, the stormwater management ordinance shall apply to all development activities for which grading, site
development, parking lot paving construction, street improvement, or building permits are required, pursuant to the codes, laws, and regulations of the city
of Sandpoint or the state of Idaho. (Ord. 1259, 11-16-2011)
11-3-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Unless relief from the standards set forth in this chapter is granted by properly approved variance, all development to which this chapter is applicable shall
comply with the following requirements and methods for stormwater management control:
A. Any activity applicable to this chapter shall require the development of a comprehensive stormwater management plan, which addresses and complies
with the requirements and standards established by this chapter and the plan criteria, design standards, and BMPs adopted pursuant to this chapter.
Stormwater management plans shall be prepared by a qualified, licensed professional and submitted for review to the city engineer. The city engineer
may require any plan to be signed by a registered civil engineer when off site drainage or adjacent property rights are affected.
B. Each stormwater management plan created in accordance with this chapter shall also establish:
1. Assurance of adequate funding;
2. The necessary maintenance system, including an acceptable plan for sustained functioning of the collection and treatment system; and
3. The easements necessary to provide continued maintenance of the system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 291/303
C. A stormwater management plan will not be necessary for individual building sites if runoff from the site has been accommodated by an approved
stormwater management plan for the subdivision in which the site is located and development of the site conforms to the assumptions made in the
approved plan. Detailed erosion control plans shall still be required.
D. A stormwater management plan will not be required for new nonattached single-family dwelling residential structures or additions to existing
nonattached single-family dwelling residential structures if the requirements of this chapter can be met by proposed or existing site landscaping. Proof
of meeting the requirements of this section shall be provided to the city engineer for approval.
E. Runoff from sites shall be discharged into an approved BMP except in the following case: When the total impervious surface area on a lot, resulting
from new construction or an addition to existing structures, is less than two thousand (2,000) square feet, runoff may be discharged directly into the
existing stormwater conveyance system, provided the existing facilities have sufficient capacity to accommodate the increased runoff, as determined by
the city engineer.
F. All activities subject to the requirements of this chapter shall be carried out such that runoff shall not be degraded, accelerated, concentrated, or
otherwise conveyed beyond the exterior property lines or project boundaries of the project in question except in compliance with the provisions of a
BMP adopted pursuant to this chapter or as allowed through joint management of stormwater with adjoining property owners pursuant to agreement
approved in writing by the city. Drainage shall not be diverted and/or released to a downstream property which had not received drainage prior to
development. Flow may not be concentrated onto downstream properties where sheet flow previously existed.
G. The quality of surface runoff shall be protected by strict compliance with the design standards and BMP adopted pursuant to this chapter or by
implementation of measures shown by a qualified, licensed professional to have an effective design capability which exceeds the BMP adopted hereby.
H. This chapter shall be applied in a manner consistent with the procedures set forth in the city of Sandpoint zoning ordinance, city of Sandpoint
subdivision ordinance, city of Sandpoint building code ordinance, and such other ordinances as the city may enact to regulate the use and
development of land within the city pursuant to authority granted by Idaho Code title 67, chapter 65. For purposes of application of the design
standards and other related documents and standards, the city of Sandpoint shall be designated as the "permit authority".
I. All elements, not limited to, walls, sidewalks, curbs, inlet structures, conveyance systems, and treatment measures shall be considered an integral part
of the permanent stormwater management system. (Ord. 1259, 11-16-2011)
11-3-4: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A. General Requirements: All stormwater management plans shall conform to the following general requirements:
1. Clearly identify all stormwater facilities including, but not limited to, pipes, inlets, catch basins, temporary and permanent stormwater controls;
2. Stamped and signed by a qualified, licensed professional; and
3. Provide a recordable document assuring the city of future maintenance.
B. Plan Requirements: Stormwater management plans shall have the following parts:
1. Project Summary Narrative With Supporting Design Calculations:
a. The project summary shall present an overview of the proposed project and all pertinent details supporting the design calculations and system
sizing calculations.
b. These elements include, but are not limited to, off site drainage onto the property, pre- and postdevelopment runoff, temporary and permanent
stormwater controls, detention and/or retention facilities, pipes, swales, culverts, ditches, and catch basins. Summary shall contain supporting logic
for selection of BMP, methods to handle anticipated groundwater and nonstormwater discharges, inspection schedule, cut and fill slope
considerations if slopes are steeper than two feet (2') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical, permanent stabilization measures, winterization
requirements when applicable, inspection schedule, cost estimate for the permanent stormwater management system, and a construction
schedule with erosion and sediment control milestones, including dates for winter site work shutdown. The summary shall identify all potential
sources of pollution and describe practices to reduce and/or eliminate them.
2. Site Plan: Site plan, not greater than a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'). The site plan shall include the following:
a. Vicinity map not greater than a scale of one inch equals two thousand feet (1" = 2,000').
b. Property boundaries and all existing natural and manmade features and facilities within fifty feet (50') of the site, including, but not limited to,
streets, utilities, easements, topography, structures, and drainage channels.
c. Existing and final contours at one foot (1') intervals.
d. Location of all proposed improvements, including, but not limited to, paving, structures, utilities, landscaped areas, flatwork, and stormwater
control facilities.
e. Proposed drainage patterns including, but not limited to, ridgelines and tributary drainage areas.
f. Stormwater management system, including, but not limited to, invert elevations, slopes, length, cross sections, and sizes. Construction details shall
be shown for all components.
g. Existing and proposed drainage/stormwater easements.
h. Construction, grading, and clearing limits.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 292/303
i. Area, in square feet, of disturbance, impervious surface and overall site.
j. Quantity, in cubic yards, of excavation and embankment.
k. Distance, in feet, of the maximum depth of excavation and height of embankment.
3. Erosion And Sediment Control Plan:
a. An erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted and approved prior to initiation of any site clearing, excavation, grading or other
development activity. Both temporary and permanent erosion control measures shall be included. The plan shall represent the minimum
requirements for the site. Additional measures may be required by the city in the event of unexpected storm occurrences, repair or maintenance of
existing systems, or replacement of nonfunctioning systems.
b. Minimum elements of the plan shall include:
(1) Confirmation that the project complies with state and federal water quality regulations (e.g., national pollutant discharge elimination system
construction general permit).
(2) Location of all proposed temporary BMPs.
(3) Perimeter sediment controls (e.g., silt fence, rock construction entry, dust control, etc.).
(4) Inlet protection.
(5) Concrete washout area.
(6) Temporary and permanent stabilization methods.
(7) Methods to control nonstormwater discharges.
(8) Methods and locations for storage and handling of construction material, debris and waste.
(9) Inspection schedule and timing. At a minimum, inspection is to take place once every seven (7) days, within twenty four (24) hours of an
anticipated storm event of 0.5 inches or greater, and within twenty four (24) hours of the end of a storm event of 0.5 inches or greater. Frequency
may be decreased with approval from the city engineer during frozen ground conditions.
c. The plan shall identify those entities or individuals responsible for inspection, maintenance and upkeep of both temporary and permanent erosion
control measures.
4. Operation And Maintenance Plan: The stormwater management plan shall identify the entities or individuals responsible for the long term
maintenance of the stormwater management system, as well as the materials, methods and procedures to ensure the system functions as designed.
Maintenance activities shall include, but not be limited to, watering, mowing, fertilizing, sod renovation, sediment and debris removal from detention
basin, debris removal and cleaning of all inlets, piping, outlet structures, slope protection, or other measures that ensure the system's function.
5. Alteration To Plan: Significant alterations to the approved stormwater management plan, as determined by the city engineer, shall be submitted to
the city for review and approval. (Ord. 1259, 11-16-2011)
11-3-5: DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. General: All stormwater facilities shall incorporate the following design standards:
1. All facilities shall be designed to accommodate a 25-year storm frequency and storm duration of five (5) minutes, or equal to the time of
concentration.
2. When on site facilities must accommodate drainage from off site, such facilities shall be designed to accommodate a 50-year storm frequency and
storm duration of five (5) minutes, or equal to the time of concentration.
3. Peak flows shall be calculated by the rational method for areas ten (10) acres or less. Peak flows shall be calculated by the soil conservation service
(SCS) method TR-55, for areas greater than ten (10) acres. Other methods may be approved by the city engineer.
4. The intensity duration frequency curves from the Idaho transportation department shall be used for the rational method.
5. Runoff coefficients and curve numbers shall be as published in the "Catalog Of Stormwater Best Management Practices For Idaho Cities And
Counties".
6. Runoff may be directed into existing drainage facilities following treatment and retention, provided the existing facilities have sufficient capacity to
accommodate the increased runoff and water quality standards are in no way diminished, as determined by the city engineer.
7. Any and all alterations to existing drainageways shall be approved by the city engineer prior to construction activities.
B. Vegetated Swales: All swales shall incorporate the following design standards:
1. All vegetated swales shall be designed to retain at a minimum a volume equal to the first one-half inch (1/2") of runoff over the tributary impervious
area.
2. Swales shall be a maximum of eight inches (8") deep in commercial and industrial areas and six inches (6") deep in all others. Depth shall be the
difference between the lowest point in the swale and the inlet of the overflow structure. Exceptions may be allowed with approval by the city
engineer. Percolation tests may be required to demonstrate that the soil is capable of infiltrating larger quantities of water.
3. Swales which are not performing properly as determined by the city engineer shall be renovated. Proper performance criteria may include factors
such as standing water remaining in the swale for longer than seventy two (72) hours or the vegetative cover dying. (Ord. 1259, 11-16-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 293/303
11-3-6: COMPONENT MAINTENANCE AND FUNDING:
The city of Sandpoint may establish a department of city government or contract for maintenance in order that drainage system components can be
maintained. Establishment of a supportive funding mechanism is hereby authorized. (Ord. 1259, 11-16-2011)
11-3-7: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following performance standards shall be applicable to all design, construction, implementation, and maintenance of stormwater management
systems pursuant to this chapter:
A. For purposes of this chapter, "undeveloped state" shall mean the natural woodland and forest type soils and vegetation in place prior to the start of any
construction or clearing activity on the site.
B. There shall be no measurable increase in the peak rate of runoff from the site after development when compared with the runoff rate in the undeveloped
state for a 25-year storm. Sufficient retention capacity shall be constructed within project boundaries to detain the on site surface flow to meet the
performance standard established by this section. Existing and/or proposed off site public street drainage shall be detained separately from the on site
drainage.
C. Channels which collect or concentrate stormwater shall be protected against erosion and contain energy dissipation measures to prevent further
erosion on adjoining lands. Existing unprotected channels shall be protected against further erosion in the course of site development. Any site
development or construction shall preserve the existing stormwater management improvements.
D. Sediment resulting from erosion of disturbed soils shall be detained on site.
E. Any and all collected stormwater shall be directed to vegetative swales or to an alternative stormwater management system approved by the city
engineer. Permanent treatment of stormwater runoff shall be accomplished by directing all runoff to a vegetated swale or to an approved BMP.
1. Exceptions: Runoff may be discharged directly into existing stormwater conveyance system or other overflow structures with the approval of the city
engineer under the following circumstances:
a. When the total impervious surface area on a lot, resulting from new construction or an addition to existing structures, is less than two thousand
(2,000) square feet.
b. Runoff from roofs that do not have potential sources of contamination.
F. Erosion, sediment, or discharge of pollutants, resulting from construction activities, which enter onto public property or private property not controlled by
the permit holder, shall be eliminated to the maximum extent practicable unless otherwise permitted or exempted under this chapter. In no case shall
they be washed into drainage features.
G. All construction activity commenced pursuant to an approved stormwater management plan or site development permit must at all times comply with
the conditions of the plan or permit. The permit holder is responsible for ensuring their contractor(s), subcontractor(s), utility trenching subcontractor(s),
and all other persons entering the site abide by the conditions of the permit. The permit holder's signature or that of his authorized agent on the permit
shall constitute an agreement by the permit holder to accept responsibility for meeting the conditions of the permit.
H. No construction activity shall take place without a valid stormwater management plan. If a permit has been suspended or revoked, or has expired, all
work covered by the plan shall cease until a new plan is issued.
I. All necessary action shall be taken to minimize the depositing and tracking of mud, dirt, sand, gravel, rock or debris on or onto the public right of way.
The owner of the site of the construction activity or the permit holder with respect to the construction site shall be responsible for any cleanup of the
public rights of way or private property not under the permit holder's control, necessitated by any tracking or depositing of mud, dirt, sand, gravel, rock
or debris, or shall reimburse the city for any expenses incurred by the city to effectuate the cleanup. At a minimum, all public rights of way shall be
cleaned on a daily basis if sediment or debris has been tracked onto the road.
J. Construction ramps shall be constructed of material that will not erode or deteriorate under adverse conditions, and shall not be placed in a manner as
to interfere with or block the passage of stormwater runoff.
K. No debris, dirt, aggregate, or excavated materials, or construction supplies shall be placed on the public right of way unless specifically permitted by the
city of Sandpoint in writing. In addition, public sidewalks shall not be removed, blocked, or otherwise rendered unusable by construction activity,
equipment or materials, or portable toilets, unless a safe, usable alternate walkway, as approved by the city of Sandpoint, is placed on the same side of
the right of way by the contractor.
L. No owner or lessee of real property shall allow the property to be unoccupied, unused, vacant or undeveloped after the topsoil has been disturbed or the
natural cover removed, unless control measures are undertaken to prevent mud, sand, dirt and gravel, or other material from migrating off site and
entering the public right of way or a stormwater system.
M. All temporary erosion/sediment and construction waste control measures shall be removed after final site stabilization. Trapped sediment and other
disturbed soil areas resulting from the removal of temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized within twenty one (21) days from removal of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 294/303
temporary measures. (Ord. 1259, 11-16-2011)
11-3-8: GUARANTEE OF INSTALLATION:
No building permit, final plat approval, or other discretionary approval shall be granted until the implementation of the stormwater management plan has
been approved by the city engineer.
A. For new subdivisions, except as allowed by this code, no building permit will be issued until the stormwater management system, including, but not
limited to, vegetated swales, curbs and sidewalks, has been constructed for the developed portion and will accept the flow of stormwater as designed.
For all other cases, no certificate of occupancy will be issued until the stormwater management system has been installed and will accept the flow of
stormwater as designed.
B. If, in the judgment of the city engineer or his designee, project occupancy can be achieved without harm to the environment or potential occupants,
occupancy may proceed upon receipt of an acceptable guarantee of financial surety, pursuant to this code, to complete installation when weather
conditions or other variables allow. In no case shall such guarantee be allowed if the incomplete improvements would result in increased erosion,
sedimentation, or other damage to the development, public improvements, subsurface or surface waters, the proposed stormwater management
system or otherwise endanger the public health or safety.
C. At any time, the city may stop work on the installation of subdivision improvements, withhold further issuance of building permits in a development, stop
work on any individual building or development of any individual building site, or otherwise take steps necessary to protect the waters of the state from
damage as a result of development.
D. For commercial, industrial, and subdivision development, the owner may be required to provide an acceptable guarantee of financial surety, such as a
letter of credit or a bond, to the city prior to issuance of the stormwater management permit. The design professional shall provide an estimate of the
cost to implement the approved stormwater management system. Estimated costs shall be based upon the current local construction costs. The
financial guarantee shall be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated cost to complete the stormwater management system. Prior to release of
the financial guarantee, the applicant's design professional shall submit a letter to the city, approving the construction and certifying its completion. If
the required improvements have not been completed by the specified date, the city may contract to have the work completed with the money from the
financial guarantee. The city may also take additional enforcement measures as provided by law. (Ord. 1259, 11-16-2011)
11-3-9: ADOPTION OF SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION:
The city of Sandpoint may, by resolution, adopt additional design standards, definition of terminology, administrative procedures, etc., intended to
implement the general requirements and performance standards set forth in this chapter. Changes in the design standards may be accomplished by
subsequently adopted resolution. Such design standards may be complied with in alternative ways that will contribute to rational achievement of the
general requirements and performance standards set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1259, 11-16-2011)
11-3-10: PROPERTY OWNER'S MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY:
Unless other provisions are made in the process of development review and approval, responsibility for maintenance of stormwater management system
elements remains with the property owner, and violation of these maintenance requirements shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1259, 11-16-
2011)
11-3-11: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
No person shall damage, harm, fail to install, complete, or maintain, or otherwise impair the approved methods of transmission of stormwater to the
stormwater management system or any portion of a stormwater management system installed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1259, 11-16-2011)
11-3-12: ENFORCEMENT:
Provisions of this chapter may be enforced in one or more of the following manners:
A. All activities governed by these regulations shall be subject to inspection by the city. An approved set of plans must be available for review on site
whenever work is in progress. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to notify the city of the progress of the project and call the design
professional for all required inspections. The permittee's design professional shall perform the following inspections and submit inspection reports to
the city.
Minimum required inspections:
1. After erosion and sedimentation controls have been installed, prior to ground disturbance;
2. Monthly review of site inspection reports documenting erosion and sediment control measures and their maintenance;
3. After individual stormwater management system elements have been installed; and
4. After the project has been completed, including revegetation.
For sites which are active during the winter, two (2) additional inspections shall be required:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 295/303
5. After the site has been prepared for the winter (typically in September or October); and
6. Sometime in January or February to ensure that the erosion and sedimentation control measures are adequate and maintained.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of subsections 11-3-7C, D, E, F, and H of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished with penalties pursuant to Idaho Code section 18-113.
1. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed,
continued, or permitted by any such person, and he shall be punished accordingly.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and may
be punished with penalties pursuant to Idaho Code section 18-113A.
1. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed,
continued, or permitted by any such person, and he shall be punished accordingly.
D. By civil action to compel performance and completion of, or maintenance of, facilities installed pursuant to this chapter.
E. Denying, revoking, or suspending building permits or certificates of occupancy, as the case may be.
F. Occupancy of dwelling or building without an approved certificate of occupancy shall constitute a violation of this chapter in addition to any building or
zoning ordinance from which the occupancy requirement derives.
G. By any other method or remedy allowed by law. (Ord. 1259, 11-16-2011)
11-3-13: TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION:
A. All persons in charge of a construction site at the time of adoption hereof shall have one hundred twenty (120) days to obtain a city approved certificate
of training or an interim certificate. All subsequent site developments shall have a person immediately available possessing one of these certificates on
staff, with direct control and authority, upon the request of a city inspector.
Homeowners who are acting as their own general contractor and building their own home are exempt from needing to be certified or having a certified
person immediately available.
B. A training program must be approved by the city and must include educational materials on the following subjects:
1. Ecological and resource value of the waters of the state and the U.S.;
2. The proper and effective methods of erosion and sediment control implementation and maintenance, and the benefits of such;
3. Recognition of improperly implemented erosion and sediment control BMPs and the methods of correction;
4. The purpose and provisions of any laws, regulations, and ordinances on erosion and sediment control, including this chapter;
5. A description of sediment as a pollutant;
6. The processes of erosion, sediment transport, and sediment deposition;
7. The required responsibilities of supervisory and enforcement;
8. The effect of storms on erosion control measures;
9. Emergency remedial action;
10. Dewatering practices;
11. Management of hillsides;
12. Proper measures for areas subject to flooding, including those outside the floodplain; and
13. The difference between erosion control and sediment control.
C. Certifications from other cities, states, or associations may be accepted upon approval of the city, when the applicant can demonstrate the prior
certification was based on standards similar to those found in this chapter. (Ord. 1259, 11-16-2011)
11-3-14: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Required: Each applicant requiring the preparation of a stormwater management plan shall apply for a stormwater management permit.
B. Permit Fee: There shall be a fee for each permit application. The fee shall be as set by resolution of the city council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 296/303
C. Continuous Compliance: Approval of a stormwater management system plan and issuance of a permit does not relieve a person from the duty to
ensure continuous compliance with all conditions of the approved plan or permit, as well as all of the applicable provisions of this chapter and
appropriate state and federal requirements.
D. Suspension Or Revocation: The permit may be suspended or revoked by the city at any time if the site of construction activity is not in full compliance
with the conditions of the approved stormwater management system plan, the permit, and all the applicable provisions of this chapter; the permit was
issued in error; or the permit was based on incorrect information.
E. Expiration: A permit shall automatically expire and become null and void if the project for which the permit was issued is not commenced within a period
of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance, the project for which the permit was issued is suspended or abandoned for any reason
within the permit holder's control, or the time frame for conditions of a violation order has elapsed without compliance. The project shall not
recommence until the permit has been renewed. Such renewal will require submittal of intent to renew the permit, payment of the applicable fee, and
approval of the city. (Ord. 1259, 11-16-2011)
11-3-15: VARIANCE:
A variance from the requirements of this chapter or from the design standards adopted pursuant to this chapter may be granted only upon a showing of
undue hardship due to unique site characteristics, so long as those characteristics are not the result of any actions of the applicant. Said variance may be
granted by the city engineer or city council in such circumstances where the approval of the variance would not otherwise impair achievement of the
standards or purposes of this chapter, would not impose an additional burden upon adjoining or downstream lands or landowners, or otherwise disrupt the
scheme of stormwater management in the community. It shall be incumbent upon anyone requesting a variance to provide data showing that alternative
methods of stormwater handling proposed will produce comparable efficacy of the stormwater management measures required by this chapter. No
variance shall be issued unless all elements of this section are met. (Ord. 1259, 11-16-2011)
Chapter 4
URBAN RENEWAL PLANS
11-4-1: NORTHERN URBAN RENEWAL PLAN:
The city hereby adopts by reference ordinance 1140 approving the northern urban renewal plan, as approved by the Sandpoint city council by resolution
05-58 on September 21, 2005, encompassing the following described lands:
A Tract of land lying in a portion of Sections 3, 9, 10, 15 and 16, all in Township 57 North, Range 2 West, Boise Meridian, Bonner County, Idaho.
(Ord. 1140, 11-30-2005)
11-4-2: DOWNTOWN URBAN RENEWAL PLAN:
The city hereby adopts by reference ordinance 1141 approving the downtown urban renewal plan, as approved by the Sandpoint city council by resolution
05-64 adopted on October 19, 2005, encompassing the following described lands:
A Tract of land in a portion of Sections 22 & 23, all in Township 57 North, Range 2 West, Boise Meridian, Bonner County, Idaho.
(Ord. 1141, 11-30-2005)
Chapter 5
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
11-5-1: REGULATIONS:
The city hereby adopts by reference flood damage regulations as set out by ordinance 1221, as amended from time to time. A copy of these regulations is
on file with the city. (Ord. 1221, 10-21-2009)
Title 12
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE
Chapter 1
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE REGULATIONS
12-1-1: TITLE, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the CITY OF SANDPOINT DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE. The purpose of these
regulations is to prescribe the procedure whereby developers of land shall pay an impact fee as set forth in this chapter for the purpose of providing the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 297/303
public facilities and system improvements needed to serve future residents and users of such development. It is further the purpose of this chapter to:
1. Ensure that adequate facilities are available to serve new growth and development;
2. Promote orderly growth and development by establishing uniform standards by which the city may require that those who benefit from new growth
and development pay a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve new growth and development;
3. Ensure that those who benefit from new growth and development are required to pay no more than their proportionate share of the cost of public
facilities needed to serve new growth and development and to prevent duplicate and ad hoc development requirements;
4. Collect and expend development impact fees pursuant to the enabling powers granted by the provision of the Idaho development impact fee act, title
67, chapter 82, Idaho Code;
5. Provide the legal and procedural basis for the implementation of development impact fees within the area of city impact; and
6. Ensure that any capital improvement funded wholly or in part with impact fee revenue shall first be included in an approved capital improvements
plan that lists the capital improvements that may be funded with impact fee revenues as well as the estimated costs and timing for each
improvement.
B. As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless another meaning is plainly intended:
BEDROOM: A private room in a dwelling that is larger than one hundred (100) square feet gross floor area, including closet space, meets the
building code egress requirements of the international building code, is separable from other rooms by a door or door frame that can be used for a
standard door, does not have facilities or furnishings for cooking, eating, or laundering and is not solely a bathroom, a living room, a den/family room,
a kitchen, a dining room, a laundry room or a utility room for HVAC equipment.
BUILDING PERMIT: The permit required for new construction and additions.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS: Improvements with a useful life of twenty (20) years or more, by new construction or other action, which increase the
service capacity of a public facility, or service improvement.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN: A plan adopted and amended pursuant to the provisions of the Idaho development impact fee act, Idaho Code
section 67-8208, which identifies capital improvements for which development impact fees may be used as a funding source. The capital
improvements plan is included as part of the "2011 capital improvement plans and development impact fees" study prepared by TischlerBise, dated
September 28, 2011, along with all footnotes, exhibits, appendices, addenda, and other attachments referenced therein, a copy of which is on file
with the city clerk's office, and which is hereinafter referred to as "report" for purposes of this chapter.
CITY: The city of Sandpoint, a municipal corporation duly organized pursuant to the laws of the state of Idaho.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real property, the use of any principal structure or land, or any other activity that
requires issuance of a building permit, or manufactured/mobile home permit, which creates additional demand and need for public facilities.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: Any written duly authorized document from the city that authorizes the commencement of a development.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE: A payment of money imposed as a condition of development approval to pay for a proportionate share of the cost of
system improvements needed to serve the development. The proportionate share, including associated capacity demands, is included in the report.
This term is also referred to as an impact fee in this chapter. The term does not include the following:
1. A charge or fee to pay the administrative, plan review or inspection cost associated with permits required for development;
2. Connection or hookup charges;
3. Availability charges for drainage, sewer, water, or transportation charges for services provided directly to the development; or
4. Amounts collected from a developer in a transaction in which the city has incurred expenses in constructing capital improvements for the
development if the owner or developer has agreed to be financially responsible for the construction or installation of the capital improvements,
unless a written agreement is made pursuant to section 67-8209(4), Idaho Code, for credit or reimbursement.
DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENT: A requirement attached to a developmental approval or other governmental action approving or authorizing a
particular development project including, but not limited to, a rezoning, which requirement compels the payment, dedication or contribution of goods,
services, land, or money as a condition of approval.
EXTRAORDINARY COSTS: Those costs incurred as a result of an extraordinary impact.
EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT: An impact which is reasonably determined by the city to:
1. Result in the need for system improvements, the cost of which will significantly exceed the sum of the development impact fees to be generated
from the project or the sum agreed to be paid pursuant to a development agreement as allowed by section 67-8214(2), Idaho Code;
2. Result in the need for system improvements which are not identified in the capital improvements plan;
3. Have an impact which results in a lower than acceptable level of service.
FEE PAYER: That person who pays or is required to pay a development impact fee.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The sum of the areas of the several floors of the building or structure, including areas used for human occupancy or required
for the conduct of the business or use, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It does not include cellars, unenclosed porches, or attics
when not used for human occupancy, nor any floor space in an accessory building, carport, or the main building intended or designed for the parking
of motor vehicles in order to meet any city parking requirement nor nonresidential facilities; arcades, porticoes, and similar open areas which are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 298/303
located at or near street level, which are accessible to the general public, and which are not designed or used as sales, display, storage, service, or
production areas.
IMPACT FEE: See definition of Development Impact Fee.
LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS: A description of the service area and projections of land uses, densities, intensities, and population in the service area
over at least a twenty (20) year period.
LEVEL OF SERVICE: A measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for public facilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, constructed according to HUD/FHA manufactured home construction and safety standards, transportable in
one or more sections, which:
1. In the traveling mode, is eight feet (8') or more in width or is forty (40) body feet or more in length, or
2. When erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet; and
3. Is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities; and
4. Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein;
5. Except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with
respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with
the standards established under 42 USC 5401 et seq.
MOBILE HOME: A structure similar to a manufactured home, but built to a mobile home code prior to June 15, 1976, the date of enactment of the
federal manufactured housing and safety standards act (HUD code).
MODULAR BUILDING: Any building or building component, other than a manufactured/mobile home, which is constructed according to standards
contained in the applicable building code, as adopted or any amendments thereto, which is of closed construction and is either entirely or
substantially prefabricated or assembled at a place other than the building site.
PRESENT VALUE: The total current monetary value of past, present, or future payments, contributions or dedications of goods, services, materials,
construction, or money.
PROJECT: A particular development on an identified parcel of land.
PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS: In contrast to system improvements, project improvements are site improvements and facilities that are planned and
designed to provide service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use and the convenience of the occupants or users of
the project.
PROPORTIONATE SHARE: That portion of the cost of system improvements determined pursuant to the formula for assessment of impact fees set
forth in the report and in the fee resolution adopted by the city council to implement its provisions. The proportionate share of the costs attributable to
new development are based upon the plans and formulas made applicable through the report in a manner consistent with requirements of chapter
82, title 67, Idaho Code.
PUBLIC FACILITIES: Those types of improvements described in Idaho Code section 50-1703, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Parks, open space and recreation areas, and related capital improvements; and
2. Public safety facilities.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has
its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle.
SERVICE UNIT: A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation, or discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated in
accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a particular public facility category (i.e., parks, police) of capital
improvements.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS: In contrast to project improvements, means capital improvements to public facilities which are designed to provide
service to a service area including, and without limitation, the type of improvements described in section 50-1703, Idaho Code.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS COSTS: Costs incurred for construction or reconstruction of system improvements, including design, acquisition,
engineering and other costs attributable thereto, and also including, without limitation, the type of costs described in section 50-1702(h), Idaho Code,
to provide additional public facilities needed to service new growth and development. For clarification, system improvement costs do not include:
1. Construction, acquisition or expansion of public facilities other than capital improvements identified in the capital improvements plan;
2. Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements;
3. Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards;
4. Administrative and operating costs of the city unless such costs are attributable to development of the capital improvements plan, as provided in
section 67-8208, Idaho Code; or
5. Principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds or other indebtedness except financial obligations issued by or on behalf of
the city to finance capital improvements identified in the capital improvements plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 299/303
UNIT(S) OF DEVELOPMENT: A quantifiable increment of development activity measured in terms of dwelling units, or other appropriate
measurements contained in the impact fee schedule incorporated in the report. (Ord. 1264, 12-29-2011)
12-1-2: APPLICATION:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply uniformly to all those who benefit from new growth and development except as provided below.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
1. Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure that was destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, providing the structure is rebuilt and ready
for occupancy within two (2) years of its destruction;
2. Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not increase the number of service units;
3. Replacing a residential unit, including a modular building or manufactured/mobile home, with another residential unit on the same lot, provided that
the number of service units does not increase;
4. Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot;
5. Constructing an addition on a residential structure that does not increase the number of service units;
6. Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such as tennis courts or clubhouse, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the use
creates a significant impact on the capacity of system improvements;
7. Upon demonstration by fee payer by documentation such as utility bills and tax records, to the installation of a modular building,
manufactured/mobile home or recreational vehicle on that same lot or space for which a development impact fee has been paid previously, and as
long as there is no increase in service units.
C. An exemption must be claimed by the fee payer upon application for a building permit. Any exemption not so claimed shall be deemed waived by the
fee payer. Applications for exemption shall be submitted to and determined by the city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, within ninety (90)
days. Appeals of the city clerk's, or his or her duly designated agent, determination shall be made under the provisions of section 12-1-11, "Appeals", of
this chapter. (Ord. 1264, 12-29-2011)
12-1-3: COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEE:
A. The development impact fee shall be paid and collected at the time of issuance of a building permit or a manufactured/mobile home installation permit.
B. No building permit or other equivalent city approval shall be issued for "development" as herein defined unless the impact fee is paid pursuant to this
chapter.
C. A manufactured/mobile home unit may not locate on a manufactured/mobile home site unless the impact fee is paid pursuant to this chapter or has
been paid on a previous manufactured/mobile home unit on the same site.
D. In the event payment is dishonored, the city shall have all lawful remedies including, but not necessarily limited to, the withholding of utility services, the
imposition of reasonable interest and penalties, the imposition of liens pursuant to chapter 5, title 45, Idaho Code, the withholding of other city
approvals required for the development of other properties owned by the fee payer, and the issuance of "stop work" orders, and the revocation or
suspension of the building permit. (Ord. 1264, 12-29-2011)
12-1-4: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS:
The capital improvement projects to be financed by the impact fee are those as listed in the report, incorporated herein by reference, along with all
footnotes, exhibits, appendices, and other attachments referenced. (Ord. 1264, 12-29-2011)
12-1-5: CALCULATION OF IMPACT FEE:
A. Procedure: The city shall calculate the amount of the impact fee due for each building permit and manufactured/mobile home installation permit by the
procedure set forth in the "report".
B. Accounting Principles: The calculation of a development impact fee shall be in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A
development impact fee shall not be deemed invalid because payment of the fee may result in an incidental benefit to owners or developers within the
service area other than the person paying the fee.
C. Basis Of Fee: A development impact fee shall be calculated on the basis of the performance standard for public facilities adopted in this chapter and in
the report that are applicable to existing development as well as new growth and development. The construction, improvement, expansion or
enlargement of new or existing public facilities for which a development impact fee is imposed must be attributable to the capacity demands generated
by the new development.
D. Mix Of Uses: If the development for which a building permit is sought contains a mix of uses, the impact fee will be calculated for each type of use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 300/303
E. Certification: Prior to making an application for a building permit or manufactured/mobile home installation permit, a prospective applicant may request
in writing a written certification of the development impact fee schedule or individual assessment for a particular project which shall establish the
development fee for a period of one year from the date of certification. The certification shall include an explanation of facilities considered under
section 67-8207, Idaho Code. The certification shall specify the system improvement(s) for which the impact fee is intended to be used.
F. Individual Assessment: Individual assessment of impact fees is permitted in situations where the fee payer can demonstrate by clear and convincing
evidence that the established impact fee is inappropriate.
1. Individual assessments of development impact fees may be made by application to the city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, prior to
receiving building permits, manufactured/mobile home installation permits, or other necessary approvals from the city. The city clerk, or his or her
duly designated agent, shall evaluate such individual assessments under the guidelines provided for in subsection F4 of this section. If the guidelines
are met, the individual assessment shall be approved by the city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent. Any decision regarding a request for an
individual assessment shall be provided in writing to the applicant and a copy of said decision, along with supporting documentation, shall be
provided to the city council within thirty (30) days of the decision.
2. Late applications for individual assessments may be submitted within thirty (30) days after the receipt of a building permit only if the fee payer makes
a showing that the facts supporting such application were not known or discoverable prior to receipt of a building permit and that undue hardship
would result if said application is not considered.
3. The city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, shall render a written decision regarding the individual assessment and forward it to the city
council within thirty (30) days of the date a complete application is submitted. The decision of the city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, shall
establish the impact fee for the project in question for a period of one year from the date said decision becomes final.
4. The city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, shall evaluate an application for individual assessment and may approve the same if fee payer
has shown by clear and convincing evidence that the established impact fee is inappropriate and that the following facts and conditions exist:
a. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions apply to the development that does not apply generally to other properties in the vicinity
of the development.
b. An individual assessment is necessary for the reasonable and acceptable development of the property.
c. The approval of the individual assessment will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity in which the
development is located.
d. The approval of the individual assessment will not adversely affect the capital improvement plan for the city.
5. Appeals to the city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, determination of individual assessment shall be made to the city council by the filing of
an appeal with the city clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing, faxing, or personal delivery of written notice of the decision of the city clerk,
or his or her duly designated agent. Final determination regarding the appeal of individual assessments shall be made by the city council. (Ord. 1264,
12-29-2011)
12-1-6: METHODOLOGY FOR CALCULATION:
A. The amount of the impact fee shall be calculated using the methodology contained in the report.
B. A development impact fee shall not exceed a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements determined in accordance with section 67-8207,
Idaho Code. Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs.
C. A developer shall have the right to elect to pay a project's proportionate share of system improvement costs by payment of development impact fees
according to the fee schedule as full and complete payment of the development project's proportionate share of system improvement costs, except as
provided in section 67-8214(3), Idaho Code. The schedule of development impact fees for various land users per unit of development shall be as set
forth in the "report".
D. Proportionate share determination:
1. All development impact fees shall be based on the proportionate share, including associated capacity demands that are included in the report. The
proportionate share is the cost attributable to the new development after the city considers the following:
a. Any appropriate credit, offset, or contribution of money, dedication of land, or construction of system improvements;
b. Payments reasonably anticipated to be made by or as a result of a new development in the form of user fees, debt service payments, or taxes
which are dedicated for system improvements for which development impact fees would otherwise be imposed; and
c. All other available sources of funding such system improvements.
2. In determining the proportionate share of the cost of system improvements to be paid by the developer, the following factors shall be considered by
the city:
a. The cost of existing system improvements within the service area or areas;
b. The means by which existing system improvements have been financed;
c. The extent to which the new development will contribute to the cost of system improvements through taxation, assessments, or developer or
landowner contributions, or has previously contributed to the cost of system improvements through developer or landowner contributions;
d. The extent to which the new development is required to contribute to the cost of existing system improvements in the future;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 301/303
e. The extent to which the new development should be credited for providing system improvements, without charge to other properties within the
service area or areas;
f. Extraordinary costs, if any, incurred in serving the new development;
g. The time and price differential inherent in a fair comparison of fees paid at different times; and
h. The availability of other sources of funding system improvements including, but not limited to, user charges, general tax levies, intergovernmental
transfers, and special taxation. The city shall develop a plan for alternative sources of revenue, which shall include, but not necessarily be limited
to, plans generated during the city's annual budget process, lobbying efforts, tax increment financing, implementation of user fees and various
forms of utilities. (Ord. 1264, 12-29-2011)
12-1-7: ANNUAL ADJUSTMENT:
This chapter provides for an automatic annual adjustment to the impact fee based on the constructions materials index for Seattle, Washington. The
adjustment may increase or decrease the impact fee depending on the value of the index for that year. The annual effective date of this fee adjustment
shall coincide with the beginning date of the city's annual budget. (Ord. 1264, 12-29-2011)
12-1-8: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Transfer Of Funds To City Treasurer: Upon receipt of impact fees, the city treasurer, or his or her duly designated agent, shall be responsible for
placement of such funds into separate accounts as hereinafter specified. All such funds shall be deposited in interest bearing accounts, within the
capital projects fund, in a bank authorized to receive deposits of city funds. Interest earned by each account shall be credited to that account and shall
be used solely for the purposes specified for funds of such account.
B. Establishment And Maintenance Of Accounts: The city finance officer, or his or her duly designated agent, shall establish separate accounts and
maintain records for each such account whereby impact fees collected can be segregated.
C. Maintenance Of Records: The city finance officer, or his or her duly designated agent, shall maintain and keep accurate financial records for each such
account that shall show the source and disbursement of all revenues; that shall account for all monies received; that shall ensure that the disbursement
of funds from each account shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision of projects specified in the capital improvements plan; and that shall
provide an annual accounting for each impact fee account showing the source and amount of all funds collected and the projects that were funded.
D. Category For Fees: Development impact fees shall only be spent for the public facility category (i.e., parks, police, fire and circulation) of system
improvements for which the fees are collected and either within or for the benefit of the service area in which the project is located.
E. Review And Modification: Unless the city council deems some other time period is appropriate, the city shall at least once every five (5) years
commencing from the date of the original adoption of the capital improvement plan, review the development potential of the area and update the capital
improvements plan in accordance with the procedures set forth in Idaho Code section 67-8206. The city may make any updates as are deemed
necessary as a result of: 1) development occurring in the prior year; 2) capital improvements actually constructed; 3) changing facility needs; 4)
inflation; 5) revised cost estimates for capital improvements; 6) changes in the availability of other funding projects; and 7) such other factors as may be
relevant.
F. Capital Budget: The city shall annually adopt a capital budget.
G. Annual Report: As part of its annual audit process, the city shall prepare an annual report describing the amount of all development impact fees
collected, appropriated, or spent during the preceding year by category of public facility and service area.
H. Earmarking And Expenditure Of Fees: All other requirements of Idaho Code 67-8210, regarding earmarking and expenditure of collected development
impact fees, shall apply. (Ord. 1264, 12-29-2011)
12-1-9: CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENT:
A. In the calculation of development impact fees for a particular project, credit or reimbursement shall be given for the present value of any construction of
system improvements or contribution or dedication of land or money required by the city from a developer for system improvements of the public facility
category (i.e., parks, police, fire, circulation) for which the development impact fee is being collected. Credit or reimbursement shall not be given for
project improvements.
B. If a developer is required to construct, fund or contribute system improvements in excess of the development project's proportionate share of system
improvement costs, the developer shall receive a credit on future impact fees or be reimbursed at the developer's choice for such excess construction,
funding or contribution from development impact fees paid by future development which impacts the system improvements constructed, funded or
contributed by the developer(s) or fee payer. If a credit for the payment of future impact fees is requested, the credit shall be given only for the public
facility category that received system improvements in excess of the development's proportionate share.
C. If credit or reimbursement is due to the developer pursuant to this section, the city shall enter into a written agreement, with the fee payer, negotiated in
good faith, prior to the construction, funding, or contribution. The agreement shall provide for the amount of credit or the amount, time and form of
reimbursement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 302/303
D. No credits shall be given for the construction of local on site facilities, structures, improvements, or other project improvements required by zoning,
subdivision, or other city regulations unless the improvement is identified in the "report" as a system improvement.
E. Any person requesting such credit or reimbursement shall submit their request in writing on a form provided by the city and present documentation of
costs or payments for facilities to the city clerk or his or her duly designated agent prior to issuance of a building permit or manufactured/mobile home
installation permit. The determination shall be made no more than forty five (45) days after complete documentation is submitted to the city clerk or his
or her duly designated agent. Any appeal from such a determination by the city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, shall be pursuant to section
12-1-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 1264, 12-29-2011)
12-1-10: REFUNDS:
A. The current owner or contract purchaser of property on which an impact fee has been paid may request a refund of such fee if:
1. Service is available but never provided;
2. The project for which a building permit has been used has been lawfully altered resulting in a decrease in the amount of the impact fee due;
3. The city, after collecting the fee when service is not available, has failed to appropriate and expend the collected development impact fees pursuant
to section 67-8210(4) Idaho Code;
4. A building permit or permit for installation of a manufactured/mobile home is denied or abandoned.
B. The request for refund must be filed in writing and submitted to the city clerk or his or her duly designated agent on a form provided by the city for such
purpose. The owner shall provide such documentation as the city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, may require proving such satisfaction,
reconveyance, or releases from contract sellers, mortgagees, lienholders, and/or others having an interest in the real property for which an impact fee
has been paid.
C. A request for refund must be filed within the time allowed by law.
D. Within ninety (90) days of the date of receipt of a request for refund, the city clerk or his or her duly designated agent must provide the owner, in writing,
with a decision on the refund request including the reasons for the decision. If a right to refund exists, the city is required to send a refund to the owner
of record within ninety (90) days after it is determined that a refund is due. A refund shall include a refund of interest at one-half (1/2) the legal rate
provided for in section 28-22-104, Idaho Code.
E. Owner may appeal the determination of the city clerk, or his or her duly designated agent, to the city council pursuant to the provisions in section 12-1-
11 of this chapter. (Ord. 1264, 12-29-2011)
12-1-11: APPEALS:
A. A developer or fee payer may appeal the written determination of the applicability and amount of the development impact fee, or refund, or any
discretionary action or inaction by or on behalf of the city to the city council.
B. The developer or fee payer must file a notice of appeal to the city council with the city clerk within thirty (30) days following the written determination,
discretionary action, or inaction. When filing an appeal, the fee payer shall submit a letter providing a full explanation of the request, the reason for
appeal, as well as all supporting documentation.
C. The filing of an appeal shall not stay required payment of the impact fee, however, a fee payer can pay a development impact fee under protest in order
to obtain development approval or building permit.
D. Upon voluntary agreement by the fee payer and the city, any disagreement related to the impact fee for the proposed development may be mediated by
a qualified independent party.
1. Mediation may take place at any time during the appeals process and participation in mediation does not preclude the fee payer from pursuing other
remedies provided for in this chapter.
2. The fee payer and the city shall share mediation costs equally. (Ord. 1264, 12-29-2011)
12-1-12: EXTRAORDINARY IMPACTS:
In determining the proportionate share of the cost of system improvements to be paid by the developer, the city clerk or his or her duly designated agent
shall consider whether any extraordinary costs will be incurred in serving the development based upon an "extraordinary impact" as defined in section 12-
1-1 of this chapter. This determination shall be made prior to issuance of any permit for development and shall be paid prior to any such issuance except
as may be provided pursuant to a private agreement between the parties as authorized by Idaho Code section 67-8214.
If the city clerk or his or her duly designated agent determines that the development will result in an extraordinary impact, it shall advise the fee payer in
writing what the extraordinary impact is, the reason for the extraordinary impact, and the estimated costs to be incurred as a result of the extraordinary
impact.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=437 303/303
Nothing in this chapter shall obligate the city to approve any development that results in extraordinary impact.
The fee payer may appeal the determination of an extraordinary impact or the amount of extraordinary costs incurred in writing by filing a notice of appeal
to the city council with the city clerk pursuant to the terms set forth in section 12-1-11, "Appeals", of this chapter. When filing an appeal, the fee payer shall
submit a letter providing the reason for the appeal along with supporting documentation. The city council shall consider the appeal and make a final
determination within ninety (90) days of receipt of the written appeal. (Ord. 1264, 12-29-2011)
12-1-13: ADOPTION OF THE REPORT; CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN:
The report, titled "2011 capital improvement plans and development impact fees" study prepared by TischlerBise, dated September 28, 2011, along with all
footnotes, exhibits, appendices, addenda, and other attachments referenced therein, all of which are, by this reference, incorporated herein as if set forth
fully, is hereby adopted as the technical foundation upon which Sandpoint development impact fees are to be based. A description of acceptable levels of
service for system improvements is described in the report. (Ord. 1264, 12-29-2011)
12-1-14: BONDING:
Funds pledged toward retirement of bonds, revenue certificates, or other obligations of indebtedness for such projects may include impact fees and other
city revenues as may be allocated by the city council. (Ord. 1264, 12-29-2011)
12-1-15: EFFECTS ON CITY DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density of development, design and improvement standards and
requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of capital improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or
other regulations of the city, which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development. (Ord. 1264,
12-29-2011)
12-1-16: OTHER POWERS AND RIGHTS NOT AFFECTED:
A. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from requiring a developer to construct reasonable project improvements in conjunction with a development
project.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent or prohibit private agreements between property owners and developers, the Idaho transportation
department, the city, and other governmental entities in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements or providing for credits or
reimbursements for system improvement costs incurred by a developer including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for
project improvements which are used or shared by more than one development project. If it can be shown that a proposed development has a direct
impact on a public facility under the jurisdiction of the Idaho transportation department, then the agreement shall include a provision for the allocation of
impact fees collected from the developer for the improvement of the public facility by the Idaho transportation department.
C. Nothing herein shall obligate the city to approve development that results in an extraordinary impact. Extraordinary impacts shall be determined and
processed pursuant to section 12-1-12 of this chapter.
D. Nothing herein shall obligate the city to approve a development request that may reasonably be expected to reduce levels of service below minimum
acceptable levels established in the development impact fee ordinance. To this end, the city may impose a development impact fee for system
improvement costs incurred subsequent to adoption of the ordinance to the extent that new growth and development will be served by the system
improvements.
E. Nothing herein shall be construed to create any additional right to develop real property or diminish the power of the city in regulating the orderly
development of real property.
F. Nothing herein shall work to limit the use by the city of the power of eminent domain or supersede or conflict with requirements or procedures authorized
in the Idaho Code for local improvement districts or general obligation bond issues.
G. Nothing herein shall restrict or diminish the power of the city to annex property into its territorial boundaries or exclude property from its territorial
boundaries upon request of a developer or owner, or to impose reasonable conditions thereon, including the recovery of project or system improvement
costs required as a result of such voluntary annexation. (Ord. 1264, 12-29-2011)