ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 09/04/18
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article I Name and Scope of Code
Section 1-101 How Code Designated and Cited
Section 1-102 Effect of Code
Section 1-103 Reference to Section Number
Section 1-104 Repealing Clause
Section 1-105 Enacting Style of Ordinances
Section 1-106 Matter Adopted by Reference
Section 1-107 Maintenance of the Code
Article II Recordation and Amendments
Section 1-201 Recordation and Memorandum of Ordinances - Required
Section 1-202 Same - To Be Prima Facie Evidence of Contents, etc.
Section 1-203 Amendments
Article III Definitions
Section 1-301 Definitions
Article IV Rules of Construction
Section 1-401 Intent
Section 1-402 Catchlines of Sections
Section 1-403 Constructions of Words
Section 1-404 Effect of Repeal or Repealing Ordinances
Section 1-405 Delegation of Authority
Article V Penalties
Section 1-501 General Penalties
Section 1-502 Amendment of Section Subject to Penalty
Section 1-503 Offense Having Two Penalties
Section 1-504 Offenses Under Repealed Provisions
Section 1-505 Severability of Parts of this Code
Article VI Ethics
Section 1-601 Statement of Policy
Section 1-602 Statement of Economic Disclosure Form Required
Section 1-603 Statement of Economic Disclosure Form
Section 1-604 Campaign Contributions - Individuals
Section 1-605 Campaign Contributions - Organizations
Section 1-606 Conflict of Interest
Section 1-607 Disclosure of Campaign Contributions
Section 1-608 Filing of Complaints
Section 1-609 Penalties for Violation
Section 1-610 Applicability of State Law
Article VII State Officials and Employees Ethics Act
Section 1-701 Adoption of Act
Section 1-702 Existing Ethics Provisions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-2 REVISED 01/16/18
Section 1-703 Future Amendments to the Act
Section 1-704 Future Declaration of Unconstitutionality of the Act
Article VIII Membership in Organizations
Section 1-801 Board of Trustees
Section 1-802 Village Administration
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
1-3 REVISED 06/03/13
Ord. #13-028)
Article I Name and Scope of Code
Section 1-101 How Code Designated and Cited. The ordinances contained in this and following
chapters shall constitute and be designated as the "Municipal Code of Arlington Heights, Illinois,
1995", and may be so cited.
Section 1-102 Effect of Code. This Code is a comprehensive amendment and recodification of the
general ordinances of the Village and completely supersedes the Municipal Code of Arlington
Heights, 1965, and all general ordinances passed by the Board of Trustees prior to the effective date
of this Code, including any prior ordinance provisions in conflict with this Code, except those that
are, by reference, expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect.
Section 1-103 Reference to Section Number. Reference to any section of this Code shall be
understood to include the penalty section relating thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
Section 1-104 Repealing Clause. All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the effective
date of this Code, except those that are expressly exempted from repeal and except those that are
referred to as being still in force, are hereby repealed. The following ordinances are hereby expressly
exempted from repeal at this time:
a. Chapter 28 of the Municipal Code of Arlington Heights, 1985, as amended, entitled “Zoning
Regulations.”
b. Chapter 29 of the Municipal Code of Arlington Heights, 1965, as amended, entitled
Subdivision Control Regulations.”
Section 1-105 Enacting Style of Ordinances. The enacting style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it
ordained by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Arlington Heights."
Section 1-106 Matter Adopted by Reference. Copies of all statutes, codes, technical codes, public
records and other matters adopted by reference, in whole or in part or as modified in this Code, shall
be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk prior to adoption in accordance with State law and
be kept on file after adoption and available for use, inspection and examination by the public.
Section 1-107 Maintenance of the Code. The Legal Department shall be responsible for
maintaining the Code, including distribution of copies as requested, and updates as needed.
Article II
Recordation and Amendments
Section 1-201 Recordation and Memorandum of Ordinances - Required. All ordinances passed
by the Village Board shall be consecutively numbered. The Clerk shall maintain records of all
ordinances passed as well as any required proof of publication of the ordinances.
Section 1-202 Same - To Be Prima Facie Evidence of Contents, etc. The record required by the
preceding section, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage
and the publication or posting of ordinances.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-4 REVISED 06/03/13
Section 1-203 Amendments. Any additions or amendments to this Code, when passed in such form
as to indicate the intention of the Village Board to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to
be incorporated in this Code so that a reference to the "Municipal Code of Arlington Heights" shall
be understood to include them.
Article III Definitions
Section 1-301 Definitions.
a. Board of Trustees or Village Board. The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Arlington Heights.
b. Code. The Municipal Code of Arlington Heights, Illinois, 1995, as amended.
c. Municipal Code of Arlington Heights, Illinois, 1995. The ordinances contained in this bound
volume as well as any later amendments passed by the Village Board.
d. Person. Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, company, association or corporation
in his, her or its own capacity or as administrator, conservator, executor, trustee, receiver or
other representative appointed by a court; and when the word "person" is used in any section
of this Code prescribing a penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or associations, the word
shall include the partners or members thereof, and such term as applied to corporations shall
include the officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for any violation.
e. Village. The Village of Arlington Heights, a body politic and a municipal corporation
organized under the laws of the State of Illinois.
Article IV
Rules of Construction
Section 1-401 Intent. All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Code
shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Board of Trustees maybe
fully carried out.
Section 1-402 Catchlines of Sections. The catchlines of any of the sections of this Code printed in
boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles of sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
re-enacted.
Section 1-403 Constructions of Words.
a. Whenever any words in any section in this Code import the plural number, the singular shall
be deemed to be included, and whenever the singular number shall be used, it shall be
deemed to include the plural.
b. Whenever the masculine gender is used in this Code, females as well as males shall be
deemed to be included.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
1-5 REVISED 06/03/13
c. Words in the present tense shall be deemed to include the future tense.
d. The words "written" and "in writing" may include printing or other mechanical methods of
reproduction.
e. The word "shall" as used in this Code is mandatory.
Section 1-404 Effect of Repeal or Repealing Ordinances. When any ordinance, repealing any
former ordinance, clause or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed as
to revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
Section 1-405 Delegation of Authority. Whenever authority is given to a Village official by the
provisions of this Code, that authority may be delegated by the official to a duly authorized
representative unless otherwise specifically provided, but that delegation of authority shall not
relieve the official from primary responsibility to fulfill any duty imposed by this Code.
Article V Penalties
Section 1-501 General Penalties. Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the Village, any act
is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or
ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provisions of this Code or
any such ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
Section 1-502 Amendment of Section Subject to Penalty. In the case of amendment of any section
of this Code containing provisions for which a penalty is provided in another section, the penalty
provided in the other section shall be held to relate to the section amended, whether re-enacted in the
amendatory ordinance or not, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein.
Section 1-503 Offense Having Two Penalties. In all cases where the same offense is made
punishable or is created by different sections of this Code, the Village Prosecutor may elect under
which to proceed; but not more than one conviction shall be had against the same person for the
same offense.
Section 1-504 Offenses Under Repealed Provisions.
a. Unless otherwise expressly provided, no new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former
ordinance, whether the former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against the former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment incurred, or claims arising under the former ordinance, or in anywaywhatever to
affect any such offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
so incurred, or claims arising before the new ordinance takes effect, except that the
proceedings thereafter shall conform, so far as practicable, to the ordinances in force at the
time of such proceeding. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment will be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance that provision may, by the consent of the party affected, be
applied to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance takes effect.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-6 REVISED 01/16/18
b. This Section shall extend to all repeals either by express words or implication whether the
repeal is in the ordinance making any new provision upon the same subject or any other
ordinance.
c. Nothing contained in the preceding section shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village repealed; or as
discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting
the liability of any person; or as waiving any right of the Village under any section or
provisions of any ordinance existing at the time of the passage of this Code.
Section 1-505 Severability of Parts of this Code. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause,
phrase or word of this Code be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, that invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining
words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code.
Ord. #18-001)
Article VI Ethics
Section 1-601 Statement of Policy. It is the policy of the Village of Arlington Heights that its
elected and appointed officials should, in all cases, exercise their judgment and perform their duties
for the sole benefit of the citizens of the Village of Arlington Heights. To this end, all such persons
should avoid accepting or retaining any economic benefits or opportunities which could impair or
present an actual threat to the exercise of independent judgment. It is the responsibility of all elected
and appointed officials to maintain the highest standards of ethical behavior by acting with steadfast
integrity, unconditional impartiality and a total devotion to the best interests of the Village and its
residents. The Village Board hereby determines that the adoption of an ordinance setting forth ethical
principles and regulations applicable to public officials is in the best interests of the Village of
Arlington Heights and will contribute to the public confidence in the integrity, ability and
performance of public officials.
In addition to the provisions of this Article, the Village Manager is directed and authorized to
promulgate rules and regulations relating to outside employment, conflict of interest, or other ethical
matters deemed necessary, which shall be applicable to all Village employees. Such rules and
regulations do not apply to the elected officials and officials appointed by the Mayor, as they are not
employees. The Village Manager shall prepare all forms for statements required by this Article and
the forms shall be distributed to persons subject to this Article not later than 30 days prior to the date
set for filing.
Section 1-602 Statement of Economic Disclosure Form Required. On or before May 1 of each
calendar year, all elected officials, all appointed officials, and all members of boards and commissions
of the Village who have been appointed by the President and Board of Trustees shall file a
Village Statement of Economic Disclosure with the Village Clerk. In addition, Village employees
who meet any of the following criteria must also file the Village Statement of Economic Disclosure
with the Village Clerk on or before May 1 of each calendar year:
a. are, or function as, the head of a department, division, bureau, or other administrative unit
within the Village, or who exercise similar authority within the Village;
b. have direct supervisory authority over, or direct responsibility for the formulation,
negotiation, issuance or execution of contracts entered into by the Village in the amount of
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
1-7 REVISED 09/04/18
1,000 or greater;
c. have authority to approve licenses and permits by the Village; this item does not include
employees who function in a ministerial capacity;
d. adjudicate, arbitrate, or decide any judicial or administrative proceeding, or review the
adjudication, arbitration or decision of any judicial or administrative proceeding within the
authority of the Village;
e. have authority to issue or promulgate rules and regulations within areas under the authority
of the Village; or
f. have supervisory responsibility for 20 or more employees of the Village.
Section 1-603 Statement of Economic Disclosure Form. The Statement of Economic Disclosure
form shall require the following information, as described in detail on the form:
a. Disclosure of Ownership of Real Estate
b. Disclosure of Loans
c. Disclosure of Ownership of Business Interests Conducting Business with the Village
d. Disclosure of Other Employment
Ord. #18-032)
Section 1-604 Campaign Contributions – Individuals.
a. No individual may make a contribution or contributions to a candidate, or a committee
supporting a candidate, for the office of Village President or Village Trustee in a total
amount greater than $500 for any single campaign.
b. No candidate, or a committee supporting a candidate, for the office of Village President or
Village Trustee may accept a contribution or contributions from an individual in a total
amount greater than $500 for any single campaign.
c. This Section does not apply to contributions made for political speech independent of any
candidate campaign or to contributions from a candidate for his or her own campaign.
d. For purposes of this Section, the word “contribution” means money, loans, debts incurred,
property-in-kind, or other things having a monetary value that is incurred or received by the
candidate or by persons directly involved with the candidate. The word “contribution” does
not include an activity to which an individual is invited in his or her official capacity.
Ord. #18-032)
Section 1-605 Campaign Contributions – Organizations.
a. No organization may make a contribution or contributions to a candidate, or a committee
supporting a candidate, for the office of Village President or Village Trustee in a total
amount greater than $1,000 for any single campaign.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-8 REVISED 09/04/18
b. No candidate, or committee supporting a candidate, for the office of Village President or
Village Trustee may accept a contribution or contributions from an organization in a total
amount greater than $1,000 for any single campaign.
c. This Section does not apply to contributions made for political speech independent of any
candidate campaign or to contributions from a candidate for his or her own campaign.
d. For purposes of this Section, the word “contribution” means money, loans, debts incurred,
property-in-kind, or other things having a monetary value that is incurred or received by the
candidate or by persons directly involved with the candidate. The word “contribution” does
not include an activity to which an individual is invited in his or her official capacity.
e. For purposes of this Section, the word “organization” means any organized entity such as a
corporation, partnership, association, committee, or similar entity, but not including a
candidate’ s political committee or any independent non-candidate political committee.
Section 1-606 Conflict of Interest. The Village President and Village Trustees shall, at all times,
avoid the appearance of impropriety. No elected or appointed official or employee of the Village,
whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction or shall have a financial or other
personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official
duties in the public interest or would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the
performance of his official duties. When recusing oneself on any matter, the elected official shall
state the reason for such recusal.
Section 1-607 Disclosure of Campaign Contributions. All statements of campaign contributions
required to be filed by state law shall be filed with the Village Clerk concurrently with their filing
with the State. This includes statements required to be filed by state law by political action
committees or other organizations concerning campaign contributions.
Section 1-608 Filing of Complaints. The Village Manager is authorized to receive all complaints
made against individuals subject to this Article. Each complaint shall be submitted to the In-House
Counsel for investigation. Upon a review of the evidence, the In-House Counsel shall prepare a
written report for the Board of Trustees. If the In-House Counsel determines that the complaint is not
sustained, he or she shall so state in the recommendation. If he or she determines that the complaint
is sustained, the report shall include recommendations for such administrative or legal action as
deemed appropriate. The Board shall then review the report and recommendations of the In-House
Counsel, and, by majority vote including the President, determine what action, if any, is to be taken
in accordance with the provisions of this Article. If it is a member of the Board of Trustees who is
accused, that member shall not participate in the vote. In the event no violation is found, complaint
files shall be open for public inspection to the extent required by State law. However, the person
making the complaint shall be notified in writing of the decision of the Board of Trustees. To the
extent that it is practical to do so, an elected official should use his or her best efforts to notify, in
writing, other elected Village officials prior to filing a complaint or charges against any Village
official.
Section 1-609 Penalties for Violation. Any person subject to the provisions of this Article who
violates any of its provisions shall be subject to the following sanctions and/or penalties:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
1-9 REVISED 01/16/18
a. The Village Board, after review of the In-House Counsel’ s recommendations and
conclusions, may take the appropriate corrective or disciplinary action against any person
who is subject to the terms of this Article and who is found to have violated the provisions
thereof.
b. In appropriate circumstances, the Village Board maydirect that appropriate legal proceedings
be commenced for the purpose of removal from office.
c. The Village Board may recommend a judicial proceeding to be brought, and if the person is
found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be guilty of knowingly violating any of the
provisions of this Article, or furnishing false, misleading, or incomplete information during
the investigation with the intent to mislead, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $750 for any one offense.
Section 1-610 Applicability of State Law. Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to in any way
restrict the application of any state statute or any common law provision with respect to conflict of
interest, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office which would otherwise be applicable to any person
subject to the provisions of this Article. The provisions of this Article shall be deemed additional
requirements and shall in no way be construed as a derogation under home rule of present statutory
penalties and other local remedies for acts prohibited in this Article.
Ord. #99-044, #04-032)
Article VII State Officials and Employees Ethics Act
Section 1-701 Adoption of Act.
a. The regulations of Sections 5-15 (5 ILCS 430/5-15) and Article 10 (5 ILCS 430/10-10 through
10-40) of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter
referred to as the “Act” in this Section) are hereby adopted byreference and made applicable to
the officers and employees of the Village to the extent required by 5 ILCS 430/70-5.
b. The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the Act, by
any officer or any employee of the Village, is hereby prohibited.
c. The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee of
the Village under the Act, is hereby prohibited.
d. The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by any officer or employee
of the Village, is hereby prohibited.
e. For purposes of this Section, the terms “officer” and “employee” shall be defined as set forth
in 5 ILCS 430/70-5 (c).
f. The penalties for violations of this Section shall be the same as those penalties set forth in 5
ILCS 430/50-5 for similar violations of the Act.
Section 1-702 Existing Ethics Provisions. This Section does not repeal or otherwise amend or
modify any existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of Village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-10 REVISED 06/03/13
Section, however, the provisions of this Section shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5
ILCS 430/70-5(a).
Section 1-703 Future Amendments to the Act. Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective
after the effective date of this Section shall be incorporated into this Section byreference and shall be
applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political
activities. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this Section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the Village.
Section 1-704 Future Declaration of Unconstitutionality of the Act.
a. If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this Section
shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois Supreme Court’ s decision becomes final and not
subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This Section shall be deemed repealed without
further action bythe Corporate Authorities of the Village if the Act is found unconstitutional by
the Illinois Supreme Court.
b. If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act unconstitutional but upholds the
constitutionality of the remainder of the Act, or does not address the remainder of the Act, then
the remainder of the Act as adopted by this Section shall remain in full force and effect;
however, that part of this Section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be
deemed repealed without further action by the Corporate Authorities of the Village.
Ord. #99-044)
Article VIII Membership in Organizations
Section 1-801 Board of Trustees. The Village of Arlington Heights and the Board of Trustees, as
an entity shall only participate in intergovernmental organizations. Such memberships shall be
approved or disapproved as a part of the budget process. Individual trustees and members of the
Village Administration may join and serve on the boards of other organizations without implying
membership by the Village, if such membership creates no conflict of interest as provided in Article
VII of this Chapter.
Section 1-802 Village Administration. The Village Administration mayparticipate in professional
and technical organizations. The Village Manager shall designate such membership for approval or
disapproval as a part of the budget process.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 06/03/13
CHAPTER 2 – ELECTED OFFICERS
Article I The Village President
Section 2-101 Election and Term of Office
Section 2-102 Duties: Presiding Officer; Official Head
Section 2-103 Oath and Salary
Section 2-104 President Pro Tem
Section 2-105 Vacancy in the Office of Village President
Article II The Board of Trustees
Section 2-201 Composition; Election; Powers
Section 2-202 Quorum; Meetings
Section 2-203 Committee of the Whole
Section 2-204 Village Board Meetings
Section 2-205 Citizens to be Heard
Section 2-206 Rules of Procedure
Section 2-207 Oath and Compensation
Section 2-208 Powers and Duties
Section 2-209 Vacancy in the Office of Trustee
Section 2-210 Commencement of Term of Office
Article III Other Appointed Officers
Section 2-301 Recall of Elected Officers
ELECTED OFFICERS
2-2
Article I The Village President
Section 2-101 Election and Term of Office. The Village President shall be elected by the electors
of the Village for a term of four years, and shall be the President of the Board of Trustees as provided
by Statute.
Section 2-102 Duties: Presiding Officer; Official Head. The Village President shall preside at all
meetings of the Village Board and on all ceremonial occasions. The Village President shall be
recognized as the official head of the Village by the courts for the purpose of serving civil process
and by the Governor for all legal purposes.
a. The Village President may vote on all questions coming before the Village Board. The
Village President shall vote: 1) where the vote of the Trustees has resulted in a tie; 2) where
one-half of the Trustees elected have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution or motion
even though there is no tie vote; or 3) where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate
authorities is required by the Illinois Municipal Code to adopt an ordinance, resolution or
motion. Nothing in this Section shall deprive an acting President or President pro tem from
voting in his or her capacity as Trustee, but he or she shall not be entitled to another vote in
his or her capacity as acting President or President pro tem. The President shall have the
power to administer oaths upon all lawful occasions and shall be a conservator of the peace.
The President shall perform other duties and exercise other powers as may be imposed upon
him or her by the Municipal Code and the Statutes of the State of Illinois. The President
shall devote to the duties of office whatever time faithful discharge thereof may require.
b. President may veto. All resolutions and motions: 1) which create any liability against the
Village, or 2) which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, or 3) to sell
any Village or school property, and all ordinances, passed by the Board shall be deposited
with the Village Clerk. If the President of the Board of Trustees approves of them, he or she
shall sign them. Those of which he or she disapproves shall be returned to the Board, with
his or her written objections, at the next regular meeting of the Board occurring not less than
five days after their passage. The President may disapprove of any one or more sums
appropriated in any ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation, and, if so, the
remainder shall be effective. However, the President may disapprove entirely of an
ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation. If the President fails to return any
ordinance or any specified resolution or motion with written objections, within the
designated time, it shall become effective despite the absence of the President’ s signature.
c. Board may override President's veto. Every resolution and motion, specified in Section 2-
102 b., and every ordinance which is returned to the Board by the President shall be
reconsidered by the Board. If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds of the Trustees elected
to the Village Board agree to pass an ordinance, resolution, or motion, notwithstanding the
President's refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective. The vote on the question of
passage over the President's veto shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be recorded in the
journal of proceedings.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
2-3 REVISED 07/06/09
Ord. #96-061)
Section 2-103 Oath and Salary. Before entering upon the duties of office, the President shall take
the oath of office prescribed by statute for municipal officers, and shall receive an annual salary of
8,500 and no other compensation shall be allowed for that office. Any ordinance providing for a
change in the compensation of the Village President shall be adopted no less than 180 days before
the beginning of the term of the Village President.
Section 2-104 President Pro Tem. On the second Monday in May, following each Village election,
the Board of Trustees shall elect one of its members to act as President pro tem, who shall, during the
absence of or disability of the President, act as presiding officer of all meetings of the Village Board.
The Trustee elected to serve as President pro tem must have served as a Trustee on the Village
Board for at least two years prior to election as President Pro Tem. The Trustee elected as President
pro tem shall be selected only from those Trustees who have been duly elected by the citizens of the
Village. In order to allow for consideration of the recommendation before the Committee-of-the-
Whole meeting, the Village President's recommendation for President pro tem shall be distributed to
each Trustee not later than the Friday preceding the May Committee-of-the-Whole meeting.
Ord. #09-020)
Section 2-105 Vacancy in the Office of Village President. Whenever a vacancy in the office of
Village President occurs during his or her term, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the
term at the next election of Trustees. During the period of time from the time the vacancy occurs,
the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term at the next election of Trustees. During the
period of time from the time the vacancy occurs until a President is elected and has qualified, the
Board of Trustees shall fill the vacancy by the election of an Acting President.
Article II The Board of Trustees
Section 2-201 Composition; Election; Powers. The Board of Trustees shall consist of the President
and eight Trustees. They shall constitute the corporate authorities of the Village of Arlington
Heights. The President shall be elected by the electors of the Village for a four-year term. The
Trustees shall be elected at the regular Village election to be held in each odd numbered year. The
powers of the Board shall be purely legislative except as otherwise provided by statute or ordinance.
The Board shall approve for payment all expenses and liabilities of the Village.
Section 2-202 Quorum; Meetings. A majority of the corporate authorities, being five members,
shall constitute a quorum to do business. A smaller number, however, may adjourn from time to
time. The affirmative majority vote of at least three members shall be necessary for the adoption of
any resolution or motion unless a greater number is required by statute.
a. Regular Meetings. The regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be held on the first
and third Mondays of each month at the hour of 8:00 P.M. All meetings shall be held at the
Village Hall except as otherwise determined by the Board. Meetings may be adjourned to a
date certain by vote of the Board.
b. Special Meetings: Notice. The President or any four Trustees may call a Special Meeting by
giving notice, in writing, served personally, or by registered mail, upon all members of the
Board at least 48 hours prior to the time set for the Special Meeting. The notice shall specify
ELECTED OFFICERS
2-4 REVISED 03/07/16
the time and place of the Special Meeting and the matters to be considered at the meeting.
Notice to the members of the Board may be waived by attendance at the meeting or by
written waiver of notice. Matters not specified in the notice may not be considered at the
Special Meeting unless all members of the Board are present and unanimous consent is given
for consideration of such matters. No vote of the Board of Trustees shall be reconsidered or
rescinded at a Special Meeting unless there are present at the Special Meeting as many
Trustees as were present when the vote was taken. Special Meetings mayalso be called by a
motion, adopted at a regular meeting, specifying the matters to be considered. No notice to
the members of the Board shall be required for such meetings except to members not present
at the time such motion was adopted.
c. Village Clerk to Issue Notices. The Village Clerk shall give the Notices required in this
Section and shall specify that the President or four named Trustees are calling the meeting.
Ord. #96-030, #02-038, # 12-038)
Section 2-203 Committee of the Whole.
a. Meetings. The Board of Trustees shall meet as a Committee-of-the-Whole on the second
Monday of each month and, prior to the regular Village Board meeting, as needed. In
addition, the Board may also meet as a Committee-of-the Whole at such other times as it
determines necessary.
b. Functions of the Committee-of-the-Whole. The Committee-of-the-Whole shall be concerned
solely with the formation of policy. Whenever policy and administration overlap, every
effort shall be made by the Committee-of-the-Whole to collaborate and coordinate with the
Village Manager.
c. Liaison with Boards and Commissions. The Committee-of-the-Whole shall be liaison and
monitor the activities of the appointed Boards and Commissions. Each Board and
Commission shall meet with the Committee-of-the-Whole as directed by the Committee.
d. Special Committees. Matters of a special or extraordinary nature may be referred to a
Special Committee by a majority vote of the President and Board of Trustees. Such Special
Committees shall be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees.
Ord. #99-043, #06-080, # 13-028, #16-004)
Section 2-204 Village Board Meetings. The following shall be the procedures for Village Board
meetings:
a. Order of Business. The Order of Business to be observed at all meetings of the Village
Board shall be as follows, except that a majority vote of all Trustees present maysuspend the
following order of business:
I. Call to Order
II. Pledge of Allegiance
III. Roll Call of Members
IV. Approval of Minutes
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
2-5 REVISED 03/07/16
V. Accounts Payable
VI. Recognitions and Presentations
VII. Public Hearings
VIII. Citizens to be Heard
IX. Old Business
X. Consent Agenda
XI. Approval of Bids
XII. New Business
XIII. Legal
XIV. Report of the Village Manager
XV. Appointments
XVI. Petitions and Communications
XVII. Adjournment
b. Consent Agenda. The Village Manager may submit to the President and Board of Trustees a
Consent Agenda to be considered by the President and Board of Trustees at each regularly
scheduled Village Board meeting. The Consent Agenda shall contain all matters deemed by
the Village Manager to be of a non-controversial nature. The Manager, in his or her
discretion, may include on the Consent Agenda all matters on which a preliminary vote or
recommendation, has been taken by the Village Board.
The Manager may also include on the Consent Agenda, resolutions or ordinances accepting
plats of subdivision and appointments and reappointments from Boards and Commissions,
together with all other matters which the Manager deems suitable for a Consent Agenda.
The Consent Agenda may be adopted by a roll call vote and the roll call shall be recorded in
the minutes of the Village Board as approving each item contained on the Consent Agenda.
The motion to adopt the Consent Agenda shall be non-debatable. Any item maybe removed
from the Consent Agenda at the Village Board meeting by the request of any one Trustee, in
which case the item shall be considered separately.
The taking of a single vote on the Consent Agenda shall be deemed sufficient compliance
with all requirements of law to all intents and purposes and with like effect as if the vote in
each case had been taken separately by nays and ayes on the question of each ordinance,
resolution and motion included on the Consent Agenda.
In the event one or more Trustees wishes to be recorded as passing or voting against any item
included in the Consent Agenda, that Trustee shall so notify the Village Clerk who will make
an appropriate reference in the minutes to record such negative votes.
c. Initiation of Ordinances. The Village Board, upon petition by at least one percent of the
registered voters of the Village as computed at the last general election at which
Representatives to the United States Congress were elected, shall consider any proposal
contained in the petition to amend, add to or delete from the general ordinances contained in
the Municipal Code of 1995, as amended. The petition shall be filed with the Village Clerk
at least ten days prior to a regularly scheduled Village Board meeting at which consideration
ELECTED OFFICERS
2-6 REVISED 03/07/16
of the matter is sought. The filing of the petition shall require placing of such matter upon
the agenda for consideration by the President and Board of Trustees.
Any petitioner dissatisfied with the outcome of the one percent petition procedure of the
preceding paragraph may invoke the 12 percent petition procedure of this paragraph. The
Village Board shall upon petition of at least 12 percent of the registered voters of the Village
as computed at the last general election at which Representatives to the United States
Congress were elected, consider any proposal contained in said petition to amend, add to or
delete from the general ordinances contained in the Municipal Code of 1995, as amended.
Said petition shall be filed with the Village Clerk at least ten days prior to a regularly
scheduled Village Board meeting at which consideration of said matter is sought. The
Village Board shall either pass the proposed ordinance in substance within 90 days after the
proposal appears on the Board agenda, or the proposal shall be submitted to a vote of the
electors at the next regularly scheduled election, unless it is rejected by the Village Board of
Trustees upon advice of the Village Attorney stating that the proposed ordinance is in
conflict with any Constitutional provision, existing statutes or ordinances of other preempting
jurisdictions. Any such petition shall appoint three managers who shall serve as
spokespersons and shall have the power to withdraw the petition after the Village Board
action on such petition, if a majority of such managers are satisfied with such action.
Any ordinance adopted by initiative may be repealed by the Village Board or by initiative as
provided herein.
Ord. #13-028, #06-030, # 16-004)
Section 2-205 Citizens to be Heard. Any citizen wishing to be heard on an item not on the formal
agenda at a Village Board meeting may make such a request at that Board meeting by filling out a
speaker’ s card and handing it to the Village Clerk. All such citizens shall be given three minutes in
which to make a statement and speakers may not give any or all of their time to another speaker.
Ord. #16-004)
Section 2-206 Rules of Procedure. The following rules of procedure shall govern the conduct of all
meetings of the Board of Trustees, although these rules, other than those prescribed by statute, may
be suspended at any time by the consent of a majority of the Trustees present at any meeting.
Rule 1. The President shall decide all questions of order. In all cases where these rules are not
applicable, the Board shall be governed by parliamentary law as laid down in Roberts' Rules of
Order, as revised.
Rule 2. Trustees discussing a question shall address the President, and no Trustee has the floor
unless recognized by the President. No person can address the Board unless recognized by the
President.
Rule 3. A roll call vote of yeas and nays shall be taken and recorded in the minutes for all
ordinances or propositions which create any liability against or obligation on the part of the
Village, or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in all other instances where a
request for a roll call vote is made by any Trustee. This rule shall not apply to any items included in
the Consent Agenda.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
2-7 REVISED 03/07/16
Rule 4. Special Committees shall issue written reports stating their findings and conclusions.
Special Committees may consider only such matters as are referred to them by vote of the Board of
Trustees or by the Village President.
Rule 5. The vote upon the adoption of an ordinance, motion or resolution of the Board may be
reconsidered at the same meeting at which the vote was taken or at the next regularly scheduled
meeting on motion of any Trustee not present at the time such ordinance, motion or resolution was
adopted, or on the motion of any Trustee previously voting on the prevailing side of such ordinance,
motion or resolution, but no ordinance, motion or resolution shall be rescinded except by the same
number of votes which were required to pass the matter sought to be reconsidered.
If a request for reconsideration of any matter signed in the manner of election petitions by at least
one percent of the registered voters as computed at the last general election at which Representatives
to the United States Congress were elected, is presented to the Village Clerk prior to the next regular
meeting of the Board of Trustees following the action taken, which meeting shall be at least two
weeks later, the Board shall reconsider such matter in the same manner as if a motion to reconsider
had been made by a Trustee voting on the prevailing side of such ordinance or motion, whether or
not the matter was reconsidered previously. Final action shall be taken at that meeting on all matters
reconsidered.
Rule 6. When a question is before the Board, no motion shall be in order but the following: 1) to
adjourn; 2) to lay on the table; 3) the previous question; 4) to postpone definitely; 5) to postpone to a
certain time, and 6) to amend. These motions are privileged and have precedence in the order in
which they succeed each other in this rule. Motions to adjourn, to lay on the table and for the
previous question shall be decided without debate.
Rule 7. A motion to adjourn is always in order except: 1) When a member is in possession of the
floor; 2) When the yeas and nays are being called; 3) When the members are voting; 4) When
adjournment was the last preceding motion; 5) When it has been decided that the previous question
shall be taken.
Ord. #96-061)
Section 2-207 Oath and Compensation. Each Trustee shall take the oath of office prescribed by
statute and shall receive compensation at the rate of $ 2,800 per year, payable in monthly
installments. Any ordinance providing for a change in the compensation provided for Trustees shall
be 180 days before the beginning of the terms of the trustees whose compensation is to be fixed.
Section 2-208 Powers and Duties. The Board of Trustees shall pass ordinances, resolutions and
motions in accordance with the provisions of this Article and the Statutes of the State of Illinois.
The members of the Board of Trustees shall be conservators of the peace and shall have power: 1) to
arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all persons who break the peace, or are found
violating any municipal ordinance or any criminal law of the State; 2) to commit arrested persons for
examination; 3) if necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody overnight or Sunday in any safe
place, or until they can be brought before the proper authority; and 4) to exercise all other powers as
conservators of the peace as may be prescribed.
Ord. #09-020)
Section 2-209 Vacancy in the Office of Trustee. Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of
ELECTED OFFICERS
2-8 REVISED 07/06/09
Trustee, the vacancy must be filled in accordance with the applicable section set forth below:
a. If a vacancy occurs in the office of Trustee with the unexpired portion of that term to be at
least 28 months and there is at least 130 days before the next scheduled general municipal
election, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term at that election.
b. If a vacancy occurs in the office of Trustee with less than 28 months remaining in the
unexpired portion of the term or less than 130 days before the next scheduled general
municipal election, the vacancy must be filled by the President. An appointment by the
President must be made within 60 days after the vacancy occurs. The appointment shall be
forwarded to the corporate authorities, who must act upon that appointment within 30 days.
Section 2-210 Commencement of Term of Office. The terms of all elected officials shall begin at
the first regular or special meeting in the month following the election of said officials.
Article III Other Appointed Officers
Section 2-301 Recall of Elected Officers. Any elected Village officer may be recalled in
accordance with the provisions of this Section.
Any registered voter residing in the Village seeking to initiate the recall of any elected officer may
file with the Village Clerk a written statement under oath of the intent to file a recall petition seeking
recall of a named officer, in accordance with the provisions of this Section. Within 120 days of the
date of filing the statement, the voter or persons acting on the voters' behalf shall file with the Village
Clerk a written petition signed by not less than 12% of the registered voters of the Village at the time
of the last general election. The petition shall contain the full names and addresses of the petitioners.
Each page of the petition shall be supported by a sworn statement of the circulator that he or she is a
registered voter in the Village and further certifying that the signatures were obtained in the presence
of the circulator and are genuine.
Each petition may name no more than one officer whose recall is sought and shall contain a brief and
succinct statement of the reason for which recall is sought. More than one petition naming different
officers may be filed for a single recall election.
Within 30 days of the filing of a petition which meets the requirements of this Section, the President
and Board of Trustees shall adopt an ordinance calling a special election to be held on the next
consolidated election date which shall be not less than 60 days from the date of the ordinance.
Notice of the election and publication of a sample ballot in a newspaper published in the Village
shall be given in the manner provided by law.
The Village Clerk shall prepare a pamphlet for distribution to the voters setting forth the date and
time of election and the reasons for initiating recall procedures in accordance with the petition. It
shall also contain a responsive statement by the officer whose recall is sought. The reasons and
response shall be limited to 500 words each. The pamphlet shall be reviewed by the Village
Attorney as to form and content, in compliance with this Article. The Village Clerk shall use all
reasonable means to cause a copy of the pamphlet to be distributed to each household within the
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
2-9
Village. The Village Clerk shall cause a copy of the pamphlet to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the Village not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the
election.
The conduct of the election and any challenge to the petition or contest of the election shall be as
nearly as possible in accordance with the provisions of the Election Code of the State of Illinois
relating to the election of municipal officers.
The Village Board shall canvass the results of the election. If a majority of the votes cast shall be in
favor of the recall of the named officer, the office shall be declared vacant and the office shall then
be filled in the manner provided by law for the filling of vacancies. No officer who has been recalled
may be reappointed to that office until after the next regular election to fill the office vacated.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 11/05/18
CHAPTER 3 - APPOINTED OFFICERS
Article I The Village Manager
Section 3-101 Creation of Office
Section 3-102 Powers and Duties
Article II Finance Department
Section 3-201 Finance Director
Section 3-202 Finance Department
Section 3-203 Fees to be Placed in General Corporate Fund
Section 3-204 Transfer of Special Funds to the General Corporate Fund
Article III Other Appointed Officers
Section 3-301 Village Attorney
Section 3-302 Village Prosecutor
Section 3-303 Intentionally Left Blank
Section 3-304 Director of Building and Life Safety Department
Section 3-305 Director of Human Resources
Section 3-306 Director of Public Works
Section 3-307 Director of Planning and Community Development
Section 3-308 Director of Health and Human Services
Article IV Village Clerk
Section 3-401 Appointment and Term of Office
Section 3-402 Compensation
Section 3-403 Seal
Section 3-404 Attestations
Section 3-405 Records
Section 3-406 Indexes
Section 3-407 Additional Duties
Section 3-408 Deputy Village Clerk
APPOINTED OFFICERS
3-2 REVISED 05/21/18
Article I The Village Manager
Section 3-101 Creation of Office. There is hereby created the office of Village Manager. The
Village Manager shall be the administrative head of the Village government and shall be responsible
for the efficient administration of all departments.
a. Appointment and Tenure. The Village Manager shall be appointed by the President and
Board of Trustees for an indefinite term. The Manager shall be appointed without regard to
his or her political beliefs and need not be a resident of the Village when appointed;
provided, however, that the Manager shall become a resident of the Village within a
reasonable time after appointment. In case of absence or disability of the Village Manager,
the Assistant Village Manager shall perform the duties of the Manager.
b. Compensation. The compensation of the Village Manager shall be an amount fixed from
time to time payable according to standard procedure.
c. Removal. The Manager may, at any time, be removed from office by a majority vote of the
members of the Board of Trustees.
Ord. #16-004, #17-009, # 18-016)
Section 3-102 Powers and Duties. The powers and duties of the Manager shall be:
a. Enforcement of Laws. To enforce the laws and ordinances within the Village;
b. Appoint and Remove Department Heads. To appoint and remove all directors of
departments, and all other appointed officers and employees except when the appointment
power is vested in the elected officials of the Village under the Statutes of the State of
Illinois. No appointment shall be made upon any basis other than that of merit and fitness;
c. Direct the work of all Departments. To exercise control of all departments and divisions
which may be created by the Board of Trustees;
d. To have all the powers and exercise all the duties granted to municipal clerks and controllers
with respect to preparation of a proposed annual budget identifying the estimated funds
necessary to defray the expenses of the Village for the fiscal year for the consideration of the
Board of Trustees. The proposed budget is to conform to the policy and process described in
Chapter 7, Article V;
e. Attend Meetings of the Board. To attend meetings of the Board of Trustees with the right to
take part in the discussions, but with no right to vote;
f. Make a Recommendation to Board. To recommend to the Board of Trustees for adoption
such measures as deemed necessary or expedient;
g. Make Purchases for Departments; Board Approval. To make all necessary purchases of
supplies and equipment for all departments in the Village and for that purpose the Manager is
authorized to make expenditures of $25,000 or less without preliminary authorization bythe
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
3-3 REVISED 02/20/17
Board; provided, however, that all expenditures and payments, regardless of amounts, shall
be subject to approval by the Board of Trustees.
h. Disposition of Personal Property; Board Approval.
1. When the Village Manager determines that the Village owns personal property which
is no longer necessary or useful to or for the best interests of the Village, he or she,
subject to the limitations hereinafter set forth, is authorized and directed to proceed
without further authorization by the Board of Trustees to dispose of such property by
sale, trade-in or any other manner considered most advantageous to the Village.
2. The authority granted to the Village Manager in paragraph 1 shall be limited to the
disposition of any single item, or any group of items designated by the Village
Manager to be not in excess of $10,000. No disposition of personal property shall be
made to a person who is, at the date of disposition, an officer, agent or employee of
the Village, unless the property is being disposed of pursuant to sealed bids.
3. When the Village Manager determines it to be practicable, he or she shall cause the
item or items of personal property to be disposed of pursuant to paragraph 1 to be
advertised for disposition to the highest bidder. The advertisement shall be in the
form of a notice published at least seven days prior to the date of disposition in a
newspaper having a general circulation within the Village and shall state the time,
place and terms of the disposition. When the Village Manager determines that it is
not practicable to so advertise the disposition, he or she may dispose of the item or
items of personal property in whatever manner considered most advantageous to the
Village.
4. In the event the personal property to be disposed of has a value estimated by the
Village Manager to be in excess of $10,000, the Village Manager may dispose of the
same by either advertising for bids and submitting the bids received to the Board of
Trustees for approval of the disposition or receiving specific authorization from the
Board of Trustees to dispose of the property in accordance with paragraph 3.
5. At least once a year, the Village Manager shall provide the President and Board of
Trustees at list of surplus property that was disposed of during that year that was
valued at $10,000 or less.
6. If an item or group of items of personal property has a value which has been
estimated in good faith, and disposition of the property is made in accordance with
the procedure applicable to property of the estimated value, the disposition by the
Village Manager, in all events, shall be deemed to be lawful and binding regardless
of the amount of proceeds received from the disposition.
i. Other Duties. To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or may be required
by ordinance, resolution, or direction of the Board of Trustees.
APPOINTED OFFICERS
3-4 REVISED 03/19/12
Ord. #12-013)
Article II Finance Department
Section 3-201 Finance Director. There is hereby created the office of Finance Director, to
administer the Finance Department under the supervision of the Village Manager. The office of
Finance Director shall be filled by an appointment, made by the Village Manager, of a person
competent to carry out the duties of the office. The appointment shall be for an indefinite term and at
such salary as may be set by the Village Manager after consultation with the President and Board of
Trustees. The Finance Director shall carry out the following duties:
a. Assist the Village Manager in the preparation of the budget and tax levy ordinances;
b. Conduct special studies and investigations into the financial affairs of the departments and
offices of the Village as directed by the Village Manager;
c. Prescribe standards and approve the procedures to be employed in the accounting for money
and property by the Village department directors and offices;
d. Administer and enforce all sources of income including water and sewer utilities, special
assessments, motor fuel tax receipts, parking meter receipts, sales tax receipts, escrow and
other trust fund income, all license and permit fees, (excepting permit fees required under the
Building, Electrical and Zoning provisions of this Code), negotiate bond sales and debt
refinancing transactions, subject to any regulations established by law and subject to the
approval of the Board of Trustees;
e. Act in an advisory capacity in financial matters to the President and Board of Trustees and to
the Village Manager; and
f. Perform such other fiscal functions as may be required by the Village Manager.
Section 3-202 Finance Department. The Finance Department shall contain the following divisions
with the duties and regulations hereinafter set forth:
a. Treasury Division. The Treasury Division, under the supervision of the Finance Director,
shall have such duties as are prescribed by the Statutes of the State of Illinois and of this
Code. The Village Treasurer shall:
1. Collect all bills for special assessments or services rendered by the Village and
receive all monies due the Village, either directly or from agencies and departments
of the Village government authorized to receive payment of amounts due the Village.
All monies received on any special assessment shall be held bythe Village Treasurer
as a special fund to be applied only to the payment of the improvement, or bonds and
vouchers issued therefor, together with interest thereon, for which the assessment was
made, and that money shall be used for no other purpose, unless to reimburse the
Village for money expended for the improvement. These shall be made in
accordance with the statutes and the law and the Treasurer shall keep the books and
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
5
accounts in a manner so that prorations in payments of principal and interest can be
made and ascertained;
2. Deposit all monies received by law and keep the deposit of the Village money
separate and distinct from, and record daily in, the appropriate Village fund all
monies collected;
3. Sign all Village checks, in accordance with authority given by the provisions of this
Code; all checks drawn on the Village Treasury must be signed by the President,
countersigned by the Village Treasurer, stating the particular fund or appropriation to
which it is chargeable, and the person to whom payable; and no money shall be
otherwise paid except as may be provided by statute. Money shall not be transferred
by the Treasurer from one fund to another after it has been received, nor appropriated
to any purpose other than that for which it has been collected or paid, except as may
be ordered by the President and Board of Trustees or the Village Manager in the
manner and form prescribed by statute;
4. Prepare the payroll;
5. Keep records showing all monies received, the source from which it is received and
the purpose for which it is paid;
6. Keep records at all times showing the financial status of the Village; and,
7. Keep those books and accounts as may be required by statute or ordinance, and in the
manner required by the Finance Director.
b. Accounting Division. The Accounting Division, under the supervision of the Finance
Director, shall:
1. Establish, organize and maintain a centralized accounting system;
2. Prepare and submit such financial statements, memoranda and reports as may be
required by statute and the provisions of this Code, or as the Village Manger may
direct;
3. Audit currently all revenues in order to insure the proper deposit of all sums due the
Village;
4. Completely record all financial transactions of the Village government;
5. Prepare the warrant register; and
6. Perform other functions as may be required by the Finance Director.
c. Purchasing Division. The Purchasing Division shall be under the supervision of the Finance
Director, subject to the direction of the Village Manager as ex-officio Purchasing Agent. The
Finance Director shall make all purchases authorized by the President and Board of Trustees
APPOINTED OFFICERS
6 REVISED 03/19/12
in the manner provided by law, and subject to the limitations imposed by law, and subject to
the direction of the Village Manager. The Purchasing Agent shall:
1. Purchase all supplies, services, materials and equipment, subject to the provisions
and limitations of the statute governing public contracts and the applicable provisions
of this Code;
2. Sell or dispose of property certified to by the Village Manager as having no public
use, such sales to be made in the manner prescribed by statute, where such sales are
regulated by law;
3. Take charge of the storage of supplies and materials purchased bythe Village and not
delivered directly to the various departments and offices, and keep proper inventory
records of same;
4. Install and maintain centralized purchasing procedures, standard techniques and
recording systems;
5. Pre-audit all purchase orders as to availability of funds and the appropriation relating
thereto before certification and issuance, and pre-audit all expenditures before
payment, to prevent illegal or irregular expenditures; and
6. Perform other functions as may be required by the Finance Director.
d. Division of Water and Sewer Collection. This division shall be supervised by the Finance
Director and the functions shall be:
1. Receiving water and sewer receipts;
2. Adjustment of sewer and water bills;
3. Computing and filing meter reading records;
4. Water and sewer billing; and
5. Setting up and maintaining consumers' accounts, including current reconcilement
with control accounts.
Section 3-203 Fees to be Placed in General Corporate Fund. Unless the provisions of this Code
specifically provide otherwise, all fees and payments required by the provisions of this Code to be
paid to the Finance Director shall be placed by the Finance Director in the General Corporate Fund
of the Village.
Section 3-204 Transfer of Special Funds to the General Corporate Fund. Whenever the Finance
Director shall determine that funds or cash bonds previously paid to the Village to be held for escrow
purposes under any ordinance or regulation of the Village are no longer necessary to effectuate the
purposes for which deposits were made, such funds shall be returned to the original depositors upon
showing that the conditions for which the deposits were made have been satisfied. In the event the
Finance Director is unable to locate the original depositors or their lawful assignees, the Finance
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
3-7 REVISED 11/05/18
Director shall serve the depositor by certified mail directed to the last known address, a notice
indicating that funds are available for return. If no claim is made within 30 days of the giving of
notice, the notice stating that such funds are available for return to the designated depositor shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation published in the Village. If no claim is made within
ten days after publication of the notice, the Finance Director shall report this fact to the President and
Board of Trustees, who may, by motion, transfer the funds to the General Corporate Fund of the
Village.
Article III Other Appointed Officers
Section 3-301 Village Attorney. There is hereby created the office of Village Attorney to sue or
defend from suit actions at law or in equity to which the Village may be a party, or in which it may
be interested, or which may be brought against or by any officer of the Village on behalf of the
Village or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the Village.
a. Appointment; Tenure; Compensation; Removal. The office of Village Attorney shall be
filled by an appointment, made by the Village President, with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees, of a person competent to carry out the duties of the office. The
appointment shall be for an indefinite term and at such compensation as may be fixed by the
President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
b. Duties. The Village Attorney shall see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees
entered in favor of the Village and of all similar interlocutory orders. He or she shall be the
legal adviser of the Village and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting it,
whenever requested to do so by any Village official. Upon request by the President or the
Board, he or she shall reduce any opinion to writing. The Village Attorney shall supervise
the completion of all special assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings.
Section 3-302 Village Prosecutor. There is hereby created the office of Village Prosecutor who
shall represent the Village in all cases that involve prosecutions for any violation of any of the
provisions of this Code, or on any appeal therefrom.
a. Appointment; Tenure; Salary; Removal. The office of Village Prosecutor shall be filled by
an appointment, made by the Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, of a person competent to carry out the duties of the office. The appointment shall
be for an indefinite term and at such salary as may be fixed by the President and Board of
Trustees. The Village Prosecutor may be removed from office by the Village President with
the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
b. Duties. The Village Prosecutor shall prosecute violations of any provision of this Code on
behalf of the Village and advise and assist all Village officers or employees on questions of
law involved in filing complaints, making arrests, and preparing for prosecutions for
violations of this Code.
Ord. #12-013, #18-039)
Section 3-303 Intentionally Left Blank.
APPOINTED OFFICERS
3-8 REVISED 06/05/17
Ord.#04-059, # 11-032, #12-013, # 16-030, #17-023)
Section 3-304 Director of the Building and Life Safety Department. There is hereby created the
office of Director of the Building and Life Safety Department, to administer the Building and Life
Safety Department under the supervision of the Village Manager. All references in the Municipal
Code to Director of Building or Director of Building Services shall mean the Director of the Building
and Life Safety Department and all references to the Building Department or Department of Building
Services shall mean the Building and Life Safety Department.
a. Appointment; Tenure; Salary; Removal. The office of Director of Building and Life Safety
Department shall be filled by an appointment, made by the Village Manager, of a person
competent to carry out the duties of the office. The appointment shall be for an indefinite
term and at such salary as may be set by the Village Manager after consultation with the
President and Board of Trustees. The Director of Building and Life Safety Department may
be removed from office at the discretion of the Village Manager.
b. Duties. The Director of the Building and Life Safety Department shall plan and direct the
functions and operations of the Building and Life Safety Department including conducting
inspections of Village buildings and other structures for structural safety and ordinance
compliance. He or she is responsible for enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to
building services including inspections as well as the Zoning Ordinance and the Sign Code.
He or she shall have the power to order all work stopped on construction or alteration or
repair of buildings in the Village when such work is being done in violation of any provision
of this Code relating thereto.
c. Entry Powers. The Director of the Building and Life Safety Department shall have the power
to make or cause to be made an entry, at any reasonable hour, into any building or premises
where the work of altering, repairing or constructing any building or structure is going on, for
the purpose of making inspections.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
3-9 REVISED 03/19/12
Ord. #11-032, #12-013)
Section 3-305 Director of Human Resources. There is hereby created the office of Director of
Human Resources, to administer the Department of Human Resources under the supervision of the
Village Manager.
a. Appointment; Tenure; Salary; Removal. The office of Director ofHuman Resources shall be
filled by an appointment, made by the Village Manager, of a person competent to carry out
the duties of the office. The appointment shall be for an indefinite term and at such salary as
may be set by the Village Manager after consultation with the President and Board of
Trustees. The Director of Human Resources may be removed from office at the discretion of
the Village Manager.
b. Duties. The Director of Human Resources shall handle recruitment for jobs, direct the
administration of the position classification and pay plans, assist Staff on personnel matters,
administer the Village’ s policies, rules and regulations, including maintaining the Village’s
Employee Handbook, and administer the benefit plans, as well as any other duties as
assigned.
Ord. #12-013)
Section 3-306 Director of Public Works. There is hereby created the office of Director of Public
Works, to administer the Department of Public Works under the supervision of the Village Manager
and who shall enforce all the provisions of this Code relating to public works.
a. Appointment: Tenure: Salary: Removal. The office of Director of Public Works shall be
filled by an appointment, made by the Village Manager, of a person competent to carry out
the duties of the office. The appointment shall be for an indefinite term at such salary as may
be set by the Village Manager after consultation with the President and Board of Trustees.
The Director of Public Works may be removed from office at the discretion of the Village
Manager.
b. Duties. The Director of Public Works shall have charge of repair, maintenance and care of
all public streets, alleys and driveways; of all public trees and planting areas; of all municipal
buildings and property; of all municipal vehicles and equipment; of all public sewers; of the
municipal water system; of the lighting, signing and traffic controls of public streets and
alleys, and shall keep the above-mentioned systems in efficient operation and good repair;
supervision of all employees assigned to work with him or her; and of the care of all property
of the Village which is not assigned to the care or custody of any other officer.
Ord. #12-013)
Section 3-307 Director of Planning and Community Development. There is hereby created the
office of the Director of Planning and Community Development, to administer the Department of
Planning and Community Development under the supervision of the Village Manager.
a. Appointment: Tenure: Salary: Removal. The office of Director of Planning and Community
Development shall be filled by an appointment, made by the Village Manager, of a person
competent to carry out the duties of the office. The appointment shall be for an indefinite
term at such salary as may be set by the Village Manager after consultation with the President
and Board of Trustees. The Director of Planning and Community Development may be
removed from office at the discretion of the Village Manager.
APPOINTED OFFICERS
3-10 REVISED 06/20/16
Ord. #04-059)
b. Duties. The Director of Planning and Community Development shall oversee the following:
the preparation and maintenance of the comprehensive plan, development review,
community development, economic development, urban design and beautification, and
redevelopment; shall act in advisory capacity on all planning related matters to the Board of
Trustees; shall act as liaison to the Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and other
commissions as deemed necessary; and shall perform such other duties as the Village
Manager may direct from time to time.
Ord. #16-030)
Section 3-308 Director of Health and Human Services. There is hereby created the office of
Director of Health and Human Services, to administer the Department of Health and Human Services
under the supervision of the Village Manager.
a. Appointment: Tenure: Salary: Removal. The office of Director of Health and Human
Services shall be filled by an appointment, made by the Village Manager, of a person
competent to carry out the duties of the office. The appointment shall be for an indefinite
term and at such salary as may be set by the Village Manager after consultation with the
President and Board of Trustees. The Director of Health and Human Services may be
removed from office at the discretion of the Village Manager.
b. Duties. The Director of Health and Human Services shall plan, direct, and coordinate
projects and programs that provide health and human services to Village residents. Heor she
is responsible for enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to public health services
including inspections
Article IV Village Clerk
Section 3-401 Appointment and Term of Office. The Village Clerk shall be appointed by the
Village Manager and shall serve at the pleasure of the Village Manager. The Village Clerk shall
report to the Village Manager and submit to the Manager or to the Board of Trustees such reports as
the Manager may require.
Ord. #12-013)
Section 3-402 Compensation. Compensation for the Village Clerk shall be determined in
accordance with the current Village pay plan.
Section 3-403 Seal. The Village Clerk shall be the custodian of the Village seal and shall fix its
impression on documents whenever this is required.
Section 3-404 Attestations. The Village Clerk shall seal and attest all contracts of the Village and
all licenses, permits, and such documents as shall require this formality.
Section 3-405 Records. The Village Clerk shall keep the journal of records of all Board meetings, a
record of ordinances, and any other documents which may be required by statute or the Board of
Trustees to keep.
Section 3-406 Indexes. The Village Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents
and records kept by him so that ready access thereto may be had.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
3-11
Section 3-407 Additional Duties. In addition to the duties herein provided, the Village Clerk shall
perform such other duties and functions as may be required by this Code or by the Statutes of the
State of Illinois, including all duties imposed upon the Village Clerk in connection with elections
conducted in the Village of Arlington Heights, pursuant to the Election Code. The Village Clerk
shall also perform such other duties and functions as may be delegated to him by the Village
Manager.
Section 3-408 Deputy Village Clerk. The Village Manager may designate one Deputy Village
Clerk who shall, during the disability or absence of the Village Clerk, have and exercise all powers
and duties imposed by law upon the Village Clerk. Notwithstanding any provisions of this Article,
the Village Manager may designate additional personnel to assist the Village Clerk in the
performance of the duties herein provided or imposed upon the Village Clerk bythe laws of the State
of Illinois.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
CHAPTER 4 — THE POLICE DEPARTMENT
Article I General Provisions
Section 4 -101 Creation
Section 4 -102 Duties of Members of Police Department
Section 4 -103 Office of Chief Created
Section 4 - 104 Duties of the Chief
Section 4 -105 Office of Deputy Chief Created
Section 4 -106 Duties of Deputy Chief
Section 4 -107 Office of Police Commander Created
Section 4 -108 Property Processed by Police Department: Chief to be Custodian
Section 4 -109 Disposition of Unclaimed Property
Section 4 -110 Appointment and Compensation of Members
Section 4 -111 Conduct of Members; Suspension
Section 4 -112 Witness Fees
Section 4 -113 Special Police Officers
Article II Jail
Section 4 -201 Establishment
Section 4 -202 Keeper
Section 4 -203 Prisoners
Section 4 -204 Escape
Section 4 -205 Communication with Prisoners
Section 4 -206 Penalty
REVISED 07/ 06/ 15
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Article I General Provisions
Section 4 -101 Creation. There is hereby created a Police Department, an executive department of
the Village, consisting of the Police Chief and such other members of the department as may be
appointed by the Village Manager or the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
Section 4 -102 Duties of Members of Police Department. It shall be the duty ofthe members of the
Police Department to enforce all ordinances of the Village and all statutes of the State of Illinois
effective in the Village, and to arrest all violators thereof. Every member of the Police Department is
hereby declared to be a conservator of the peace and shall have the powers granted by law to such
conservators of the peace.
a. All warrants for the violation of any provisions of this Code or the State criminal law, to
whomsoever directed, may be served and executed within the limits of the Village by any
member of the Police Department. For this purpose, members of the Police Department have
all the common law statutory power of constables.
b. Members of the Police Department shall have power and authority, in a peaceable and quiet
manner, to enter any house, building or on any premise in the Village, in which the police
reasonably expect to find therein any person who is there for any unlawful purpose. If any
person shall be found therein, guilty of any crime, misdemeanor, or violating any provision
of this Code or any other ordinance for the preservation of peace and good order of the
Village, or who may reasonably be suspected thereof, or who shall be aiding and abetting
such person so doing, they shall apprehend and keep in custody such person, as in cases of
other arrests.
Ord. # 12- 013)
Section 4 -103 Office of Police Chief Created. There is hereby created the office of Police Chief.
The Chief shall be appointed by, and shall serve at the discretion of, the Village Manager. The Chief
need not be a member of the Police Department at the time of appointment. The Chief shall receive
such salary as may be set by the Village Manager after consultation with the President and Board of
Trustees.
Section 4 -104 Duties of the Chief. The Chief shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Police
Department, responsible for the administration of the Police Department, the performance of all its
functions and for all the members of the Department.
a. The Chiefmay make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the guidance ofthe members
of the Department as deemed necessary.
b. The Chief shall be responsible for the training and conduct of the members of the
Department.
C. The Chief shall be keeper of the Village jail and shall have custody of all persons
incarcerated therein.
d. The Chief shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of the
Department as may be required by any statute, this Code or the Village Manager.
2 REVISED 03/ 19/ 12
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
e. Before entering upon the duties of office, the Chief shall take the oath of office prescribed by
statute for municipal officers.
Ord. # 15 -020)
Section 4 -105 Office of Deputy Chief Created. There is hereby created the office ofDeputy Chief.
The Deputy Chief shall be appointed by, and shall serve at the discretion of, the Village Manager.
The appointment to Deputy Chief shall be filled by a current member ofthe Police Department, from
the ranks of Commander, Lieutenant and Sergeant only. Compensation for the Deputy Chief shall be
determined in accordance with the current Village pay plan.
Ord. # 06 -025, # 15 -020)
Section 4 -106 Duties of the Deputy Chief. Each Deputy Chief shall be responsible for the control
and direction of activities for one division of the Police Department. As needed, one of the Deputy
Chiefs shall be designated to be the second executive officer in command of the Police Department
and shall assist the Police Chief in administration of the Police Department. During the absence or
disability of the Police Chief, one of the Deputy Chiefs shall perform the duties of the Chief.
Section 4 -107 Office of Police Commander Created. There is hereby created the office ofPolice
Commander. The Police Commander shall be appointed by, and shall serve at the discretion of, the
Village Manager. The appointment to Police Commander shall be filled by a current member of the
Arlington Heights Police Department, from the rank of Sergeant only. Compensation for the Police
Commander shall be determined in accordance with the current Village pay plan.
Section 4 -108 Property Processed by Police Department: Chief to be Custodian. The Police
Chief shall be the custodian of all lost, abandoned or recovered stolen property in the Village and all
property which may be seized or otherwise taken possession of by the Police Department of the
Village.
Section 4 -109 Disposition of Unclaimed Property. Ifproperty seized or taken possession ofby the
Police Department, as provided in Section 4 -108 shall not be claimed by the rightful owner within 90
days from the date of the final disposition of the court proceedings in connection with which such
property was seized or otherwise taken possession of, or in the case there are no such court
proceedings, then if such property so seized or taken possession surrendered to such owner within 90
days after the date which the Police Department obtains such possession, the Police Chief shall cause
the property to be sold for cash to the highest bidder at a public auction and the proceeds to be
deposited with the Village Treasurer.
a. The Police Chief shall cause to be published, in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county, a description of all property to be sold (including the time and place of sale) together
with the date of seizure or the taking possession thereof and shall give notice that if such
property is not claimed by the rightful owner or owners thereofwithin ten days from the date
of such publication, the property will be sold at public auction.
b. In addition to the publication of notice provided for in this section, the Police Chief shall post
or cause to be posted in at least three public places in the Village, a copy of the notice
published in the newspaper and shall make a record of the date when such publication and
the posting of notices are made and if, within ten days from the date of such publication and
3 REVISED 07/ 06/ 15
POLICE DEPARTMENT
posting, no claim for such property described in such notices shall have been made by the
rightful owner thereof, shall proceed to sell such property at public auction.
C. No Village employees directly or indirectly shall purchase or participate in the bidding for or
purchase of any unclaimed property.
If any person shall deposit with the Police Department money or any other personal property
of value which has been found or otherwise come into the lawful possession of such person
without ownership, the Police Department may receive and hold such property in
safekeeping. The party delivering such property shall receive a receipt indicating the date the
property is received and the nature of the property. If the rightful owner does not claim such
property within 90 days, the property shall be returned to the person who delivered the
property to the Police Department. Any claim to such property by person other than those
who delivered the property to the Police Department shall be supported by affidavit and such
other suitable evidence as may be required by the Police Chief to establish the fact that the
claimant is indeed the rightful owner. Neither the Police Chief nor any other police officer
shall be liable in any action in law or equity for delivering the property to a person who has
established his claim to the property to the satisfaction of the Police Chief.
Ord. # 12 - 028, # 15 -020)
Section 4 -110 Appointment and Compensation of Members. All regular members of the Police
Department except the Chief, Deputy Chiefs, and Police Commanders shall be appointed by the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. They shall be employees of the Village.
Ord. # 97 -069)
All appointments of police officers shall be for a probationary period of 18 months. If, at the
expiration of that time, the applicant, in the opinion of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners,
proves to be fit for the position, he shall be permanently certified to the position by the Board. If, in
the judgment of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, he shall prove unsatisfactory at the
expiration of 18 months, he shall be dropped from the service. Provided, however, that if the Village
hires a Certified Entry Candidate, as defined by the Rules of the Village Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners, such candidate shall serve a probationary period of 12 months, unless extended
because of an employee' s extended absence from work during the employee' s first 12 months of
employment.
Ord. # 01 - 068, # 12 - 028)
Section 4 -111 Conduct of Members; Suspension. It shall be the duty of every member of the
Police Department to conduct himself in a proper and law- abiding manner, and to avoid the use of
unnecessary force. He shall not behave in any manner which is a discredit to the Police Department
or in any way be guilty of conduct unbecoming a police officer. He shall promptly obey all lawful
orders from his superiors and maintain his uniform, equipment and person in a neat and orderly
condition. He shall pay his debts promptly and not be seen in the company of, or associate with,
persons of doubtful or questionable character. He shall obey and abide by the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Police Chief and the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
The Police Chief shall have the power to suspend any police officer from duty for a period not to
exceed 30 days. The suspension may be made with or without pay by the Chief, and any person
4 REVISED 07/ 06/ 15
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
suspended without pay shall not be entitled to pay while so suspended, nor until he shall be returned
to duty.
Section 4 -112 Witness Fees. Every member of the Police Department shall appear as a witness
whenever this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of a Village ordinance or a State or
Federal law. But no such member shall receive any witness fee for such services in any action or suit
to which the Village is a parry; all fees due for such services shall, if paid, be turned over to the
Village Treasurer.
Section 4 -113 Special Police Officers. The Village Manager may appoint any reputable person as a
special police officer to serve for such term and on such conditions as may be designated by the
terms of such appointment. Special police officers shall have the powers and duties of a conservator
ofthe peace, and shall receive such compensation as may be provided by the President and Board of
Trustees. Appointments may be revoked at any time by the Village Manager.
Article II Jail
Section 4 -201 Establishment. The place in the Village heretofore established and used for aj ail, or
any other place which may be hereafter used for that purpose, is hereby declared to be the Village
jail.
Section 4 -202 Keeper. The Police Chief shall be the keeper of the jail and shall have custody over
all persons confined therein and of all property pertaining thereto.
Section 4 -203 Prisoners. The jail shall be used for the incarceration of all persons arrested for
violating any laws of the State of Illinois, the United States, or for violating any Village ordinance
until such person shall be lawfully brought before a magistrate for a hearing or until such person
shall be lawfully transferred to some other place of incarceration or lawfully released.
Section 4 -204 Escape. It shall be unlawful for any person to escape or attempt to escape, or to
assist any prisoner to escape or attempt to escape from jail.
Section 4 -205 Communication with Prisoners. It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate
with any prisoner held in the jail without the permission of the Police Chief or the police officer in
charge.
Section 4 -206 Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision ofthis Article shall
be fined not less than $ 5 nor more than $ 750 for each offense.
5 REVISED 05/ 07/ 12
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
CHAPTER 5 - THE FIRE DEPARTMENT
Article I General Provisions
Section 5-101 Creation
Section 5-102 Duties of Members of Fire Department
Section 5-103 Office of Fire Chief Created
Section 5-104 Duties of the Chief
Section 5-105 Office of Deputy Fire Chief Created
Section 5-106 Office of Commander Created
Section 5-107 Appointment and Compensation of Members
Section 5-108 Conduct of Members; Suspension
Section 5-109 Inspection of Buildings
THE FIRE DEPARTMENT
2 REVISED 03/19/12
Article I General Provisions
Section 5-101 Creation. There is hereby created a Fire Department, an executive department of the
Village. The Fire Department shall consist of the Fire Chief and such other members of the
department as may be provided for from time to time by the Board of Police and Fire
Commissioners.
Section 5-102 Duties of Members of Fire Department. It shall be the function and duty of the Fire
Department and every member thereof to extinguish accidental or destructive fires and to prevent the
occurrence or spread of such fires. Any fireman in attendance at a fire shall obey the orders of the
officer in command at such a fire.
a. It shall be the duty of all members of the Fire Department to enforce all the Fire Prevention
regulations of this Code, and all other Code provisions falling within the competence of the
Fire Department. For this purpose, the members of the Fire Department are hereby vested
with the usual powers and authority of police officers.
b. In case of fire, the officer at the fire with the highest rank shall take command of the Fire
Department and direct its activities in order to suppress the fire in the best manner to the Fire
Department.
c. When it may be necessary for the protection of other property and to prevent the spread of
the conflagration, the officer in command may cause buildings to be removed, torn down or
destroyed in the best manner possible.
d. All members of the Fire Department shall perform such other duties as are required of them
by this Code or by such other rules and regulations of the Board of Police and Fire
Commissioners now or hereafter in force pertaining in any manner to the Fire Department.
Ord. #12-013)
Section 5-103 Office of Fire Chief Created. There is hereby created the Office of Fire Chief. The
Fire Chief shall be appointed by, and shall serve at the discretion of, the Village Manager. The Chief
need not be a member of the department at the time of appointment. He shall receive such
compensation as may be set by the Village Manager after consultation with the President and Board
of Trustees.
Section 5-104 Duties of the Chief. The Fire Chief shall have the control, subject to the order and
direction of the Village Manager, of the Fire Department and all fire apparatus belonging to the
Village.
a. He shall be responsible for the training and conduct of members of the department, and may
make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the guidance of the members of the
department as he shall deem necessary.
b. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Chief shall take the oath of office prescribed
by statute for municipal officers.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
5-3 REVISED 09/15/14
Section 5-105 Office of Deputy Fire Chief Created. There is hereby created the office of Deputy
Fire Chief. The Deputy Fire Chief shall be appointed by and shall serve at the discretion of the
Village Manager. He shall be a member of the Fire Department at the time of his appointment and
shall retain his classification at the time of appointment under the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners. The Deputy Fire Chief shall serve in the place and stead of the Fire Chief when the
Fire Chief is absent or otherwise incapacitated. He shall perform such other duties and functions as
may be assigned to him by the Fire Chief. He shall receive such additional compensation over and
above the compensation for his permanent rank as may be provided from time to time by the
President and Board of Trustees in the annual budget. The salary for pension purposes shall be the
total compensation by the Deputy Fire Chief.
Ord. #99-008, #14-047)
Section 5-106 Offices of Battalion Chief and Division Chief Created. There is hereby created
within the Fire Department, the offices of Battalion Chief and Division Chief. The Battalion Chiefs
and Division Chiefs shall be appointed by and shall serve at the discretion of the Village Manager.
The appointment to Battalion Chief or Division Chief shall be filled by a current member of the
Arlington Heights Fire Department, from the rank of Lieutenant only. Compensation for the
Battalion Chiefs and Division Chiefs shall be shall be determined in accordance with the current
Village pay plan.
Ord. #96-022, #96-044, # 12-028, #14-047)
Section 5-107 Appointment and Compensation of Members. All regular members of the Fire
Department, except the Chief, Deputy Chief, Battalion Chief and Division Chief, shall be appointed
by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. They shall be employees of the Village.
All appointments of firemen, below the rank of officer, shall be for a probationary period of one year.
If, at the expiration of that time, the applicant, in the opinion of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners, proves to be fit for the position, he shall be permanently certified to the position by
the Board. If, in the judgment of the Board, he shall prove unsatisfactory at the expiration of one
year, he shall be dropped from the service.
Section 5-108 Conduct of Members; Suspension. It shall be the duty of every member of the Fire
Department to conduct himself in a proper and law abiding manner. He shall not behave in any
manner which is a discredit to the Fire Department or in any way guilty of conduct unbecoming a
member of the Fire Department. He shall promptly obey all lawful orders of his superiors and
maintain his uniform, equipment and person in a neat and orderly condition. He shall pay his debts
promptly and not be seen in the company of, or associate with, persons of doubtful or questionable
character. He shall obey and abide by the rules and regulations promulgated by the Fire Chief and
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
Section 5-109 Inspection of Buildings. Members of the Fire Department upon complaint or when
deemed necessary, shall inspect all buildings and premises within the Village. Whenever said
members shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repairs, lack of or insufficient
fire escapes or fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment or byreason of age or dilapidated
condition, or from any other cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger
other property or the occupants thereof, and whenever such officer shall find in any building
combustible or explosive matter or flammable conditions dangerous to the safety of such building or
the occupants thereof, he or they shall order such dangerous conditions or materials to be removed or
remedied and such order shall forthwith be complied with bythe owner or occupant of such premises
THE FIRE DEPARTMENT
5-4
or building. The Fire Chief or any member of the Fire Department may at all reasonable hours enter
any building or premises within the Village for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation
under the provisions of the ordinances of the Village of Arlington Heights as may be deemed
necessary to be made.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 05/02/11
CHAPTER 6 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Article I General Provisions
Section 6-101 Purpose and Intent
Section 6-102 Meeting Dates
Section 6-103 Meetings with Village Board
Section 6-104 Change of Compensation of Boards and Commissions
Section 6-105 Procedures for Appointing Members
Section 6-106 Procedures for Designating Chairs
Section 6-107 Oath of Office
Section 6-108 Ethics Statement
Section 6-109 Attendance at Meetings
Section 6-110 Liaison Committee
Section 6-111 Resignations
Section 6-112 Proceedings
Section 6-113 Staff Liaison
Article II Appointive Boards and Commissions with Statutory Authority
Section 6-201 Plan Commission
Section 6-202 Zoning Board of Appeals
Section 6-203 Board of Health
Section 6-204 Board of Local Improvements
Section 6-205 Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
Section 6-206 Electrical Commission
Section 6-207 Redevelopment Commission
Article III Boards of Trustees of Pension Funds Required by Statute
Section 6-301 Board of Trustees of the Firefighters Pension Fund
Section 6-302 Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund
Article IV Elected Board with Statutory Authority
Section 6-401 Board of Library Trustees
Article V Other Boards and Commissions
Section 6-501 Design Commission
Section 6-502 Building Code Review Board
Section 6-503 Environmental Commission
Section 6-504 Housing Commission
Section 6-505 The Arlington Economic Alliance
Section 6-506 Senior Citizens’ Commission
Section 6-507 Youth Commission
Section 6-508 Commission for Citizens with Disabilities
Section 6-509 Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Commission
Section 6-510 Special Events Commission
Section 6-511 Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Board
Section 6-512 Arts Commission
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
2 REVISED 05/06/96
Article I General Provisions
Section 6-101 Purpose and Intent. This Chapter contains the enabling legislation for all boards
and commissions appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. Also included are articles pertaining to Boards of Trustees of Pension Funds and to the
Board of Library Directors, which are exempt from these general provisions.
Section 6-102 Meeting Dates.
a. All boards and commissions appointed by the Board of Trustees shall meet at least quarterly,
unless a specific exemption is set forth by the Board of Trustees. Currently exempted from
quarterly meetings are:
1. Board of Health;
2. Electrical Commission;
3. Fire and Police Commission;
4. Redevelopment Commission;
5. Building Code Review Board.
b. All meeting dates and places shall be announced in advance, usually by means of the Village
Weekly Calendar, in compliance with the Illinois Open Meeting Law.
Section 6-103 Meetings with Village Board.
Ord. #96-030)
a. Boards and commissions shall meet as needed with the Village Board, meeting as a
Committee-of-the Whole.
b. When a Village Board decision results in the need for action by a board or commission or
contains information pertinent to its activities and responsibilities, the Village Manager will
ensure its prompt conveyance to the staff liaison for that board or commission and the chair
of the board or commission involved.
Section 6-104 Change of Compensation of Boards and Commissions. Any ordinance providing
for a change in the compensation of any board or commission shall be adopted no less than 120 days
nor more than 150 days prior to the date set for the election of Village Trustees.
Section 6-105 Procedures for Appointing Members.
a. Each person applying for or expressing a willingness to serve on a board or commission shall
provide a resume to the Village President.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
3 REVISED 05/06/96
Ord. #96-030)
b. Individuals appointed by the Village President to boards and commissions will be referred to
the Committee-of-the-Whole of the Board of Trustees for interviews. Following interviews
of new appointees, their names shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular meeting of
the Board of Trustees, at which time the Board gives its advice or consent to the
appointment. Individuals designated by the Village President to be reappointed to the boards
or commissions will be announced on the “ Consent Agenda”, and resumes provided to all
trustees for the Board to give its advice or consent.
c. Appointees are provided written notification by the Village Administration of their
appointment. At the same time, each appointee is provided applicable local ordinances, State
Statutes, oath of office, ethics statement and other administrative information and
instructions.
Ord. #96-030)
Section 6-106 Procedures for Designating Chairs. Individuals designated by the Village
President to be chairs of boards or commissions will be announced on the "Consent Agenda," and
resumes provided to all trustees for the Board to give its advice or consent.
Section 6-107 Oath of Office. An appointee is qualified to vote as a member of a board or
commission only after having been administered the oath of office. The oath shall be administered at
the first regular meeting of the Board of Trustees following the confirmation of the appointment or
by the Village Clerk at a mutually convenient time. The Village Clerk will maintain on file a record
of all oaths of office.
Section 6-108 Ethics Statement. The Village policy pertaining to ethics is contained in Chapter 1
of this Code. It prescribes, among other things, that all elected and appointed officials file a
disclosure statement with the Village Clerk on appointment, not later than the administration of the
oath of office, and on or before May 1 of each year.
Section 6-109 Attendance at Meetings.
a. It is the obligation of each member of a board or commission to attend all meetings. In the
event of illness or unavoidable absence, it is the responsibility of the member to notify the
chair.
b. Acommittee member who misses three consecutive meetings is required to submit a written
explanation to the chair of the board or commission.
c. The Village President is authorized to initiate removal procedures under applicable law in
circumstances where no written explanation of absences is provided.
Ord. #96-030)
Section 6-110 Liaison Committee. The Committee-of-the Whole of the Village Board of Trustees
shall perform as liaison to monitor the activities of the appointed boards and commissions.
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
4
Section 6-111 Resignations. Members of boards and commissions who find it necessary to resign
shall notify the chair and address a letter of resignation to the Village President. Copies of all letters
of resignation shall be furnished to all members of the Board of Trustees.
Section 6-112 Proceedings.
a. Chairs of boards and commissions shall conduct business in accordance with procedures
approved by the Board of Trustees. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's
Rules of Order unless otherwise provided for in approved procedures.
b. Matters of policy shall be approved by the Board of Trustees. In this regard, the use of
Village stationery will be in accordance with current Board of Trustees policy.
c. The Village Manager will provide secretarial assistance to boards and commissions as
required.
d. All meetings will be held in a public building, usually the Village Hall, unless authorized by
the Board of Trustees.
e. Meeting agendas will be arranged so as to conclude all meetings by 10:30 P.M. Boards and
Commissions shall establish rules for extending meetings beyond 10:30 P.M.
Section 6-113 Staff Liaison. The Village Manager shall designate a staff liaison for each Board
and Commission. These staff liaisons shall advise and provide technical support to the Boards and
Commissions under the direction of the Village Manager.
Article II Appointive Boards and Commissions with Statutory Authority
Section 6-201 Plan Commission. There is hereby created a Plan Commission as provided by
Statute.
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for an appointive, fact-finding, advisory body which shall,
after due deliberation and public hearing, when required, make recommendations to the
Board of Trustees on matters pertaining to:
1. The Comprehensive Plan and Official Map;
2. Chapter 28 - Zoning Regulations;
3. Chapter 29 - Subdivision Regulations;
4. Individual Petitions pertaining to the above;
5. Such other matters as may be referred to the Plan Commission by the Village Board.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
6-5 REVISED 10/07/19
b. Members. The Plan Commission shall consist of nine members, residents of the Village,
appointed by the Village President by and with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees.
Ord. #09-020)
c. Tenure. All members of the Plan Commission shall serve terms of three years or until their
successors are appointed and have taken the oath of office. Terms of appointment shall be
staggered. Not more than one-third of the members shall be appointed in any one year unless
required by vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled only for unexpired terms. Annually, the
Village President shall, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, designate one
of the members of the Plan Commission to be chair. No person shall serve as chair more
than three consecutive years, unless the Village President determines that continued service
as chair is in the best interests of the Village.
Ord. #19-034)
d. Compensation. Members of the Plan Commission shall serve without compensation.
Authorized expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with Village Travel Regulations.
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Plan Commission shall have such powers, duties
and responsibilities as are assigned by the Village President and Board of Trustees, including
those enumerated below:
1. The Comprehensive Plan and Official Map. The Plan Commission shall have the
power and responsibility to annually review the Village Comprehensive Plan
Comprehensive Plan") and Map ("Official Map"). The Comprehensive Plan is a
description of long-range public policy affecting community character, economic
well-being, cultural and social amenities, ease and convenience of circulation in the
Village, and orderly development of various land uses and serves as a policy guide in
all decisions related to community growth. The Official Map identifies the location
of present and future public service facilities and improvements, thoroughfare system
improvements, park and school sites and land for other public purposes.
a) The Comprehensive Plan and Official Map shall be applicable to all land
situated within the corporation limits and all contiguous territory not more
than one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in
any municipality.
b) The Comprehensive Plan and Official Map shall be advisory and shall not be
construed to regulate or control the use of private property in any way except
as to such part thereof as has been implemented by ordinances duly enacted
by the Board of Trustees.
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
6-6
c) No amendment or change to the Comprehensive Plan or Official Map shall be
adopted that has not been submitted to the Plan Commission.
d) No recommendation for amendment to the Comprehensive Plan or Official
Map shall be made by the Plan Commission until notice and opportunity for
hearing have been afforded and all other provisions of State Statutes have
been satisfied.
e) The Plan Commission shall be responsible for annual review of the
Comprehensive Plan and Official Map. Each year, no later than December 31,
the Plan Commission shall report to the Village Board of Trustees, including
any recommended amendments or shall recommend no changes.
2. Zoning Regulations. The Plan Commission shall, upon direction from the Board of
Trustees or at its own initiative, review any part of Chapter 28 (Zoning Regulations),
hold appropriate public hearings and make recommendations to the Board of
Trustees.
3. Subdivision Control Recommendations. The Plan Commission shall, upon direction
om the Board of Trustees or at its own initiative, review any part of Chapter 29
Subdivision Control Regulations), hold appropriate public hearings and make
recommendations to the Board of Trustees.
4. Individual Zoning, Subdivision and Development Petitions. The Plan Commission
will conduct appropriate hearings, unless a majority of the Trustees directs that a
specific hearing be held in some other manner, and submit recommendations to the
Board of Trustees on petitions involving the following matters:
a) Subdivision and Resubdivision;
b) Special Uses;
c) Planned Unit Developments;
d) Rezoning;
e) Variations to the extent allowed in Chapters 28 and 29;
f) Other matters referred to the Commission by the Board of Trustees.
5. Organization of the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission maycreate subcommittees
and adopt policies and procedures deemed advisable to fulfill its powers, duties
and responsibilities. All such policies and procedures shall be recorded and
submitted to the Board of Trustees.
6. General Guidelines. The Plan Commission, in all its proceedings, shall:
a) Be consistent with statutes of the State of Illinois.
b) Be consistent with the Municipal Code, with particular reference to the intent
and purpose of this Section and Chapters 28 and 29. Variations may be
recommended to the extent provided for by the Code or to the extent that
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
6-7 REVISED 10/07/19
there is a reasonable interpretation of the provisions of the Code, provided
such variations are clearly identified and justified.
c) Take cognizance of all official policy documents pertaining to planning,
zoning and subdivision. Variations may be recommended only when clearly
identified and justified.
Ord. #06-071)
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. Regular meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held at the
call of the Chair. Special meetings may be called by the Village President, the Board of
Trustees, the Liaison Committee of the Board of Trustees, the Chair of the Plan Commission
or a quorum of the Plan Commission. Five members shall constitute a quorum. The Chair
shall vote with other members of the Commission.
g. Records and Reports. The Plan Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings,
which records shall be open at all times to public inspection.
Section 6-202 Zoning Board of Appeals. There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Appeals as
provided by Statute.
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for an appointive, fact-finding body which shall, after due
deliberation and public hearing, make final decisions on specified administrative matters
related to zoning.
b. Members. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven members, residents of the
Village, appointed by the Village President by and with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees.
Ord. #09-020)
c. Tenure. All members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve terms of five years or until
their successors are appointed and have taken the oath of office. Terms of appointment shall
be staggered. Not more than two of the members shall be appointed in any one year unless
required by vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled only for unexpired terms. Annually, the
Village President shall, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, designate one
of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals to be chair. No person shall serve as chair
more than three consecutive years unless the Village President determines that continued
service as chair is in the best interests of the Village.
Ord. #19-034)
d. Compensation. Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve without compensation.
Authorized expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with Village Travel Regulations.
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
6-8 REVISED 10/18/04
Ord. #04-059, #18-010)
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the powers,
duties and responsibilities assigned by the Village President and Board of Trustees, including
those enumerated below:
1. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict
with the Code or with the Illinois Statutes.
2. Jurisdiction. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and
duties:
a) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Building Commissioner
or appropriate Administrative Officer in the enforcement of the Code, or to
hear and decide any of the appeals provided for in this Section.
b) In hearing and deciding appeals, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the
power to:
1) Permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district
divides a lot or tract held in a single ownership at the time of the
passage of the Zoning Ordinance.
2) Interpret the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in such a way as to
carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown on the map
fixing the several districts, accompanying and made a part of the
Zoning Ordinance, where the street layout actually on the ground
varies from the street layout as shown on the map aforesaid.
3) Permit the erection and use of a building or the use of premises for
railroad or public utility purposes, in accordance with the " Special
Uses" section of Chapter 28 of this Code.
4) Permit the reconstruction of a non-conforming building which has
been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God or public enemy, to the
extent of more than 50% of its value, where the Board finds some
compelling necessity which requires a continuance of the nonconforming
use and the primary purpose of continuing the nonconforming
use is not to continue a monopoly.
5) Waive the established parking requirements whenever the character
or use of the building is such as to make unnecessary the full
provision of parking facilities, or where such regulations would
impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot, as
contrasted with merely granting an advantage of convenience.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
6-9 REVISED 04/16/18
6) Permit land within 200 feet of a multiple dwelling to be improved for
the parking spaces required in connection with the multiple dwelling,
but only when there is positive assurance that such land will be used
for such purpose during the existence of the multiple dwelling.
7) Permit a variation in the yard requirements of any district where there
are unusual and practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the
carrying out of these provisions due to an irregular shape of the lot,
topographical or other conditions, provided such variation will not
seriously affect any adjoining property or the general welfare.
8) Permit a limited increase in the number of employees permitted in
processing activities in the Business, Commercial or Industrial
Districts, but only when such increase will not adversely affect the
commercial character of the establishment, will not be detrimental to
or adversely affect the character of surrounding residential
development, or will not seriously increase traffic or parking
congestion on adjoining streets.
Ord. #18-010)
c) Authorize upon appeal, whenever a property owner can show that a strict
application of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance relating to the construction
or alteration of building or structures will impose upon the owner unusual
practical difficulties or particular hardship, such variation of the strict
application of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance as are in harmony with its
general purposes and intent, but only when the Board is satisfied that a
granting of such variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the
applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable and unusual hardship or
difficulty so great as to warrant a variation from the Comprehensive Plan, and
at the same time the surrounding property will be properly protected.
In its consideration of the standards of practical difficulties or particular
hardship, the Board of Appeals shall require evidence that:
1) The proposed use will not alter the essential character of the locality
and will be compatible with existing uses and zoning of nearby
property; and
2) The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances, which may
include the length of time the subject property has been vacant as
zoned; and
3) The proposed variation is in harmony with the spirit and intent of this
Chapter;
4) The variance requested is the minimum variance necessary to allow
reasonable use of the property.
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
6-10 REVISED 04/16/18
d) Nothing contained herein shall be construed to give or grant to the Zoning
Board the power or authority to alter or change the Zoning Ordinance or the
District Map, that power and authority being reserved to the Board of
Trustees. Decisions by the Zoning Board shall be final administrative
decisions.
3. In exercising the above powers, the Board may reverse, affirm or modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and to that end shall have all
the powers of the Administrative Officer from whom the appeal is taken.
4. The Zoning Board shall not make any recommendation except in a specific case and
after it conducts a public hearing. A notice of the time and place of the public
hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation in the Village at least 15
but not more than 30 days previous to the hearing. Such notice shall contain the
address or location of the property for which the variation or other rule of the Board
is sought, as well as a brief description of the nature of the appeal.
5. No order of the Board permitting the erection or alteration of a building shall be valid
for more than one year, unless a building permit for the erection or alteration is
obtained within that year and the erection or alteration is started and proceeds to
completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. No order of the Zoning
Board permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for more than one
year, unless the use is established within that year; provided, however, that where the
use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, the order
shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for the erection or alteration is
obtained within that year and the erection or alteration is started and proceeds to
completion in accordance with the terms of such permit.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
6-11 REVISED 07/06/09
Ord. #06-071)
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. Regular meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held
at the call of the Chair. Special meetings may be called by the Village President, the Board
of Trustees, the Liaison Committee of the Board of Trustees, the Chair of the Zoning Board
of Appeals or a quorum of the Zoning Board of Appeals. Four members shall constitute a
quorum. The Chair shall vote with other members of the Board.
g. Records and Reports. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep written records of its
proceedings, which records shall be open at all times to public inspection.
Section 6-203 Board of Health. There is hereby created a Board of Health as provided by Statute.
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for an appointive, fact-finding body which shall make
recommendations to the Board of Trustees on matters pertaining to health. Additionally, the
Board of Health shall take emergency actions authorized by Statute, such as quarantine, to
protect the public health.
b. Members. The Board of Health shall consist of five members, residents of the Village and
health care professionals, appointed by the Village President by and with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees. The Executive Vice-President of Northwest Community
Hospital shall serve as ex-officio member of the Board of Health.
Ord. #09-020)
c. Tenure. All members of the Board of Health shall serve terms of three years or until their
successors are appointed and have taken the oath of office. Terms of appointment shall be
staggered. Not more than two of the members shall be appointed in any one year unless
required by vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled only for unexpired terms. Annually, the
Village President shall, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, designate one
of the members of the Board of Health to be chair. No person shall serve as chair more than
three consecutive years unless the Village President determines that continued service as
chair is in the best interests of the Village.
d. Compensation. Members of the Board of Health shall serve without compensation.
Authorized expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with Village Travel Regulations.
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Board of Health shall have such powers, duties
and responsibilities as are assigned by the Board of Trustees, including the following:
1. The Board of Health shall adopt its own rules or procedure not in conflict with the
Code or with the Illinois Statutes. The Board of Health may propose rules and
regulations for the protection of health in the Village to guard against the spread of
contagious diseases and to prevent, by necessary rules, the reduction of diseases,
contagious or otherwise, within the corporate limits of the Village.
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
6-12 REVISED 10/07/19
2. The Board of Health shall have the powers and perform the duties assigned to it by
Statute or by the provisions of this Code.
3. The Board of Health may propose reasonable rules regarding vaccination for the
prevention of the spread of contagious diseases and to quarantine premises where
such diseases occur or for such time necessary to protect the public health.
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. Regular meetings of the Board of Health shall be held at the call
of the Chair. Special meetings maybe called by the Village President, the Board of Trustees,
the Liaison Committee of the Board of Trustees, the Chair of the Board of Health, or a
quorum of the Board of Health. Three members shall constitute a quorum. The Chair shall
vote with other members of the Board of Health.
g. Records and Reports. The Board of Health shall keep written records of its proceedings,
which records shall be open at all times to public inspection.
Section 6-204 Board of Local Improvements. There is hereby created a Board of Local
Improvements as provided by Statute.
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for an appointive, fact-finding body which shall make
recommendations to the Board of Trustees on matters pertaining to the construction,
extension, improvement or repair of any local improvements.
b. Members. The Board of Local Improvements shall consist of five members, residents of the
Village, appointed by the Village President by and with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees. Such members may be persons holding other Village government positions, but
no person holding a Village government position must be appointed.
Ord. #09-020)
c. Tenure. All members of the Board of Local Improvements shall serve terms of five years or
until their successors are appointed and have taken the oath of office. Terms of appointment
shall be staggered. Not more than one member shall be appointed in any one year unless
required by vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled only for unexpired terms. Annually, the
Village President shall, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, designate one
of the members of the Board of Local Improvements to be president. No person shall serve
as chair more than three consecutive years unless the Village President determines that
continued service as chair is in the best interests of the Village. The Board shall elect a
secretary from among its members.
Ord. #19-034)
d. Compensation. Members of the Board of Local Improvements shall serve without
compensation. Authorized expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with Village Travel
Regulations.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
6-13 REVISED 10/07/19
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Board of Local Improvements shall have the
powers, duties and responsibilities assigned by the Board of Trustees, including the
following:
1. The Board of Local Improvements shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in
conflict with the Code or with the Illinois Statutes.
2. The Board of Local Improvements shall have the powers and duties imposed by 65
ILCS 5/9-2-1 et seq.
Ord. #06-071)
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. Regular meetings of the Board of Local Improvements shall be
held at the call of the Chair. Special meetings may be called by the Village President, the
Board of Trustees, the Liaison Committee of the Board of Trustees, the president of the
Board of Local Improvements, or a quorum of the Board of Local Improvements. Three
members shall constitute a quorum. The president shall vote with other members of the
Board of Local Improvements.
g. Records and Reports. The Board of Local Improvements shall keep written records of its
proceedings, which records shall be open at all times to public inspection.
Section 6-205 Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. There is hereby created a Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners as provided by Statute.
a. Intent and Purpose. To comply with the Statutes pertaining to the appointment of firefighters
and police officers.
b. Members. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall consist of three members,
residents of the Village, appointed by the Village President by and with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees.
Ord. #09-020)
c. Tenure. All members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall serve terms of
three years or until their successors are appointed and have taken the oath of office. Terms of
appointment shall be staggered. Not more than one of the members shall be appointed in any
one year unless required by vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled only for unexpired terms.
Annually, the Commissioners shall designate one of the members of the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners to be chair. No person shall serve as chair more than three
consecutive years unless the Village President determines that continued service as chair is in
the best interests of the Village. The Village Manager shall designate a Village employee to
act as the secretary.
Ord. #19-034)
d. Compensation. Members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall serve without
compensation. Authorized expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with Village Travel
Regulations.
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
6-14 REVISED 10/07/19
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall
have such powers, duties and responsibilities assigned by the Board of Trustees, including
the following:
1. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall make rules for, and appointments
to, the Fire and Police Departments as is necessary, except as provided in paragraph 2
below and as that power may otherwise be reserved to the President and Board of
Trustees.
Ord. #19-034)
2. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall appoint all officers and members
of the Fire and Police Departments of the Village, except the ranks above Police
Sergeant and Fire Lieutenant. All appointments made by the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners shall be from the rank next below that to which the
appointment shall be made, other than that of the lowest rank.
3. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall also make rules to provide for the
imposition of discipline upon members of the Fire and Police Departments,
including, but not limited to, suspension, demotion, reduction in rank and discharge.
Disciplinary action shall be in accordance with the statutes of the State of Illinois,
except as modified by the ordinances of the Village.
Ord. #13-034)
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. Regular meetings of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners shall be held at the call of the Chair. Special meetings may be called by the
Village President, the Board of Trustees, the Chair of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners or a quorum of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. Two members
shall constitute a quorum. The Chair shall vote with other members of the Board.
Ord. #19-034)
g. Records and Reports. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall keep written
records of its proceedings, which records shall be open at all times to public inspection in
accordance with applicable law.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
6-15 REVISED 10/07/19
PAGE
INTENTIONALLY
LEFT
BLANK
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
6-16 REVISED 07/06/09
Section 6-207 Redevelopment Commission. There is hereby created a Redevelopment
Commission as permitted under the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4, commonly known as the
Real Property Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act."
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for the appointment of a commission in the manner provided
by 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4 of the Real Property Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act
to exercise the powers granted under that statute to such commission.
b. Members. The Redevelopment Commission shall consist of nine members, residents of the
Village, appointed by the Village President by and with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees.
Ord. #09-020)
c. Tenure. All members of the Redevelopment Commission shall serve terms of five years or
until their successors are appointed and have qualified. Vacancies shall be filled only for
unexpired terms. Annually, the Village President shall, with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees, designate one of the members of the Redevelopment Commission to be
chair. No person shall serve as chair more than three consecutive years unless the Village
President determines that continued service as chair is in the best interests of the Village.
d. Compensation. Members of the Redevelopment Commission shall serve without
compensation. Authorized travel expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with Village
travel regulations.
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Commission, subject to the approval of the
President and Board of Trustees, may exercise the powers enumerated under the provisions
of 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4, which is a section of the Real Property Tax Increment Allocation
Redevelopment Act. The Commission shall also have the power to hold the public hearings
required by 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4 and make recommendations to the President and Board of
Trustees concerning the adoption of redevelopment plans, redevelopment projects, and
designation of redevelopment project areas.
If any member of this Commission owns or controls an interest, direct or indirect, in any
property included in any redevelopment area, or proposed redevelopment area, he or she shall
disclose that in writing to the Village Clerk, and shall also disclose the dates and terms and
conditions of any disposition of any such interest, which disclosures shall be acknowledged
by the corporate authorities and entered upon the minute books of the corporate authorities.
If an individual holds such an interest, then that individual shall refrain from any further
official involvement in regard to such redevelopment plan, project or area, from voting on
any matter pertaining to such redevelopment plan, project or area, or communicating with
other members of the Commission, the corporate authorities or employees concerning any
matter pertaining to that redevelopment plan, project or area. Further, no such member shall
acquire any interest, direct or indirect, in any property in a redevelopment area or proposed
redevelopment area after either that individual obtains
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
17 REVISED 03/20/06
knowledge of such plan, project or area or the first public notice of such plan, project or area,
whichever occurs first.
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair at such times
as may be required to fulfill the obligations imposed upon it under the terms of the Real
Property Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act. Five members shall constitute a
quorum. The Chair shall vote with other members of the Commission.
g. Records and Reports. The Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings and
such other records as may be required by law. These records shall be open at all times to
public inspection.
Article III Boards of Trustees of Pension Funds Required by Statute
Section 6-301 Board of Trustees of the Firefighters Pension Fund. There is hereby created a
Board of Trustees of the Firefighters Pension Fund as provided under 40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.
a. Intent and Purpose. To comply with the statutes pertaining to control and management of the
Firefighters Pension Fund.
Ord. #06-010)
b. Board Created. The Board of Trustees of the Firefighters Pension Fund shall consist of the
following: two members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor or President of the
Board of Trustees of the municipality or the Fire Protection District involved. Twomembers
of the Board shall be active participants of the pension fund who are elected from the active
participants of the fund. One member of the Board shall be a person who is retired under the
Firemen’ s Pension Fund Act of 1919 or this Article 40 who is elected from persons retired
under the Firemen’ s Pension Fund Act of 1919 or this Article 40.
The terms of the Mayor’ s appointees shall be staggered with one appointee serving an initial
term of three years and one appointee serving an initial term of two years. After their initial
terms, each term shall be for three years or until a successor has been appointed.
The Board of Trustees of the Firefighters Pension Fund shall elect a president and secretary
from its members.
c. Powers and Duties of Board. The Board shall have the powers and duties in Section 4-123 to
4-129 inclusive, in addition to the other powers and duties granted to it in this Article.
1. Section 4-123. To control and manage the pension fund, and all money donated,
paid, assessed, or provided by law for the relief or pensioning of disabled,
superannuated and retired firefighters, their surviving spouses, minor children and
dependent parents.
2. Section 4-124. To assess each firefighter beginning January 1, 1987, 8.25% of salary
including longevity attached to the rank held by the firefighter as established
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
18 REVISED 05/06/96
by the Village appropriation ordinance, but not including "overtime pay", "holiday
pay", " bonus pay", " merit pay", or any other cash benefit over and above the salary
established by the appropriation ordinance, which sum is to be deducted and withheld
from the pay or fees of each firefighter so assessed. The deductions, together with all
interest accrued or accruing thereon, shall be placed bythe Treasurer of the Village as
Ex Officio Treasurer of the Board, to the credit of the pension fund, subject to the
order of the Board.
3. Section 4-125. To hear and decide all applications for relief or pensions under this
Article and to order and direct the payment of pensions and other benefits.
4. Section 4-126. To make all rules and regulations necessary for the discharge of its
duties.
5. Section 4-127. To provide for the payment from the fund of all necessary expenses of
the Board.
6. Section 4-128. To invest the money of the pension fund only in accordance with 40
ILCS 5/4. Bonds purchased hereunder shall be registered in the name of the Board
or held under custodial agreement at a bank. No bank or savings and loan association
shall receive investment funds as permitted hereunder, unless it has complied with
the requirements established pursuant to Section 6 of "An Act Relating to Certain
Investments of Public Funds by Public Agencies," approved July23, 1943, as now or
hereafter amended. The limitation set forth in Section 6 shall be applicable only at
the time of investment and shall not require the liquidation of any investment at any
time.
7. Section 4-129. To keep a record of all its meetings and proceedings.
d. Section 4-134: Report for Tax Levy. The Board shall make a report to the Village Board of
Trustees of the condition of the pension fund prior to the meeting of the Village Board of
Trustees held for appropriating and levying of taxes for the year for which the report is made.
e. Section 4-137: No Compensation to Board. Members of the Board shall not receive or have
any right to receive any money or moneys from a pension fund as salary for service
performed as a member of the Board.
f. Section 4-142: Applicability of Home Rule Powers. No home rule unit, as defined in the
1970 Illinois Constitution or any amendment thereto, shall have the power to change, alter, or
amend in any way the provisions contained in 40 ILCS 5/4, and no home rule unit which is a
municipality, as defined in Section 4-103, shall provide for, singly or as a part of any plan or
program, by any means whatsoever, any type of retirement or annuity benefit to a firefighter
other than through establishment of a fund as provided in this Article as now or hereafter
amended.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
19
Section 6-302 Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund. There is hereby created a Board of
Trustees of the Police Pension Fund as provided under 40 ILCS 5/3 et seq.
a. Intent and Purpose. To comply with the statutes pertaining to control and management of the
Police Pension Fund.
b. Board Created. The Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall consist of five
members comprised of the following: two members, who shall be appointed by the Village;
two members elected from among the regular police force, by the active members thereof;
and one member elected by and from the beneficiaries of the fund. The election of the
elected members of the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall be held
biannually on the third Monday in April, at such place or places in the Village and under the
Australian ballot system and such other regulations as shall be prescribed by the appointed
members of the Board of Trustees of Police Pension Fund. The Board shall annually elect a
president and secretary from its members.
1. All members of the regular police force shall be entitled to vote for the police force
members.
2. All beneficiaries of legal age shall be entitled to vote for the member chosen from
among the beneficiaries.
3. No person shall be entitled to cast more than one ballot at any election.
c. Powers and Duties of Board. The Board shall have the powers and duties in Section 3-132 to
3-140, inclusive, of the State Statute, in addition to the other powers and duties granted to it
in this Article.
1. Section 3-132. To control and manage, exclusively, the pension fund, and all monies
donated, paid or assessed for the relief or pensioning of disabled, super-annuated and
retired members of the police department, their surviving spouses, minor children
and dependent parents. All such monies shall be placed by the Treasurer of the
Village to the credit of the fund, subject to the order of the Board.
2. Section 3-133. To order and direct the payment of pensions and other benefits
provided by this Article and to issue certificates signed by its President and Secretary
to the persons entitled thereto of the amount ordered paid to such persons from the
fund, which certificates shall state the purpose of the payment.
3. Section 3-134. To submit annually to the Village Board of Trustees at the close of
the Village's fiscal year, a list of persons entitled to payments from the fund, stating
the amount of the payments, and their purpose, as ordered by the Board. It shall also
include items of income accrued to the fund during that fiscal year. The list shall be
signed by the Secretary and President of the Board, and attested under oath. No
resolution or order for the payment of money shall be valid unless
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
20
approved by a majority of the members of the Board and any order for such payment
shall be signed by the President and Secretary of the Board.
4. Section 3-135. To invest the money of the pension fund only in accordance with 40
ILCS 5/3. Bonds purchased hereunder shall be registered in the name of the Board or
held under custodial agreement at a bank. No bank or savings and loan association
shall receive investment funds as permitted hereunder, unless it has complied with
the requirements established pursuant to Section 6 of "An Act Relating to Certain
Investments of Public Funds by Public Agencies," approved July23, 1943, as now or
hereafter amended. The limitation set forth in Section 6 shall be applicable only at
the time of investment and shall not require the liquidation of any investment at any
time.
5. Section 3-136. To compel witnesses to attend and testify before it, upon all matters
connected with the administration of this Article, in the manner provided by law for
the taking of testimony before the Circuit Court. The President, or anymember of the
Board, may administer oaths to such witnesses. To compel witnesses to attend and
testify before it, upon all matters connected with the administration of this Article, in
the manner provided by law for the taking of testimony before the Circuit Court. The
President, or any member of the Board, may administer oaths to such witnesses.
6. Section 3-137. To appoint a clerk and define the clerk's duties. No person drawing a
pension under this Article shall be employed by the Board.
7. Section 3-138. To provide for the payment from the fund of all necessary expenses,
including clerk hire, printing and witness fees.
8. Section 3-139. To keep a record of all its meetings and proceedings.
9. Section 3-140. To make necessary rules and regulations in conformity with the
provisions of this Article, which shall be published by the Board and copies
transmitted from time to time to all pensioners and contributors.
10. Section 3-141. On the 2nd Tuesday in May annually, the Treasurer and all other
officials of the Village, who had the custody of any pension funds herein provided,
shall make a sworn statement to the Board of the Police Pension Fund, and to the
President and Board Trustees of the Village, of all monies received and paid out by
them on account of the pension fund during the year, and of the amount of such funds
then on hand and owing to the pension fund. All surplus then remaining with any
official other than the Treasurer shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Village. Upon
demand of the Pension Board, any official shall furnish a statement relative to the
official method of collection or handling of such pension funds. All books and
records of such official shall be produced at any time for examination and inspection
by the Board.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
21 REVISED 02/01/99
11. Section 3-142. Any police officer and any surviving spouse, child or children, or
dependent parent thereof, entitled to receive benefits under this Article, and to whom
the Board has ordered benefits to be paid, shall receive a yearly benefit payable in 12
equal monthly installments, which shall be the aggregate amount to which they are
entitled.
If at any time there are not sufficient monies in the fund to pay the allowances of the
Board to its beneficiaries, the Village Board of Trustees shall make every effort
consistent with law to replenish the fund so that all beneficiaries may receive the
amounts to which they are entitled. If, after every effort is made, there remains a
deficit in the fund, the beneficiaries shall be paid pro rata from the available funds,
but no allowance or order of the Board shall be held to create any liability against the
Village, except upon the fund so set apart as aforesaid for the payment thereof.
12. Section 3-143. The Board shall report to the Village Board of Trustees on the
condition of the police pension fund. The report shall be made prior to the meeting
of the Board of Trustees held for the levying of taxes for the year for which that
report is made. The Board shall certify to the Village Board of Trustees:
1st - The assets in their custody at such time;
2nd - The estimated receipts during the next succeeding calendar year from
deductions from the salaries of police officers, and from all other sources; and
3rd - The estimated amount required during the calendar year to pay all pensions and
other obligations provided in this Article, and to maintain the reserve fund provided
in Section 3-127.
13. Section 3-146. Members of the Board of Trustees of a pension fund shall not receive
or have any right to receive any money or monies from a pension fund as salary for
service performed as a member of such Board.
14. Section 3-150. No home rule unit, as defined in the 1970 Illinois Constitution or any
amendment, shall have the power to change, alter or amend in any way, the
provisions contained in this Article, and no such home rule unit which is a
municipality, as defined in Section 3-103, shall provide for, singly or as a part of any
plan or program, by any means whatsoever, any type of retirement or annuity benefit
to a policeman other than through establishment of a fund as provided in this Article
as now or hereafter amended.
Article IV Elected Board with Statutory Authority
Section 6-401 Board of Library Trustees. There is hereby created a Board of Library Trustees as
provided by Statute.
Ord. #99-005)
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for an elective body of Trustees of the Arlington Heights
Memorial Library as provided in 75 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
22 REVISED 02/01/99
Ord. #99-005)
b. Members. The Board of Library Trustees shall consist of seven persons, residents of the
Village, elected as provided by Statute. In the event of a vacancy on the Board of Library
Trustees, the remaining trustees shall appoint a person to fill such vacancy until the next
scheduled library election.
c. Tenure. All members of the Board of Library Trustees shall serve terms of six years unless
appointed to fill a vacancy. The President of the Board of Library Trustees shall be
determined by the election of one of their number in the manner provided by Statute.
d. Compensation. Members of the Board of Library Trustees shall serve without compensation.
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities.
1. The Board of Library Trustees shall have such powers, duties and responsibilities as
are provided by Statute.
2. The Board of Library Trustees shall have the power to make reasonable rules and
regulations governing the use of the Library and may exclude from the Library, any
person or persons who willfully violate such rules.
Ord. #99-005)
f. Meetings. Regular meetings of the Board of Library Trustees shall be held on the fourth
Tuesday of the month at 7:30 P.M.
g. Records and Reports.
1. The Board of Library Trustees shall keep written records of its proceedings, which
records shall be open at all times to public inspection.
2. The Board of Library Trustees shall make a written report of the financial condition
of the Library within 30 days after the termination of the fiscal year of the Village.
This report shall be filed with the Village Board of Trustees and shall be made in the
manner provided in 75 ILCS 5/1 et seq. Acopy of this report shall be filed with the
Illinois State Library at the same time, as is provided by statute. The Board of
Library Trustees shall also make such reports as may be requested from time to time
by the Village Board of Trustees.
h. Tax Levies and Bond Issues. An annual Library tax shall be levied by the Village Board of
Trustees and collected each year as provided by 75 ILCS 5/1 et seq. The issuance of Library
Bonds shall be in accordance with 75 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
6-23 REVISED 10/01/11
Article V Other Boards and Commissions
Section 6-501 Design Commission. There is hereby created a Commission to be known as the
Design Commission.
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for an appointive, advisory body which shall, after due
deliberation, make recommendations to the Board of Trustees or the Building Commissioner
on matters relating to external architectural design, aesthetics, landscape and signs.
Ord. #09-020, #11-034)
b. Members. The Design Commission shall consist of five members, residents of the Village,
appointed by the Village President by and with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. The membership of the Commission shall consist of a minimum of three
architects, one of whom may be a landscape architect, plus one member who is actually
engaged in business in Arlington Heights and one member who is an urban planner or a
person specifically qualified for reasons of education, training or experience in the area of
graphic or allied arts. Members with other experience and backgrounds maybe appointed in
the event members with the above background are unobtainable.
Ord. #01-033, #09-020)
c. Tenure. Except for original appointments, all members of the Design Commission shall
serve terms of three years or until their successors are appointed and have qualified.
Vacancies shall be filled only for unexpired terms. Original appointments shall be two
members for terms of one year, two members for terms of two years and one member for a
term of three years. Annually, the Village President shall, with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees, designate one of the members of the Design Commission to be chair. No
person shall serve as chair more than three consecutive years, unless the Village President
determines that continued service as chair is in the best interests of the Village.
d. Compensation. The members of the Design Commission shall serve without compensation.
Authorized expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with the Village Travel Regulations.
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Design Commission shall have such powers,
duties and responsibilities as are assigned by the Village President and Board of Trustees, to
include those enumerated below:
1. Shall review all Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, Building Permit and
Sign Permit applications for new construction and those applications for
improvements which affect the architectural design of the building, site
improvements or signage to determine whether it meets with the standards,
requirements and purposes of the Design Guidelines and Chapter 30, Sign
Regulations.
2. Rules, Regulations and Procedures. The Design Commission shall prepare, adopt
and maintain such rules and regulations as are necessary to conduct the business of
the Design Commission and shall periodically review and update the Design
Guidelines.
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
6-24 REVISED 10/07/19
3. The Commission may perform and exercise the following powers and duties:
a) To work toward the aesthetic growth and preservation of the community by
studying exterior design drawings, sign plans, landscape and site plans to
determine how the proposed development will relate to exterior architectural
design, arrangement, height and appearance, color and texture of the
materials of the exterior construction, landscaping, entrance ways, lighting,
off-street parking facilities and similar matters as set forth in the Design
Guidelines;
b) To review all applications for sign permits for signs in the Central Business
District and all requests for variations from Chapter 30;
c) To encourage and inspire public and private participation in the enhancement
of community appearance;
d) To hold public meetings, when required, for the issuance of Certificates of
Approval and to recommend issuance or denial of such certificates;
Ord. #09-020, #11-034)
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. Meetings of the Design Commission shall be held as needed,
when properly called by the Chair. Special meetings may be called by the Village President,
the Board of Trustees, the Liaison Committee of the Board of Trustees, the Chair of the
Design Commission or a quorum of the Design Commission. Three members shall
constitute a quorum. The Chair shall vote with the other members of the Commission.
g. Records and Reports. The Design Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings,
which records shall be open to public inspection at all times.
Section 6-502 Building Code Review Board. There is hereby created a board to be known as the
Building Code Review Board.
Ord. #11-034)
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for an appointive, advisory body which shall, after due
deliberation, make recommendations to the Board of Trustees on matters relating to waivers
and amendments to the Building Code (Chapter 23) of the Village, as well as all adopted
International Code Council codes and administrative procedures relating to the enforcement
of the Building Code (Chapter 23) of the Village, as well as all adopted International Code
Council codes.
Ord. #19-034)
b. Members. The Building Code Review Board shall consist of six members, residents of the
Village, appointed by the Village President by and with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees. Members shall consist of the following: a Trustee of the Village who shall serve
during his or her term on the Village Board, a structural engineer, a building contractor, an
architect, a licensed electrician, and a mechanical engineer. Arepresentative of the Building
Department and a representative of the Fire Department shall each serve as Village
Administration Liaisons to the Board.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
6-25 REVISED 10/07/19
Ord. #09-020)
c. Tenure. All members of the Board shall serve terms of three years or until their successors
are appointed and have qualified. The terms of the contractor, structural engineer, architect
and mechanical engineer shall be staggered so that no more than two such members shall be
approved or reappointed in any one year, unless a vacancy exists. Vacancies shall be filled
only for unexpired terms. Annually, the Village President shall, with the advice and consent
of the Board of Trustees, designate one of the members of the Building Code Review Board
to be chair. No person shall serve as chair more than three consecutive years, unless the
Village President determines that continued service as chair is in the best interests of the
Village.
Ord. #19-034)
d. Compensation. Members of the Building Code Review Board shall serve without
compensation. Authorized expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with Village Travel
Regulations.
Ord. #11-034)
e. Powers, Regulations and Responsibilities. The Building Code Review Board shall have such
powers, duties and responsibilities as are assigned by the Village President and Board of
Trustees, to include those enumerated below:
1. The Building Code Review Board shall prepare, adopt and maintain such rules and
regulations as are necessary to conduct its business;
2. The Building Code Review Board shall review all requests for amendments to the
Building Code of the Village;
3. The Building Code Review Board shall certify that materials submitted for review
shall meet performance standards as stipulated in the Building Code (Chapter 23) of
the Village, as well as all adopted International Code Council codes. Any materials
which have been certified by the Board as meeting performance standards may be
utilized for construction purposes under the terms of the Village Building Code;
4. The Building Code Review Board shall recommend to the Village Board that
variations be granted from the provisions of the Building Code (Chapter 23) of the
Village, as well as all adopted International Code Council codes, in cases where the
applicant for such variation demonstrates practical difficulty and particular hardship
in the strict application of the applicable Code, and the Board finds that the granting
of such variation will not endanger the public health, safety and welfare, and will
result in a standard of construction which is at least as strict as that required by the
existing Code. No variation may be granted without final action bythe President and
Board of Trustees;
5. The Building Code Review Board shall review the Building Code (Chapter 23) of the
Village, as well as all adopted International Code Council codes, from time to
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
6-26 REVISED 10/07/19
time and make recommendations with respect to amendments and administrative
procedures relating to the enforcement of the codes;
6. Any standards, specifications, rules, regulations and fees recommended bythe Board
shall not become effective until adopted by ordinance.
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. Regular meetings of the Building Code Review Board shall be
scheduled at a date and time to be determined by the Board and announced in the Village
calendar and other appropriate media. Special meetings may be called by the Village
President, the Board of Trustees, the Liaison Committee of the Board of Trustees, the Chair
of the Building Code Review Board, or a quorum of the Building Code Review Board.
Three members shall constitute a quorum. The Chair shall vote with other members of the
Commission.
g. Records and Reports. The Building Code Review Board shall keep written records of its
proceedings, which records shall be open at all times to public inspection. An annual report
shall be made to the Board of Trustees, to include matters before the Building Code Review
Board and their status.
Ord. #11-005)
Section 6-503 Environmental Commission. There is hereby created a commission to be known as
the Environmental Commission.
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for an appointive, advisory body which shall promote the
preservation and enhancement of the physical environment of the Village of Arlington
Heights and cooperate with the Village government and all other governmental agencies in
the protection of said environment.
Ord. #09-017)
b. Members. The Environmental Commission shall consist of seven members, residents of the
Village, appointed by the Village President by and with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees. Additionally, one youth member, who shall be non-voting, may be appointed to
serve a term of no less than one year and no more than three years.
Ord. #09-020)
c. Tenure. All members of the Environmental Commission shall serve terms of three years or
until their successors are appointed and have qualified. The terms of members shall be
staggered so that no more than three members shall be appointed or reappointed in any one
year, unless a vacancy exists. Vacancies shall be filled only for unexpired terms. Annually,
the Village President shall, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, designate
one of the members of the Environmental Commission to be chair. No person shall serve as
chair more than three consecutive years, unless the Village President determines that
continued service as chair is in the best interests of the Village.
Ord. #19-034)
d. Compensation. Members of the Environmental Commission shall serve without
compensation. Authorized expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with Village Travel
Regulations.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
6-27 REVISED 10/07/19
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Environmental Commission shall have such
powers, duties and responsibilities assigned by the Board of Trustees, including the
following:
1. The Environmental Commission shall prepare, adopt and maintain such rules and
regulations as are necessary to conduct its business;
2. The Commission may perform and exercise the following powers and duties:
a) Make recommendations from time to time to the Board of Trustees with
respect to adoption and amendment of ordinances relating to environmental
control;
b) Investigate resource recovery, including recycling, reuse and conservation of
material resources and solid wastes;
c) Analyze pollution concerns that may be in violation of local, state or federal
regulations;
d) Consult and cooperate with all agencies of the Village, other municipalities,
and federal, state and local agencies concerned with environmental
protection;
e) Promulgate and effect a program of publicity relating to environmental
dangers and public education relating to environmental control;
f) Develop action programs of environmental protection and exercise such other
functions as may be delegated by the President and Board of Trustees;
g) Conduct public hearings, carry on research or otherwise obtain such factual
data and issue such reports and recommendations to the Village Board and to
the public as in the judgment of the Commission will effectuate the policies
and purpose of the Commission.
Ord. #06-071)
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. Regular meetings of the Environmental Commission shall be
held at the call of the Chair. Special meetings may be called by the Village President, the
Board of Trustees, the Liaison Committee of the Board of Trustees, the Chair of the
Environmental Commission or a quorum of the Environmental Commission. Five members
shall constitute a quorum. The Chair shall vote with other members of the Commission.
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
6-28 REVISED 02/21/11
g. Records and Reports. The Environmental Commission shall keep written records of its
proceedings, which records shall be open at all times to public inspection. An annual report
shall be made to the Board of Trustees, to include matters before the Commission and their
status. Such annual report may also contain recommendations as to additional steps to be
taken to preserve and protect the physical environment of the Village.
Section 6-504 Housing Commission. There is hereby created a commission to be known as the
Housing Commission.
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide an appointive, advisory body which shall:
1. Promote adequate housing for all the community's people, to create and/or maintain
sound viable neighborhoods, to meet the needs for housing by increasing the number
of housing units for low-and-moderate income families and individuals, and to
expand housing opportunities for all members of the community;
2. Constitute a Fair Housing Review Board, later referred to in this Section as the
Board, for the purpose of conducting hearings and acting in such a manner as set
forth in e. 3.
b. Members. The Housing Commission shall consist of seven members, residents of the
Village, appointed by the Village President by and with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees.
Ord. #09-020)
c. Tenure. All members of the Housing Commission shall serve terms of three years or until
their successors are appointed and have qualified. The terms of members shall be staggered
so that no more than three members shall be appointed or reappointed in any one year, unless
a vacancy exists. Vacancies shall be filled only for unexpired terms.
Annually the Village President shall, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees,
designate one of the members of the Housing Commission to be Chair. No person shall
serve as chair more than three consecutive years, unless the Village President determines that
continued service as chair is in the best interests of the Village.
d. Compensation. Members of the Housing Commission shall serve without compensation.
Authorized travel expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with Village Travel
Regulations.
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Housing Commission shall have such powers,
duties and responsibilities as are assigned by the Village President and Board of Trustees, to
include those enumerated below:
1. Rules, Regulations and Procedures. The Housing Commission shall prepare, adopt
and maintain rules and regulations as are necessary to conduct the business of the
Commission.
2. The Commission may perform and exercise the following powers and duties:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
29 REVISED 02/07/05
a) To provide advice in the implementation of on-going affordable housing
programs;
b) To work with the surrounding communities and governmental agencies in
meeting the housing needs of low and moderate income families in the area;
c) To evaluate, set priorities and determine future affordable housing needs (if
any), and to make appropriate recommendations to the Village Board;
d) In pursuance of the foregoing, to exercise any of the following powers:
1) To work with builders and developers in implementing affordable
housing programs;
2) To review local codes as they relate to low and moderate income
housing;
3) To investigate new funding methods and new techniques of providing
housing for all income groups;
4) To educate and inform local residents with respect to low and
moderate income housing programs;
5) To provide recommendations for site selection, adequate controls
over development progress, residency requirements, management and
maintenance of low and moderate income housing;
6) To analyze local housing needs and related social service needs on a
continuing basis.
Ord. #05-004)
3. Fair Housing Review Board.
a) The Fair Housing Review Board shall hear and investigate complaints
regarding discrimination in the sale, rental or financing of housing. It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the corporate limits of the
Village:
1) To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny, dwelling to any person because of race, color,
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
30 REVISED 02/07/05
religion, national origin, familial status or disability, or because of
any other unlawful discrimination listed in Article 3 of the Illinois
Human Rights Act, 775 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., as now or hereafter
amended;
2) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges or sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color,
religion, national origin, familial status, disability or because of any
other unlawful discrimination listed in Article 3 of the Illinois Human
Rights Act, 775 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., as now or hereafter amended;
3) To make, print, or publish or cause to be made, printed or published,
any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on a race, color, religion, national origin,
familial status or disability, or because of any other unlawful
discrimination listed in Article 3 of the Illinois Human Rights Act,
775 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., as now or hereafter amended, or an
intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination;
4) To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, familial status, disability or because of any other unlawful
discrimination listed in Article 3 of the Illinois Human Rights Act,
775 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., as now or hereafter amended, that any
dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental, when a
dwelling is in fact available;
5) For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular
race, color, religion, national origin, familial status or disability, or
any other protected class listed in Article 3 of the Illinois Human
Rights Act, 775 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., as now or hereafter amended;
6) For any bank, building and location association, firm or enterprise
whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of
commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial
assistance to any person applying for the purpose of purchasing,
constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to
discriminate against a person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate,
duration or other terms or conditions of the loan or other financial
assistance, because of the race, color, religion, national origin,
familial status or disability of that person or any person associated
with that person or any other protected class listed in Article 3 of the
Illinois Human Rights Act, 775 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., as now or
hereafter amended, in connection with the loan or other financial
assistance or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
31 REVISED 02/07/05
occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which the loan
or other financial assistance is to be made or given.
b) Nothing in this Article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or
society, or any non-profit institution or organization operated, supervised or
controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or
society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it
owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, to persons of religion,
from giving preference to such person, unless membership in the religion is
restricted on account of race, color, national origin, familial status or
disability or on account of any other unlawful discrimination listed in Article
3 of the Illinois Human Rights Act, 775 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., as now or
hereafter amended. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to rooms or
units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be
occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, of
the owner actually maintains and occupies one of the living quarters as his or
her residence.
c) Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of Sections 6-
504(e)(3)(a)(1) to 6-504(e)(3)(a)(6) of the Code may, within 60 days after the
date of the alleged violation, file a written complaint with the Department of
Planning and Community Development setting forth the grievance to be
presented to the Board. The complaint shall state the name and address of the
complainant and of the persons against whom the complaint is brought and a
plain concise statement of the alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation.
d) The Board is fully authorized to immediately investigate each complaint
filed. However, the Board’s enforcement authority shall not be construed as a
limitation on the Village in seeking penalties or other remedial action from a
court of competent jurisdiction. The Board's investigation shall include an
opportunity for the complainant to be interviewed. If the Board determines
that the respondent has not committed a violation, it shall state its finding of
fact in writing and report it to the Board of Trustees. If the Board determines
that probable cause exists for the allegations made in the complaint, the
Board shall set a date for the conciliation hearing. At the hearing, the Board
shall interview the complainant and the person or persons against whom the
complaint has been directed, and attempt to resolve the complaint by all
proper methods of conciliation and persuasion. If such attempts at
conciliation are not successful within 60 days after the date of filing the
complaint, the Board shall then proceed promptly with full hearing.
e) The hearing shall be conducted by the Board or any four members thereof,
upon due and reasonable notice to all parties. The Board shall have full
power to subpoena witnesses and pertinent documents, which power may be
enforced by the Board by proper petition to any court of competent
jurisdiction. The Board shall have the power to administer oaths and to take
sworn testimony. Any person charged with a violation shall have the
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
32 REVISED 07/15/13
right to cross-examine witnesses. At the conclusion of the hearings, the
Board shall render a written report with findings and recommendations which
shall be served by mail upon the complainant and the respondent. No report
shall be delayed more than 60 days after the date of the issuance of notice for
commencement of the first hearing on the complaint.
f) Upon receipt of the report and recommendations, the President and Board of
Trustees shall thereupon set a date for consideration of the report with
recommendations at a public meeting. The President and Board of Trustees
shall give notice in writing at least five days prior to the date to all parties to
the hearings before the Review Board. At the public hearing, the President
and Board of Trustees may receive such further evidence or information as
they deem proper. If the President and Board of Trustees shall determine that
the respondent in such proceedings is guilty of a violation of any applicable
provision of Sections 6-504(e)(3)(a)(1) to 6-504(e)(3)(a)(6), itmaydirect that
appropriate legal action be taken against the respondent.
Ord. #13-037)
4. Affordable Housing Trust Fund
a) The Housing Commission shall make recommendations to the Village
Board regarding the following:
1) Goals for the use of Housing Trust Fund resources;
2) Annual Budget for the Housing Trust Fund;
3) Procedures for reviewing applications and awarding Housing Trust
Fund resources to applicants;
4) Criteria to be used in reviewing applications and programs that utilize
Housing Trust Fund resources;
5) Procedures to be used for disbursing Housing Trust Fund resources;
6) Review of applications and programs for Housing Trust Fund awards;
7) Procedures to be used to monitor Eligible Activities funded by the
Housing Trust Fund to ensure that Housing Trust fund resources are
used in conformance with all applicable requirements; and
8) Evaluation of Housing Trust Fund activities.
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. Regular meetings of the Housing Commission shall be
scheduled at least monthly at a date and time to be determined by the Commission and
announced in the Village calendar and other appropriate media. Special meetings may be
called by the Village President, the Board of Trustees, the Liaison Committee of the Board of
Trustees, the Chair of the Housing Commission or a quorum of the Commission. Four
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
6-33 REVISED 08/03/15
members shall constitute a quorum. The Chair shall vote with other members of the Commission.
g. Records and Reports.
1. The Housing Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which
records shall be open at all times to public inspection. An annual report shall be
made to the Committee-of-the-Whole, to include matters before the Commission and
their status.
2. When sitting as the Fair Housing Review Board, a copy of the report of each hearing
and recommendation pertaining thereto shall be submitted to the Village President
and Board of Trustees.
h. Any project or recommendation of the Housing Commission shall follow established
procedures of review through the Plan Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, and the
Village Board of Trustees as required by the Municipal Code. The powers and duties herein
granted to the Housing Commission shall be subject to approval and review by the Village
Board. The Village Manager is directed to render such advice and assistance to the Housing
Commission, including the provision of office space and personnel, as may be required to
effectuate the program of the Housing Commission. The Village Attorney shall act as
counsel to the Commission.
Ord. #95-089, #15-025)
Section 6-505 The Arlington Economic Alliance. There is hereby created the Arlington Economic
Alliance.
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for an appointive, advisory body whose purpose shall be to
promote existing businesses and attract new businesses to the Village and to develop and
support programs in order to foster and support a Village-wide initiative towards the
promotion of quality economic development.
Ord. #02-025)
b. Members. The Arlington Economic Alliance shall consist of 13 members, either residents of
the Village or individuals working for a business located in the Village, appointed by the
Village President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. There shall
also be one member of the Village staff, appointed by the Village Manager, serving as
liaison.
Ord. #02-025, #09-020)
c. Tenure. All members of the Arlington Economic Alliance, shall serve terms of three years or
until their successors are appointed and have qualified. The terms of members shall be
staggered so that no more than five members shall be appointed or reappointed in any one
year, unless a vacancy exists. Vacancies shall be filled only for unexpired terms. Annually,
the Village President shall, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, designate
one of the members of the Arlington Economic Alliance to be chair. No person shall serve
as chair more than three consecutive years, unless the Village President determines that
continued service as chair is in the best interests of the Village.
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
6-34 REVISED 08/03/15
In addition to the two staff members serving as liaisons, membership of the Arlington
Economic Alliance shall consist of individuals representing the following organizations or
types of business. Each organization or type of business shall have one representative on the
Arlington Economic Alliance. For any of the categories of members, if a classification
cannot be filled from the designated category, the appointee maybe from any business within
the community.
Organization or Type of Business
Automobile Dealer
Business Representative
Chamber of Commerce
Convention & Visitors Bureau
Downtown Business Owner
Financial Institution
Hospitality Industry
Industrialist
Real Estate, Developer or Property Manager - Commercial
Real Estate, Developer or Property Manager - Residential
Restauranteur
Retailer
Top Twenty Employer
d. Compensation. Members of the Arlington Economic Alliance shall serve without
compensation. Authorized travel expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with Village
Travel Regulations.
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Arlington Economic Alliance shall have such
powers, duties and responsibilities as are assigned by the Village President and Board of
Trustees, to include those enumerated below:
1. The Arlington Economic Alliance shall prepare, adopt and maintain such rules and
regulations as are necessary to conduct the business of the Arlington Economic
Alliance.
2. The Arlington Economic Alliance shall promote economic development byactivities
including, but not limited to, the following:
a) Advising the Village on the development and implementation of business
retention/expansion programs;
b) Advising the Village on the implementation of a marketing program to attract
new business and industry;
c) Monitoring business activity and trends on the local, state, and national
levels;
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
6-35 REVISED 08/03/15
d) Establishing a focal point for businesses to approach and discuss issues that
affect them;
e) Engage representatives from the following communitywide entities at
Arlington Economic Alliance meetings as appropriate: Arlington Heights
Memorial Library, Arlington Heights Park District, Township High School
District 214, the Special Events Commission, and other entities as
appropriate.
f) Researching and advising the Board of Trustees, Village Manager and boards
and commissions on matters relating to economic development.
g) Annually, not later than the beginning of the fiscal year, submit to the Village
Board for approval, a statement of its goals and objectives and procedures for
accomplishing them.
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. Regular meetings of the Arlington Economic Alliance shall be
scheduled on a quarterly basis at a date and time to be determined bythe Arlington Economic
Alliance and announced in the Village calendar and other appropriate media. Special
meetings may be called by the Village President, the Board of Trustees, the Chair of the
Arlington Economic Alliance or a quorum of the Arlington Economic Alliance. Seven
members shall constitute a quorum. The Chair shall vote with other members of the
Arlington Economic Alliance.
g. Records and Reports. The Arlington Economic Alliance shall keep written records of its
proceedings, which records shall be open at all times to public inspection. An annual report
shall be made to the Board of Trustees, to include matters before the Arlington Economic
Alliance and their status.
Section 6-506 Senior Citizens' Commission. There is hereby created a commission to be known
as the Senior Citizens' Commission.
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for an appointive, advisory body which shall promote the
needs and concerns of the senior citizens of the Village of Arlington Heights and to
cooperate with the Village Government and all other governmental agencies in the promotion
of the cause of the senior citizen.
b. Members. The Senior Citizens' Commission shall consist of ten members, residents of the
Village, appointed by the Village President by and with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees.
Ord. #09-020)
c. Tenure. All members of the Senior Citizen's Commission shall serve terms of three years or
until their successors are appointed and have qualified. The terms of members shall be
staggered so that no more than three members shall be appointed or reappointed in any one
year, unless a vacancy exists. Vacancies shall be filled only for unexpired terms. Annually,
the Village President shall, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, designate
one of the members of the Senior Citizens' Commission to be chair. No person shall serve as
chair more than three consecutive years, unless the Village President determines that
continued service as chair is in the best interests of the Village.
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
6-36 REVISED 08/03/15
d. Compensation. Members of the Senior Citizens' Commission shall serve without compensation.
Authorized travel expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with Village Travel
Regulations.
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Senior Citizens' Commission shall have such
powers, duties and responsibilities as are assigned by the Village President and Board of
Trustees, to include those enumerated below.
1. The Senior Citizens' Commission shall prepare, adopt and maintain such rules and
regulations as are necessary to conduct the business of the Commission.
2. Make recommendations from time to time to the Board of Trustees with respect to
adoption and amendment of ordinances relating to senior citizens.
3. Investigate the needs and concerns of the senior citizens, including housing,
employment, education, physical and mental health, income, nutrition, legal aid,
retirement roles and activities, spiritual well-being, transportation, government and
all other related areas of planning.
4. Analyze complaints of senior citizens of the Village of Arlington Heights.
5. Consult and cooperate with all agencies of the Village, other municipalities, and
federal, state and local agencies concerned with senior citizens.
6. Promulgate and effect a program of publicity relating to senior citizens and public
education relating to senior citizens.
7. Develop action programs of benefit to senior citizens and exercise such other
functions as may be delegated by the President and Board of Trustees.
8. Conduct public hearings, carry on research, or otherwise obtain such factual data and
issue such reports and recommendations to the Village Board and to the public as in
the judgment of the Commission will effectuate the policies and purpose of the
Commission.
9. The Commission shall annually, not later than the beginning of the fiscal year, submit
to the Village Board for approval a statement of its goals and objectives and
procedures for accomplishing them.
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. Regular meetings of the Senior Citizens' Commission shall be
scheduled at least monthly at a date and time to be determined by the Commission and
announced in the Village calendar and other appropriate media. Special meetings may be
called by the Village President, the Board of Trustees, the Liaison Committee of the Board of
Trustees, the Chair of the Senior Citizens' Commission or a quorum of the Commission. Six
members shall constitute a quorum. The Chair shall vote with other members of the
Commission.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
37 REVISED 07/06/09
g. Records and Reports. The Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which
records shall be open at all times to public inspection.
Section 6-507 Youth Commission. There is hereby created a commission to be known as the
Arlington Heights Youth Commission.
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for an appointive, advisory body which shall, after due
deliberation, make recommendations to the Board of Trustees on matters pertaining to the
welfare of the youth of the Village of all ages, particularly those in middle school and high
school. When authorized by the Board of Trustees, the Commission will take additional
steps and measures to promote youth programs.
Ord. #01-033, #07-041)
b. Members. The Commission shall consist of 13 members, six to be adult members and seven
to be youth members, high school students, appointed by the Village President by and with
the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, subject to the following conditions:
Appointments shall include at least one member from the staff of School District 214 or 25, a
representative of the Arlington Heights Park District, and a representative of the Arlington
Heights Police Department. The appointment of high school students shall be from among
the residents of the Village of Arlington Heights who are students of any high school serving
Arlington Heights residents. The adult members shall be residents of the Village or
employed within the Village in a professional capacity relating to youth work.
Ord. #09-020)
c. Tenure. All members of the Commission, except high school students, shall serve terms of
three years or until their successors are appointed and have taken the oath of office. High
school students shall serve one year. Terms of appointment shall be staggered. Not more
than three members with three year terms shall be appointed in any one year unless required
by vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled only for unexpired terms. Annually, the Village
President shall, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, designate one of the
members of the Commission to be chair. No person shall serve as chair more than three
consecutive years, unless the Village President determines that continued service as chair is
in the best interests of the Village.
d. Compensation. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. Authorized
travel expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with Village travel regulations.
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Commission shall have such powers, duties and
responsibilities as are assigned by the Village President and Board of Trustees, to include
those enumerated below:
1. The Commission shall prepare a statement of goals and objectives which shall be
reviewed and revised at least annually and submitted to the Village Board for
approval not later than the beginning of the fiscal year. Procedures for accomplishing
goals and objectives shall be included;
2. The Commission shall prepare, adopt and maintain such rules and regulations as are
necessary to conduct the business of the Commission;
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
38 REVISED 06/07/10
3. The Commission shall consider all existing youth programs sponsored bythe Village,
Township, County, State and Federal governments and by schools, parks, religious
institutions, and non-profit organizations. Those programs of value to the youth of
Arlington Heights will be brought to the attention of the Board of Trustees together
with recommendations to promote their use. When authorized or directed by the
Board of Trustees, promotional programs will be implemented;
4. Deficiencies in existing youth programs will be brought to the attention of the Board
of Trustees, together with recommendations for corrective action, to include the role
envisioned for the Village, Township, County, State and Federal governments;
religious institutions and private enterprise;
5. The Commission shall review the Village Administration's evaluations of youth
programs funded by the Village and recommend appropriate action to the Board of
Trustees;
6. The Commission shall recommend to the Board of Trustees, as part of the annual
budget process, appropriate budgets to support existing, new or modified youth
programs supported by evaluations and justifications.
Ord. #10-026)
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. Regular meetings of the Commission shall be scheduled at least
monthly at a date and time to be determined by the Commission and announced in the
Village calendar and other appropriate media. Special meetings maybe called bythe Village
President, the Board of Trustees, the Liaison Committee of the Board of Trustees, the Chair
of the Commission or a quorum of the Commission. Seven members shall constitute a
quorum. The Chair shall vote with other members of the Commission.
g. Records and Reports. The Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which
records shall be open at all times to public inspection.
Section 6-508 Commission for Citizens with Disabilities. There is hereby created a commission
to be known as the Arlington Heights Commission for Citizens with Disabilities.
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for an appointive, advisory body which shall promote the
needs and concerns of the citizens with disabilities of the Village of Arlington Heights and to
cooperate with the Village government and all other governmental agencies in the promotion
of the cause of people with disabilities.
b. Members. The Commission for Citizens with Disabilities shall consist of nine members,
residents of the Village, appointed by the Village President by and with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees. Four members shall be persons with disabilities, that is,
persons who have a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more
major life activities.
Ord. #09-020)
c. Tenure. All members of the Commission for Citizens with Disabilities shall serve terms of
three years or until their successors are appointed and have qualified. The terms of members
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
39
shall be staggered so that no more than two members shall be appointed or reappointed in
any one year, unless a vacancy exists. Vacancies shall be filled only for unexpired terms.
Annually, the Village President shall, with the advice and consent of the BoardofTrustees,
designate one of the members of the Commission to be chair. No person shall serve as chair
more than three consecutive years, unless the Village President determines that continued
service as chair is in the best interests of the Village.
d. Compensation. Members of the Commission for Citizens with Disabilities shall serve
without compensation. Authorized travel expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with
the Village Travel Regulations.
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Commission for Citizens with Disabilities shall
have such powers, duties and responsibilities as are assigned by the Village President and
Board of Trustees, to include those enumerated below.
1. The Commission for Citizens with Disabilities shall prepare, adopt and maintain such
rules and regulations as are necessary to conduct the business of the Commission.
2. Make recommendations from time to time to the Board of Trustees with respect to
adoption and amendment of ordinances relating to persons with disabilities.
3. Investigate the needs and concerns of people with disabilities, including housing,
employment, education, physical and mental health, income, nutrition, legal aid,
retirement roles and activities, spiritual well-being, transportation, government and
all other related areas of planning.
4. Analyze complaints of citizens with disabilities of the Village of Arlington Heights.
5. Consult and cooperate with all agencies of the Village, other municipalities, and
federal, state and local agencies concerning persons with disabilities.
6. Promulgate and effect a program of publicity and public education relating to persons
with disabilities.
7. Develop programs of benefit to persons with disabilities and exercise such other
functions as may be delegated by the President and Board of Trustees.
8. Conduct public hearings, carry on research, or otherwise obtain such factual data and
issue such reports and recommendations to the Village Board and to the public as, in
the judgment of the Commission, will effectuate the policies and purpose of the
Commission.
9. The Commission shall annually, not later than the beginning of the fiscal year, submit
to the Village Board for approval a statement of its goals and objectives and
procedures for accomplishing them.
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
40 REVISED 05/02/11
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. Regular meetings of the Commission for Citizens with
Disabilities shall be scheduled at least quarterly at a date and time to be determined by the
Commission and announced in the Village calendar and other appropriate media. Special
meetings may be called by the Village President, the Board of Trustees, the Liaison
Committee of the Board of Trustees, the Chair of the Commission for Citizens with
Disabilities or a quorum of the Commission. Five members shall constitute a quorum. The
Chair shall vote with other members of the Commission.
g. Records and Reports. The Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which
records shall be open at all times to public inspection.
Ord. #11-020)
Section 6-509 Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Commission. There is hereby created a
commission to be known as the Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Commission.
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for an appointive, advisory body which shall assist in the
development of comprehensive plans for bikeways and pedestrian travel within the Village of
Arlington Heights and cooperate with the Village and other governmental agencies in the
development of a bikeway system.
b. Members. The Commission shall consist of seven members, residents of the Village,
appointed by the Village President by and with the consent and advice of the Board of
Trustees.
Ord. #09-020)
c. Tenure. Except for original appointments, all members of the Bicycle and Pedestrian
Advisory Commission shall serve terms of three years or until their successors are appointed
and have qualified. Original appointments shall be two members for terms of one year, two
members for terms of two years and three members for terms of three years. Vacancies shall
be filled in the manner set forth in paragraph b. above. Annually, the Village President
shall, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, designate one of the members of
the Commission to be chair. No person shall serve as chair more than three consecutive
years, unless the Village President determines that continued service as chair is in the best
interests of the Village.
d. Compensation. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. Authorized
expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with Village regulations.
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Commission shall have such powers, duties and
responsibilities as are assigned by the Village President and Board of Trustees, to include
those enumerated below:
1. Prepare, adopt and maintain such rules and regulations as are necessary to conduct
the business of the Commission;
2. Prepare a statement of goals and objectives, and procedures for accomplishing them,
which shall be submitted to the Village Board for approval not later than the
beginning of each fiscal year;
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
41 REVISED 09/21/09
3. Recommend a comprehensive bikeways system plan for the Village of Arlington
Heights;
4. Recommend a comprehensive bicycle education and safety program.
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. The Commission shall adopt a schedule of meetings to be
announced in the Village calendar and other appropriate media. Special meetings may be
called by the Village President, the Board of Trustees, the Liaison Committee of the Board of
Trustees, the Chair of the Commission or a quorum of the Commission. Four members of
the Commission shall constitute a quorum to carry on the business of the Commission. The
Chair shall vote with other members of the Commission.
g. Records. The Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which records shall
be open at all times to public inspection.
Section 6-510 Special Events Commission. There is hereby created a commission to be known as
the Arlington Heights Special Events Commission.
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for an appointive advisory body which shall promote,
organize and implement special events of civic, patriotic, educational and cultural nature in
the Village of Arlington Heights.
Ord. #03-024)
b. Members. The Commission shall consist of twelve members, appointed by the Village
President by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The holding of any
other appointed or elected position in the Village of Arlington Heights shall not disqualify an
appointee to the Commission.
Ord. #09-020)
c. Tenure. All members of the Commission shall serve for a period of four years; provided,
however, that the original terms shall be staggered so that five members originally appointed
shall serve two years and six members shall serve for four years, and that thereafter all
appointments shall be for four years. All vacancies as mayoccur on the Commission shall be
filled in the manner hereinabove set forth for original appointments. Annually, the Village
President shall, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, designate one of the
members of the Commission to be chair. No person shall serve as chair more than three
consecutive years, unless the Village President determines that continued service as chair is
in the best interests of the Village.
d. Compensation. Members of the Special Events Commission shall serve without
compensation. Authorized expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with Village
regulations.
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Commission shall have such powers, duties and
responsibilities by the Board of Trustees, including the following:
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
42 REVISED 09/21/09
1. To investigate opportunities for special events of civic, patriotic, educational and
cultural nature, such as will promote the best interests of the Village of Arlington
Heights;
2. To make recommendations to the Board of Trustees from time to time with respect to
such special events;
3. To study special events in other communities and localities for possible adoption and
promotion in the Village of Arlington Heights;
4. To develop programs to promote such special events as may be established, both by
the Village of Arlington Heights and by other community, civic or patriotic
organizations when such promotion is in the best interests of the Village of Arlington
Heights; and
5. To submit an annual report with recommendations to the Village Board indicating the
plans and programs of the Commission.
Ord. #03-024)
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. On its organization, the Commission shall adopt a schedule of
meetings to be announced in the Village calendar or other appropriate media. Special
meetings may be called by the Village President, the Board of Trustees, the Liaison
Committee of the Board of Trustees, the Chair of the Commission or a quorum of the
Commission. Seven members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum to carry on the
business of the Commission. The Chair shall vote with other members of the Commission.
g. Records. The Commission shall keep written reports of its proceedings. Its records shall be
open at all times to public inspection.
Ord. #09-035)
Section 6-511 Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Board. AForeign Fire Insurance Tax Board is created
pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCDS 5/11/-10-2.
Section 6-512 Arts Commission. There is hereby created a Commission to be known as the Arts
Commission.
a. Intent and Purpose. To provide for an appointive, advisory body which shall, after due
deliberation, make recommendations to the President and Board of Trustees on the
acquisition of public art within the Village of Arlington Heights.
Ord. #01-001, #09-020)
b. Members. The Arts Commission shall consist of nine members, residents of the Village,
appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
Annually, the Village President shall designate one of the persons so appointed as chair. No
person shall serve as chair more than three consecutive years unless the Village President
determines that continued service as chair is in the best interests of the Village.
c. Tenure. Except for original appointments, all members of the Arts Commission shall serve
terms of three years, or until their successors are appointed and have qualified. The terms of
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
43 REVISED 09/21/09
members shall be staggered so that no more than three members shall be appointed or
reappointed in any one year, unless a vacancy exists. Vacancies shall be filled only for
unexpired terms.
d. Compensation. The members of the Arts Commission shall serve without compensation.
Authorized expenses shall be reimbursed in accordance with Village Travel Regulations.
e. Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. The Arts Commission shall have such powers, duties
and responsibilities as are assigned by the Village President and Board of Trustees, to include
those enumerated below:
1. Prepare, adopt and maintain such rules and regulations as are necessary to
conduct the business of the Commission;
2. Invite, enlist and encourage the cooperation of public and private agencies and
the general public in support of cultural advancement within the Village;
3. Facilitate greater awareness of the arts;
4. Make recommendations to the Village Board for the provisions of an
environment in which the cultural arts will flourish within the Village.
f. Meetings, Quorum, Voting. The Commission shall adopt a schedule of meetings to be
announced in the Village calendar and other appropriate media. The Commission shall meet
as often as necessary, but no less than four times each year. Special meetings may be called
by the Village President, the Board of Trustees or a quorum of the Arts Commission. Five
members shall constitute a quorum.
g. Records and Reports. The Arts Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings,
which records shall be open to public inspection at all times.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 10/15/18
CHAPTER 7 - OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
Article I Personnel
Section 7-101 Scope
Section 7-102 Appointment
Section 7-103 Term of Office
Section 7-104 Vacancies
Section 7-105 Oath
Section 7-106 Compensation
Section 7-107 Bond
Section 7-108 Termination of Office
Section 7-109 Qualifications for Officeholders
Article II Records
Section 7-201 Definitions
Section 7-202 Original Records: Destruction
Section 7-203 Destruction of Public Records
Section 7-204 Regulations
Section 7-205 Records, Not Public Records
Section 7-206 Certificate of Intent
Article III Emergency Management Agency
Section 7-301 Establishment
Section 7-302 Director
Section 7-303 Coordinator
Section 7-304 Membership with the Joint Emergency Management Systems
Section 7-305 Functions
Section 7-306 Emergency Plans
Section 7-307 Service as Mobile Support Team
Section 7-309 Reimbursement by State
Section 7-310 Purchases and Expenditures
Section 7-310 Oath
Section 7-311 Office
Article IV Emergency Powers of the Village President
Section 7-401 Emergency Powers and Duties
Section 7-402 Governmental Powers
Section 7-403 Continuity in Office
Section 7-404 Local Disaster Emergencies
Section 7-405 Power and Authority Granted
Section 7-406 Notification
Section 7-407 Duration
Article V Emergency Energy Plan
Section 7-501 Definitions
Section 7-502 State of Emergency
Section 7-503 Power and Authority Granted
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-2 REVISED 12/21/09
Section 7-504 Notification
Section 7-505 Duration
Section 7-506 Penalty
Article VI Village Seal
Section 7-601 Village Seal: Description
Section 7-602 Village Seal: Custody
Article VII Budget Policy and Process
Section 7-701 Adoption of Budget Procedures
Section 7-702 Appointment of the Budget Officer
Section 7-703 Passage of the Budget
Section 7-704 Contents of the Budget
Section 7-705 Budget Revisions
Section 7-706 Contingencies
Section 7-707 Infrastructure/Capital Equipment Funding
Section 7-708 Public Inspection, Hearing, Notice and Publication
Article VIII Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility
Section 7-801 Scope
Section 7-802 Definitions
Section 7-803 Notices
Section 7-804 Late Payment
Section 7-805 Payment
Section 7-806 Certain Credits and Refunds
Section 7-807 Audit Procedure
Section 7-808 Appeal
Section 7-809 Hearing
Section 7-810 Interest and Penalties
Section 7-811 Abatement
Section 7-812 Installment Contracts
Section 7-813 Statute of Limitations
Section 7-814 Voluntary Disclosure
Section 7-815 Publication of Tax Ordinances
Section 7-816 Liens for Unpaid Taxes
Section 7-817 Application
Section 7-818 Severability
Article IX Municipal Electric Use Tax
Section 7-901 Municipal Electric Use Tax
Section 7-902 Definitions
Section 7-903 Electrical Use Tax Kilowatt Hour Tax Imposed; Amount
Section 7-904 Collection of Tax
Section 7-905 Tax Remittance and Return
Section 7-906 Resales
Section 7-907 Books and Records
Section 7-908 Credits and Refunds Section 7-909 Exemptions
Section 7-910 Government Entity Exemptions
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-3 REVISED 05/01/17
Article X Municipal Gas Use Tax
Section 7-1001 Municipal Gas Use Tax
Section 7-1002 Definitions
Section 7-1003 Tax
Section 7-1004 Collection of Tax by Public Utility
Section 7-1005 Books and Records
Section 7-1006 Government Entity Exemptions
Article XI Fees
Section 7-1101 Checks Returned for Non-sufficient Funds
Section 7-1102 Freedom of Information Act Request Fee
Section 7-1103 Requests to Waive Freedom of Information Act Fee
Section 7-1104 Building Permit Fees
Section 7-1105 Ambulance Fees
Section 7-1106 Fees - Storage Tanks
Section 7-1107 Fees for Relocating Buildings
Section 7-1108 Fees for Outdoor Eating Cafes
Section 7-1109 Zoning Board of Appeals Fees
Section 7-1110 Plan Commission Fees
Section 7-1111 Design Commission Fees
Section 7-1112 Sign Permit Fee
Section 7-1113 Storm Water Utility Fee
Article XII Affordable Housing Trust Fund
Section 7-1201 Creation
Section 7-1202 Purpose
Section 7-1203 Definitions
Section 7-1204 Distribution of Funds
Section 7-1205 Eligibility Requirements
Section 7-1206 Review and Approval of Applications and Programs
Section 7-1207 Condition and Requirements
Section 7-1208 Sources of Funds
Article XIII Administrative Adjudication System
Section 7-1301 Purpose
Section 7-1302 Jurisdiction
Section 7-1303 Administrative Hearings Unit
Section 7-1304 Qualifications of Administrative Hearing Officers
Section 7-1305 Scope of Authority of Administrative Hearing Officers
Section 7-1306 Administrative Hearings
Section 7-1307 Procedure
Section 7-1308 Representation at Hearings
Section 7-1309 Default
Section 7-1310 Fines
Section 7-1311 Enforcement of Administrative Hearing Officer’s Order
Section 7-1312 Election of Remedies
Article XIV Conflicts with Certain Home Rule County Ordinances
Section 7-1401 Minimum Hourly Wages and Paid Sick Leave
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-4
REVISED 05/07/18
Article XV Hotel Tax
Section 7-1501 Hotel Tax; Amount
Section 7-1502 Definitions
Section 7-1503 Tax Return
Section 7-1504 Reimbursement of Tax
Section 7-1505 Books and Records
Section 7-1506 Interest, Penalties and Fines
Section 7-1507 Proceeds
Section 7-1508 Severability
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-5
Article I Personnel
Section 7-101 Scope. The provisions of this Article shall apply equally to all officers and
employees of the Village, regardless of the time of the creation of the office or position or the time of
the election or appointment of the officer or employee unless another provision of this Code
specifically provides for some other treatment.
Section 7-102 Appointment. Appointments shall be made by the person, and in the manner,
provided by the provisions of this Code. If the provisions of this Code do not indicate who shall
appoint, or in what manner the appointment shall be made, the following rules shall apply.
a. Administrative Appointments. The Village Manager shall make all appointments of officers
or employees whose work shall be concerned with the administration of the Village.
b. Other Appointments. All other appointments of persons who shall advise the Board of
Trustees on Village policy shall be made by the President with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees.
Section 7-103 Term of Office. Every elected officer shall hold office for the term prescribed bythe
provisions of this Code or by statute. Every appointed officer or employee shall hold office for the
term specified in the provisions of this Code; if no term is specified, then, he shall hold office for an
indefinite term and may be removed at the discretion of the appointing officer.
Section 7-104 Vacancies. Vacancies in elected offices shall be filled as provided by the provisions
of this Code or by statute. Vacancies in appointed offices shall be filled in the same manner as such
appointments were first made; provided, however, that where an officer is appointed for a specified
term, the appointment to fill the vacancy shall only be for the remainder of that term.
Section 7-105 Oath. Every officer of the Village, before entering upon the duties of office, shall
take an oath in the manner and form prescribed by the provisions of this Code or by Statute.
Section 7-106 Compensation. All officers and employees of the Village shall receive such
compensation as the President and Board of Trustees shall, from time to time, provide byordinance.
Section 7-107 Bond. Every officer or employee shall, if required by the provisions of this Code, by
Statute or by the Board of Trustees, before beginning the duties of office, give a bond in such
amount and with such sureties as may be determined by the source requiring such bond, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office or position.
Section 7-108 Termination of Office. Every officer and employee of the Village, upon the
expiration of his or her term for any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to his her successor all books
and records which are the property of the Village, and if no successor has been appointed within
one week after the termination of the term of office, all such Village property shall be turned over to
the officer who appointed or hired such officer or employee, or, in the case of an elected officer, such
property shall be turned over to the Village Clerk.
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-6
Section 7-109 Qualifications for Officeholders. No person except as provided below shall be
eligible to hold any office in the Village government who is not a qualified elector of the Village, and
who has not resided within the Village for at least one year next preceding his or her election or
appointment. No person who has defaulted on any obligation to the Village or who is presently in
default shall be eligible for election or appointment.
Article II Records
Section 7-201 Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words or terms,
whenever used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings:
a. Employee. All persons appointed by the Village Manager in either permanent or temporary
capacities, including those working both full-time and part-time.
b. Local Records Commission. The Cook County Local Records Commission as provided by
Statute.
c. Officer. All elected persons, all appointed members of Boards and Commissions, the Village
Manager, the Village Attorney and the Village Prosecutor.
d. Public Agency. All boards, commissions, departments, divisions or any part of the Village
government of Arlington Heights.
e. Public Record. Any book, paper, map, photograph, or other official documentary material,
regardless of physical form or characteristics, made, produced, executed or received by any
public agency or officer pursuant to law or in connection with the transaction of public
business and preserved or appropriate for preservation by such agency or officer, or any
successor thereof, as evidence of the organization, function, policies, decisions, procedures,
or other activities thereof, or because of the informational data contained therein. Library
and museum material made or acquired and preserved solely for reference or exhibition
purposes, extra copies of documents preserved only for convenience of reference, and stocks
of publications and of processed documents are not included within the definition of public
record.
Section 7-202 Original Records: Destruction. All public records made or received by, or under
the authority of, or coming into the custody, control or possession of any officer or public agency
shall not be mutilated, destroyed, transferred, removed or otherwise damaged or disposed of, in
whole or in part, except as provided by the provisions of this Code and by Statute.
Section 7-203 Destruction of Public Records. Except as otherwise provided by Statute, no public
record shall be disposed of by any officer or public agency unless the written approval of the Local
Records Commission is first obtained.
Section 7-204 Regulations. The Local Records Commission regulations pertaining to the
destruction, or microfilming and destruction of records shall be binding on all officers and public
agencies as provided by Statute.
Section 7-205 Records Not Public Records. Non-record materials or materials not included within
the definition of public records, may be destroyed at any time by the officer or agency in possession
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-7 REVISED 10/15/18
of such materials without the prior approval of the Local Records Commission. The Local Records
Commission has the power, by Statute, to formulate advisory procedures and interpretation to guide
in the disposition of materials which are not public records.
Section 7-206 Certificate of Intent. Prior to the destruction of any of the original records, as
permitted by Statute, the officer of the public agency having such public records in custody or under
his or her supervision shall attach to each reproduction or continuous roll of reproductions, as the
case may be, a certification as provided by Statute.
Ord. #07-003, #18-037)
Article III Emergency Management Agency
Section 7-301 Establishment. There is hereby created the Village of Arlington Heights Emergency
Management Agency (“ EMA”), established to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or
damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile actions or from
natural or man-made disasters, in accordance with "The Illinois Emergency Management Agency
Act" (“ Act”), as now or hereafter amended. The EMA shall consist of the Village Manager, who
shall serve as EMA Director, the Coordinator, who shall be designated by the Director, and such
other members as selected by the EMA Director. The Coordinator shall be under the authority,
command, and control of the EMA Director.
Section 7-302 Director. Under the supervision of the Village President, the EMA Director shall
have the responsibility for the management of the EMA. In the event of the absence, resignation,
death, or inability of the Village Manager to serve as the EMA Director, the Village President, or
individual designated by the Village President, shall act as EMA Director until a new Village
Manager is appointed or other individual is appointed EMA Director.
Section 7-303 Coordinator. Under the supervision of theEMADirector, the Coordinator shall have
direct responsibility for the planning, coordination, and operation of the emergency management
activity in the Village. The Coordinator shall serve as liaison with the State and Federal authorities
and the authorities of other nearby political subdivisions to ensure the most effective operation of the
Emergency Operations Plan. The Coordinator's duties shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
a. Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel
and facilities of the Village for emergency management purposes.
b. Development and coordination of plans for the immediate use of all Village facilities,
equipment, manpower and other resources for the purposes of minimizing or preventing
damage to persons and property and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental
services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and welfare.
c. Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in control of buildings or
other property for the use of such buildings or other property for emergency management
purposes, and designating suitable buildings as public shelters.
d. Conducting public practice alerts to ensure the efficient operation of emergency management
regulations, procedures, and operations.
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-8 REVISED 10/15/18
e. Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency
management activity.
f. Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the EMA Director may direct to
promote and execute the Emergency Operations Plan.
g. In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve of the Coordinator, the
EMA Director or another person designated by the EMA Director, shall act as Coordinator
until a new appointment is made.
Section 7-304 Membership with the Joint Emergency Management System. The Village is a
member of the Joint Emergency Management System (“ JEMS”), a regional system among
neighboring municipalities for emergency management support. As a member of JEMS, the Village
coordinates its emergency management program activities with the JEMS Coordinator in order to
ensure regional standardization.
Section 7-305 Functions. The VillageEMAshall perform suchEMAfunctions within the Village as
shall be prescribed in and by the State of Illinois EMA plan and program prepared by the Governor,
and, in addition, shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as maybe required pursuant to
any mutual aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality
entered into as provided in the Act.
Section 7-306 Emergency Plans.
a. Acomprehensive Emergency Operations Plan shall be adopted and maintained byresolution
of the Corporate Authorities upon the recommendations of the Village President. In the
preparation of the Plan as it pertains to the Village organization, it is the intent that the
services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be
utilized to the fullest extent. When approved, it shall be the duty of the EMA Director, all
departments, and all employees to perform the functions assigned bythe Plan and to maintain
their portion of the Plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The Emergency
Operations Plan shall be considered supplementary to this Chapter and have the effect of law
whenever a disaster has been proclaimed.
b. Each department head assigned responsibility in the Emergency Operations Plan shall be
responsible for carrying out all duties and functions assigned therein. Duties will include the
organization and training of assigned Village employees and volunteers.
c. The Village President shall prescribe in a Continuity of Operations and Continuity of
Government Plan those positions within the disaster organization, in addition to their own,
for which lines of succession are necessary. In each instance, the responsible person will
designate and keep on file with the Village a current list of three persons as successors to the
position. The list will be in order of succession and will as nearly as possible designate
persons best capable of carrying out all assigned duties and functions.
d. When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not available within the
Village government, the Village President is authorized to seek assistance from persons
outside of government. The assignment of duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also
grant authority for the persons so assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during, and after
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-9 REVISED 10/15/18
a disaster. The Village may accept such services from persons outside of government on a
volunteer basis. Such persons shall be enrolled as emergency management volunteers in
cooperation with the heads of departments affected.
e. Some of the duties ascribed to the Village President in this Article will ordinarily be handled
as a matter of routine by the EMA Director or Coordinator, but the responsibility and
authority stem from and remain with the Village President.
Section 7-307 Service as Mobile Support Team. Any member of the Village EMA may be
designated as a member of a mobile support team created by the Director of the State of Illinois
Emergency Management Agency as provided by law. The leader of the mobile support team shall be
designated by theEMA Director. Any member of a mobile support team who is a Village employee
or officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor or the State Director shall receive the
compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or
office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the Village while so serving shall
receive reasonable compensation from the State of Illinois as provided by law.
Section 7-308 Emergency Action. If the Governor proclaims that a disaster or state of emergency
exists n the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State of
Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action or from man-made
or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the VillageEMAto cooperate fully with the State of Illinois
EMA and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
Section 7-309 Reimbursement by State. The Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate
fund any reimbursement by the State of Illinois to the Village for expenses incident to training
members of the EMA as prescribed by the State Director of EMA, compensation for services and
expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside the Village in response to a call
by the Governor or State Director ofEMAas provided bylaw, and any other reimbursement made by
the State incident to EMA activities as provided by law.
Section 7-310 Purchases and Expenditures. The Board of Trustees, may, on recommendation of
the Village Director of EMA, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the Village in a
position to combat effectively any enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the
State of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from
man-made or natural disasters and to protect the public health and safety, protect property, and
provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster.
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Village Director ofEMA is authorized, on behalf
of the Village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as maybe necessary for such
purposes, in view of the emergency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities
normally prescribed by law pertaining to Village contracts or obligations, as authorized by "The
Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act", as amended; provided, that if the Village President is
available at such time, the Village Director shall act subject to the direction and restrictions imposed
by the Village President.
Section 7-311 Oath. Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village EMA
organization shall, before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to the following oath:
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-10a REVISED 10/15/18
I (state your name) of the Emergency Management Agency of the Village do
solemnly swear ( or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and
allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private,
against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without
any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter, and I do further swear ( or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political
party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this state by force or violence; and that during such time as Iam affiliated
with the Village EMAorganization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the
United States or of this state by force or violence.
Section 7-312 Office. The Village Manager is authorized to designate space in any Village building
or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Village Board for the Village EMA organization as its
office.
Ord. #18-037)
Article IV Emergency Powers of the Village President
Section 7-401 Emergency Powers and Duties. During any period when disaster threatens or when
the Village has been struck by disaster, the Village President or theEMA Director may promulgate
such regulations as deemed necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources.
Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
a. Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in order to facilitate the work
of emergency management personnel or to facilitate the mass movement of persons from
critical areas within or without the Village.
b. Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas deemed to be hazardous or
vulnerable to disaster.
c. Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety.
Section 7-402 Governmental Powers. Whenever, due to an emergency resulting from the effects
of natural or manmade disaster or hostile act or the anticipated effects thereof, it becomes imprudent,
inexpedient or impossible to conduct the affairs of local government at the regular or usual place or
places, the Village Board may meet at any place within or outside the Village limits on the call of the
presiding officer or any two members of such governing body. The Village Board shall proceed to
establish and designate by ordinance, resolution, or other manner alternate or substitute sites or
places as the emergency temporary location or locations of government where all or any part of the
public business may be transacted and conducted during the emergency situation. Such sites or
places may be within or outside the Village.
During the period when the public business is being conducted at the emergency temporary location
or locations, the governing body and other officers of the Village shall have all of the executive,
legislative, and judicial powers and functions conferred upon such body and officers by the laws of
this State. Such powers and functions may be exercised in light of the exigencies of the emergency
situation without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-10b REVISED 10/15/18
prescribed by law and pertaining thereto, and all acts of such body and officers shall be valid and
binding as if performed within the Village.
Section 7-403 Continuity In Office. In the event that the Village President is unavailable, the
powers of the office shall be exercised and duties shall be discharged by the designated emergency
interim successors in the order specified. The emergency interim successor shall exercise the powers
and discharge the duties of the office to which designated until such time as a vacancy which may
exist shall be filled in accordance with the constitution or statutes; or until the officer, or their deputy
or a preceding emergency interim successor, again becomes available to exercise the powers and
discharge the duties of the office. Based on the authority of 5 ILCS 275/3 the line of succession for
the executive branch of government will be: Village President, President Pro Tem, Senior Trustee.
In the event that, at the time or as a consequence of any disaster or occurrence described in this
Chapter, the Village President and their successors on file with the Village shall be absent, killed, or
rendered incapable of performing the duties of such office, such office shall be filled until such time
as a successor can be selected in the manner prescribed by law, in the following line of succession:
the remaining members of the Village Board based on tenure, the Village Manager, the Director of
Finance, the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief, the Public Works Director. In the event that, at the time
or as a consequence of any disaster or occurrence described in this Chapter, the incumbent of any
Municipal office or position shall be absent, killed, or rendered incapable of performing the duties of
such office or position, such office or position shall be filled, until such time as a successor can be
selected in the manner prescribed by law, by appointment by the Village President. The Village
President shall give due consideration to the list of three successors on file with the Village but is not
required to select from said list.
Section 7-404 Local Disaster Emergencies. A local disaster emergency may be proclaimed only
by the Village President as provided by "The Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act", as
amended. The local disaster emergency shall be continued only as provided byStatute. It shall be the
duty of the Village EMA to cooperate fully with the Village President in the exercise of emergency
powers as provided by law during the time of a local disaster emergency.
Section 7-405 Power and Authority Granted. Upon declaring a Local Disaster Emergency, the
Village President may:
a. Order a general curfew applicable to the geographical areas of the Village, or to the Village
as a whole, as the Village President deems reasonably necessary to respond to the emergency,
and applicable during the hours of the day or night as the Village President deems necessary
in the interests of the public safety and welfare.
b. Prohibit the sale of any firearm of any size or description and the sale of any ammunition,
explosive or other destructive device.
c. Prohibit the intentional possession in public view of any firearm by any person except a duly
authorized law enforcement officer or military person active in the official performance of
his or her duty.
d. Order the establishment of curfews, including vehicle movement except fire, police, hospital
services, utility vehicles and physicians on emergency cases.
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-10c REVISED 10/15/18
e. Prohibit the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages, with or without payment, or the
possession of any portable container containing any alcoholic beverage by any person in a
public place.
f. Order the closing of places of public assemblage.
g. Prohibit the sale or transfer or possession of gasoline or other combustible liquid except for
delivery directly into the tank of a motor vehicle, boat or other combustion-propelled vehicle.
h. Prohibit the possession in a public place of any portable container containing combustible
liquid.
i. Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property.
Section 7-406 Notification. Upon issuance of the executive order declaring a Local Disaster
Emergency, the appropriate public official shall notify the news media situated within the Village
and shall cause two copies of the executive order declaring the existence of the State of Emergency
to be posted at the Municipal Building and the Police Department.
Section 7-407 Duration. A declaration of a Local Disaster Emergency shall expire not later than
the adjournment of the first regular meeting of the corporate authorities after the Local Disaster
Emergency is declared, unless terminated earlier by proclamation of the Village President that the
Local Disaster Emergency no longer exists.
Article V Emergency Energy Plans
Ord. #99-033)
Section 7-501 Definitions. Whenever any of the following terms are used in this Article they
shall have the meaning indicated.
a. State of Emergency. State of Emergency shall mean an occurrence or threat of widespread or
severe damage, where extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health,
safety and welfare from injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or
technological cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm,
hazardous materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert
danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods of severe and
inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical shortages of essential fuels and energy,
explosion, riot or hostile military or paramilitary action.
b. Curfew. Curfew shall mean a prohibition against any person or persons being present at or
upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway with the exception of officials
of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to a State
of Emergency duly declared by executive order pursuant to this Article.
Section 7-502 State of Emergency.
a. Whenever a State of Emergency, as defined in this Article exists, the Village Manager or his
or her designee shall report the circumstance to the Village President. The report shall
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
11 REVISED 05/17/99
include the nature of the emergency, the geographic area or areas involved, and the specific
remedies requested.
b. The Village President may declare a State of Emergency by written executive order
containing a statement signed by the Village President, under oath setting forth the following:
1. One or more of the conditions which have been met for the determination of a State
of Emergency;
2. Facts to substantiate such findings;
3. A description of the nature of the emergency; and
4. Declaration that a State of Emergency exists.
This statement must be filed with the Village Clerk as soon as practicable.
c. The Village President may exercise the extraordinary power and authority granted in this
Article when such a State of Emergency exists but not until after signing, under oath, the
executive order.
Section 7-503 Power and Authority Granted. Upon declaring a State of Emergency, the Village
President may:
a. Order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the Village or to the Village
as a whole, as the Village President deems reasonably necessary to respond to the
Emergency, and applicable during such hours of the day or night as the Village President
Deems necessary in the interests of the public safety and welfare;
b. Prohibit the sale of any firearm of any size or description and the sale of any ammunition,
explosive or other destructive device;
c. Prohibit the intentional possession in public view of any firearm by any person except a duly
authorized law enforcement officer or military person active in the official performance of
his duty.
d. Order the establishment of curfews, including vehicle movement except fire, police, hospital
services, utility vehicles and physicians on emergency cases;
e. Prohibit the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages, with or without payment, or the
possession of any portable container containing any alcoholic beverage by any person in a
public place;
f. Order the closing of places of public assemblage;
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
12 REVISED 05/17/99
g. Prohibit the sale or transfer or possession of gasoline or other combustible liquid except for
delivery directly into the tank of a motor vehicle, boat or other combustion-propelled vehicle;
h. Prohibit the possession in a public place of any portable container containing combustible
liquid;
i. Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property.
Section 7-504 Notification. Upon issuance of the executive order declaring a State of Emergency,
the appropriate public official shall notify the news media situated within the Village and shall cause
two copies of the executive order declaring the existence of the State of Emergency to be posted at
the Municipal Building and the Police Department.
Section 7-505 Duration. A declaration of a State of Emergency shall expire not later than the
adjournment of the first regular meeting of the corporate authorities after the State of Emergency is
declared, unless sooner terminated by proclamation of the Village President indicating that the State
of Emergency no longer exists.
Section 7-506 Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be fined
not less than five dollars nor more than five hundred dollars.
Article VI Village Seal
Ord. #99-033)
Section 7-601 Village Seal: Description. The seal for the Village of Arlington Heights shall be
provided for and used by the Village. The impression of the seal shall be circular in form with the
words "Arlington Heights, Illinois" on the outer circle. A facsimile of the seal appears below:
Section 7-602 Village Seal: Custody. The Village seal shall be and remain in the custody of the
Village Clerk, and shall be used by the Village Clerk in the manner provided bythe provisions of this
Code or by Statute.
Article VII Budget Policy and Process
Ord. #99-033)
Section 7-701 Adoption of Budget Procedures. The Village of Arlington Heights adopts 65 ILCS
5/8-2-9.1 through 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.10, as now or hereafter amended, to establish the budget
procedures.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13 REVISED 05/17/99
Section 7-702 Appointment of the Budget Officer. The Finance Director shall serve as the
Budget Officer.
Section 7-703 Passage of the Budget. The annual budget ordinance will be passed and adopted bya
majority vote of the corporate authorities then holding office, including the President of the Board,
before the beginning of the fiscal year for which it applies. Passage of the annual budget ordinance
shall be in lieu of an annual appropriation ordinance as required by 65 ILCS 5/ 8-2-9.
Section 7-704 Contents of the Budget.
a. There shall be a single budget document which identifies all expected revenues and
expenditures of Village-owned funds. The budget document shall contain all budgeted line
items.
b. The budget document shall contain estimates of the revenues available to the Village for the
fiscal year for which the budget is drafted, together with recommended expenditures of all
Village operations. Revenue estimates and expenditure recommendations will be presented
in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal management practices. The budget shall
contain actual or estimated revenues and expenditures for at least two years immediately
preceding the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared.
c. Each budget shall show the specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure shall be
made.
Section 7-705 Budget Revisions.
a. The annual budget may be revised by deleting, adding to, changing or creating sub-classes
within object classes and object classes themselves or byincreasing the total appropriation of
a fund. All budget revisions require a 2/3 vote of the corporate authorities then holding
office, including the President, except for administrative transfers as provided for in
subsection b. below.
b. The Village Manager or designee may transfer budgeted expenditure amounts affecting any
category of expenditure by no more than $10,000 within and between departments within any
fund. Transfers made under the provisions of this subsection shall be reported to the Board
of Trustees on a monthly basis.
c. Budget revenue amounts may be changed bythe Village Manager, when deemed appropriate,
based on revised revenue estimates. Such changes shall be reported to the Board of Trustees
on a monthly basis.
d. In the case of an emergency, the Village Manager, President, or Board of Trustees may
declare that a state of emergency exists. Such declaration authorizes the Village Manager to
award contracts, acquire services, and make purchases for the purpose of meeting the public
emergency, notwithstanding whether there is an adequate budget or available funds for the
expenditure. The Manager, within 14 days, shall file a memorandum to the Board
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
14 REVISED 12/18/00
identifying the emergency and the necessity of emergency action together with an accounting
of all proposed expenditures.
e. No revision to the budget shall be made in the event funds are not available to effectuate the
purpose of the revision, except as provided in subsection d above.
Section 7-706 Contingencies. The annual budget may contain money set aside for contingency
purposes not to exceed ten percent of the total budget, less the amount set aside for contingency
purposes, which monies may be expended for contingencies upon a majority vote of the corporate
authorities then holding office or under the transfer provisions of this Article.
Section 7-707 Infrastructure/Capital Equipment Funding.
a. Monies may be accumulated for the purpose or purposes of current or future, specified and
unspecified, capital equipment and infrastructure improvements, repair or replacement.
b. Expenditures from monies accumulated for capital equipment and infrastructure
improvements, repair or replacement shall be budgeted in the fiscal year for which the capital
and infrastructure improvement, repair or replacement will occur.
Section 7-708 Public Inspection, Hearing, Notice and Publication.
a. The corporate authorities shall make the proposed annual budget conveniently available for
public inspection at least ten days prior to the public hearing on the budget, in such form as
the corporate authorities may prescribe. Copies shall be made available at the Arlington
Heights Municipal Building and at the Arlington Heights Public Library.
b. Notices of availability for public inspection of the budget and of the public budget hearing
shall be given at least ten days prior to the time of the hearing by publication in a newspaper
having general circulation in the municipality.
c. Not less than one week after the publication of the tentative annual budget and prior to final
action on the budget, the corporate authorities shall hold at least one public hearing on the
tentative annual budget, after which the budget may be further revised and passed without
further inspection, notice or hearing.
d. The annual budget shall be published in pamphlet form as provided by law.
Article VIII
Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility
Ord. #00-082)
Section 7-801 Scope. The provisions of this Article shall apply to the Village’s procedures in
connection with all of the Village’ s locally imposed and administered taxes.
Section 7-802 Definitions. Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them
as follows:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
15 REVISED 12/18/00
a. Act. The "Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act."
b. Corporate Authorities. The Village’s President and Board of Trustees.
c. Locally imposed and administered tax or tax. Each tax imposed by the Village that is
collected or administered by the Village not an agency or department of the State. It does not
include any taxes imposed upon real property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected
by the Village other than infrastructure maintenance fees.
d. Local tax administrator. The Village’ s Finance Director, is charged with the administration
and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or
agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax
administrator’ s stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the
terms of this ordinance to give full effect to this ordinance. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this ordinance and the Act.
e. Village. The Village of Arlington Heights, Illinois.
f. Notice. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in
connection with each of the Village’ s locally imposed and administered taxes.
g. Tax Ordinance. Each ordinance adopted bythe Village that imposes any locally imposed and
administered tax.
h. Taxpayer. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and
generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is placed and with
respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the
locally imposed and administered tax to the Village.
Section 7-803 Notices. Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the
notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar days prior to the day fixed for any
applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be
sent by the local tax administrator as follows: 1) first class or express mail, or overnight mail,
addressed to the persons concerned at the persons’ last known address, or 2) personal service or
delivery.
Section 7-804 Late payment. Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made
to the Village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is (a) physically
received by the Village on or before the due date, or (b) received in an envelope or other container
displaying a valid, readable U.S. Postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the
Village, with adequate postage prepaid.
Section 7-805 Payment. Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in
the following order: 1) first to the interest due for the applicable period; 2) second to the tax due for
the applicable period; and 3) third to the penalty for the applicable period.
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
16 REVISED 12/18/00
Section 7-806 Certain Credits and Refunds.
a. The Village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the
time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly
enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall
not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under
duress.
b. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four or less years after the
end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made. The Village shall not grant a
credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person
who has not paid the amounts directly to the Village.
1. The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered
taxes; interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
a. the taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for
credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
b. the name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. the tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the
claim;
d. the date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the cancelled check or
receipt for the payment;
e. the taxpayer’ s recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax
return, in connection with the claim; and
f. a request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be
applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as
applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the Village.
2. Within ten days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund
or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
a. grant the claim; or
b. deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason
for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
c. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for
refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
17 REVISED 12/18/00
interest at the rate of 3% per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the
number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of
mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
Section 7-807 Audit Procedure. Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered
tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this ordinance.
a. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. the tax;
2. the time period of the audit; and
3. a brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
b. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected
by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer, another date and time may be
requested by the taxpayer within 30 days after the originally designated audit and during
normal business hours.
c. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be
conducted not less than seven days nor more than 30 days from the date the notice is given,
unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In
the event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer
may request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that is convenient to the
taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
d. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer’s business or activities,
including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions which had
given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall
be kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the
Village.
e. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for
inspection by the Village. If the taxpayer or tax collector fails to provide the documents
necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax
determination and assessment based on the tax administrator’ s determination of the best
estimate of the taxpayer’ s tax liability.
f. If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered
tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the
taxpayer within 30 days of the Village’ s determination of the amount of overpayment.
g. In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local
tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax.
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
18 REVISED 12/18/00
Section 7-808 Appeal.
a. The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax
administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of
claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:
1. the reason for the assessment;
2. the amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. the procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. the obligations of the Village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
b. Ataxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of
tax due or assessment may file with the local tax administrator a written protest and petition
for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within 45 days of
receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and assessment.
c. If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix
the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall
be scheduled for a date within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
d. If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the 45 day period, the tax
determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing without further
notice.
e. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested
tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax
administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for
hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be
reopened or extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.
Section 7-809 Hearing.
a. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for
hearing under section nine, above, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing
regarding any appeal.
b. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary
to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a
continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed 14 days.
c. At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
19 REVISED 12/18/00
any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of
evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
d. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax
collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision.
Section 7-810 Interest and Penalties. In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due
and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time frame
otherwise indicated.
a. Interest. The Village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late
payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be 1% per month, based on a year of
365 days and the number of days elapsed.
b. Late Filing and Payment Penalties. If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner
provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty, of 5% of the amount of tax
required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of5%
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by
the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the Village issuing a notice of tax delinquency or
notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to 10% of the total
tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A
late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the
controlling ordinance.
Section 7-811 Abatement. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate
any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator
shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing.
Section 7-812 Installment Contracts. The Village may enter into an installment contract with the
taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax administrator
may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due
and owing. Upon written notice by the local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days
delinquent, the taxpayer shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14 day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the
installment contract with the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer.
Section 7-813 Statute of Limitations. The Village, through the local tax administrator, shall
review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make
any request for refund or provide any tax still due and owing.
a. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four years maximum after
the end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable period was filed or for the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
20 REVISED 12/18/00
b. If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year period for which a notice of tax
determination or assessment may be issued by the Village, the tax paid was less than75% of
the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar
year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which
the return for the applicable period was filed.
c. No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer.
Section 7-814 Voluntary Disclosure. For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a
taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the local tax
administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a
voluntary disclosure of the tax due. Ataxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree
to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one-percent per month, for all periods prior to
the filing of the application but not more than four years before the date of filing the application. A
taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax,
interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid
tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of
fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void.
The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90 days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any
additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under
this Section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals
of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is
longer.
Section 7-815 Publication of Tax Ordinances. Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be
published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made
available to the public upon request at the Village Clerk's office.
Section 7-816 Liens for Unpaid Taxes. The local tax administrator shall establish an internal
review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force
and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall:
i. timely remove the lien at the Village’ s expense;
ii. correct the taxpayer’ s credit record; and
iii. correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
Section 7-817 Application. This Article shall be liberally construed and administered to
supplement all of the Village’s tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict
with or inconsistent with this Article, this Article shall be controlling.
Section 7-818 Severability. If any section, paragraph or provision of this Article shall be held to
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
21 REVISED 12/06/10
be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of such section,
paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this Article.
Ord. #09-052)
Article IX Municipal Electric Use Tax
Section 7-901 Municipal Electric Use Tax. The tax imposed by this Article shall be known as the
Municipal Electric Use Tax” and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the Village,
the State of Illinois or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof.
Section 7-902 Definitions. For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
a. Person. Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company,
joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation, or any of its
political subdivisions of this State or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
b. Person Maintaining a Place of Business in this State. Any person having or maintaining
within this State, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation facility,
distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any
employee, agent, or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the
person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such placeofbusiness
or agent or other representative is located in this State permanently or temporarily, or
whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in
this State.
c. Public Utility. “Public Utility” shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Section 3-105 of the
Public Utilities Act and shall include telecommunications carriers as defined in Section 13-
202 of that Act and alternative retail electric suppliers as defined in Section 16-102 of that
Act.
d. Purchase at Retail. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or
consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility
directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
e. Purchaser. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the Village,
electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
g. Tax Collector. The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
Ord. #10-045)
Section 7-903 Electrical Use Tax Kilowatt Hour Tax Imposed; Amount.
a. Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, the Village’s home rule authority, and any and all other
applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity
acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the
Village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
22 REVISED 12/06/10
Kilowatt Hours Used Cents per kilowatt- hour
First 2,000 . 610
Next 48,000 . 400
Next 50,000 . 360
Next 400,000 . 350
Next 500,000 . 340
Next 2,000,000 . 320
Next 2,000,000 . 315
Next 5,000,000 . 310
Next 10,000,000 . 305
Excess of 20,000,000 . 300
b. Said tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the Village,
the State or any other political subdivision of the State.
c. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the
extent that imposition or collection of the tax would violate the constitution of the United
States, the Illinois statutes or the constitution of the State of Illinois.
d. The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential
customers beginning with the first bill issued on or after February 1, 2011; and with respect
to the use or consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first
bill issued to such customers for delivery services, in accordance with Section 16-104 of the
Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-104) or the first bill issued to such customers on or after
February 1, 2011, whichever issuance occurs sooner.
Section 7-904 Collection of Tax.
a. Subject to the provisions of Section 7-906, Resales, of this Article regarding the delivery of
electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this Article shall be collected from purchasers
by the person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers electricity to such
purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser and is recoverable at the same
time and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
b. Any tax required to be collected by this Article, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute
a debt owed to the Village by the person delivering the electricity, provided, that the person
delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity,
the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such
charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax.
c. Persons delivering electricity shall collect from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross
charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to
add to such gross charge, an amount equal to3% of the tax they collect to reimburse them for
their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers,
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
23 REVISED 12/21/09
preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the Village upon request.
For purposes of this Article, any partial payment of a billing amount not specifically
identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity.
Section 7-905 Tax Remittance and Return.
a. Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form prescribed by the Finance
Department. The return and accompanying remittance shall be due on or before the last day
of the month following the month during which the tax is collected or is required to be
collected under Section 7-904, Collection of Tax, of this Article.
b. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused
from collecting the tax, under 7-904, Collection of Tax, of this Article, then the purchaser
shall file a return in a form prescribed by the Finance Department and pay the tax directly to
the Finance Department on or before the last day of the month following the month during
which the electricity is used or consumed.
Section 7-906 Resales.
a. Resale of Electricity. Electricity that is delivered to a person in the Village shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person receiving the
electricity has an active resale number issued by the Finance Department and furnishes that
number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies to that person that the sale is
either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.
b. Resale Number. If a person who receives electricity in the Village claims to be an authorized
reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the Finance Department for a resale number.
The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this Article
on any purchases of electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the Finance
Department may reasonably require.
c. Approval; Assignment. Upon approval of the application the Finance Department shall
assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
d. Cancellation. The Finance Department may cancel the resale number of any person if the
person fails to pay any tax payable under this Article for electricity used or consumed by the
parties, or if the number: 1) was obtained through misrepresentation, or 2) is no longer
necessary because the person has discontinued making resales.
e. Collection and Remittance.
1. If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for
resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this Article directly to the Finance
Department pursuant to Section 7-903a., Electrical Use Tax Kilowatt Hour Tax
Imposed; Amount, by this Article on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or
consumes, and shall collect the tax pursuant to 7-904, Collection of Tax, of this
Article and remit the tax on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
24 REVISED 12/21/09
purchaser.
2. Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and
complying with all other conditions of this Section shall be excused from collecting
and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller,
provided that the person reports to the Finance Department the total amount of
electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the Finance
Department may reasonably require.
Section 7-907 Books and Records. Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax
imposed by this Article, shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including
contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or mayhave given rise,
to any tax liability under this Article. The books and records shall be subject to and available for
inspection at all times during business hours of the day.
Section 7-908 Credits and Refunds. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article, in order
to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the Village, no person shall be entitled to a refund
of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this Article unless the person files a claim for refund or credit
within one year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted with the Director of Finance.
Section 7-909 Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, the tax shall not be
imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would violate the constitution or
statutes of the United States or the constitution of the State of Illinois.
Section 7-910 Government Entity Exemptions. The tax shall not apply to any school district
created and operating under the school code of the State or any unit of local government lying either
in whole or in part within the Village.
Ord. #09-052)
Article X Municipal Gas Use Tax
Section 7-1001 Municipal Gas Use Tax. The tax imposed by this Article shall be known as the
Municipal Gas Use Tax” and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the Village, the
State of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof.
Section 7-1002 Definitions. For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
a. Person. Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company,
joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation or political
subdivision of this State, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed
by order of any court.
b. Public Utility. A public utility as defined in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act.
c. Public Utilities Act, The Public Utilities Act as amended, (220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.).
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-25 REVISED 12/21/09
d. Retail Purchaser. Ay Person who purchases gas in a Sale at Retail.
e. Sale at Retail. Any sale of gas by a retailer to a Person for use or consumption, and not for
resale. For this purpose, the term “ retailer” means any Person engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas.
Ord. #10-045)
Section 7-1003 Tax.
a. Except as otherwise provided by this Article, a tax is imposed on the privilege of using or
consuming gas in the Village that is purchased in a Sale at Retail at the rate of 5.00 cents
0.050) per therm.
b. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on the Retail Purchaser, and
nothing in this Article shall be construed to impose a tax on the occupation of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, selling or transporting gas.
c. The Retail Purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas delivered to the Retail
Purchaser’ s premises, to the Public Utility designated to collect the tax pursuant to Section 7-
1004, Collection of Tax by Public Utility, of this Article, on or before the payment due date
of the Public Utility’s bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the Finance Department on or
before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas is
delivered to the Retail Purchaser if no Public Utility has been designated to collect the tax
pursuant to Section 7-1004, Collection of Tax, by Public Utility, or if the gas is delivered by
a person other than a Public Utility so designated.
d. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to impose a tax upon any person, business or
activity which, under the constitutions of the United States or State of Illinois, may not be
made the subject of taxation by the Village.
e. A Person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the tax imposed by this
Article with respect to the use or consumption of the gas, but who later uses or consumes part
or all of the gas, shall pay the tax directly to the Finance Department on or before the
fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
f. The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the Retail Purchaser is billed by a Public
Utility on or after February 1, 2011.
g. If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions
of this Article, whether as a result of mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount
shall be ( i) credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this Article from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment or (ii) subject to a refund if no such tax is due or
to become due; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to
the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited or refunded.
h. No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this Article shall be
commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-26 REVISED 09/19/16
Section 7-1004 Collection of Tax by Public Utility. The Village President, Village
Treasurer/Finance Director and Village Manager are each authorized to enter into a contract for
collection of the tax imposed by this Article with any public utility providing gas service in the
Village. The contract shall include and substantially conform with the following provisions:
a. the Public Utility will collect the tax from Retail Purchasers as an independent contractor;
b. the Public Utility will remit collected taxes to the Finance Department no more often than
once each month;
c. the Public Utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a service fee equal to 3%
of the amounts collected and timely remitted to the Finance Department;
d. the Public Utility shall not be responsible to the Finance Department for any tax not actually
collected from a Retail Purchaser; and
e. such additional terms as the parties may agree upon.
Section 7-1005 Books and Records. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records,
including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that
gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under this Article. All such books
and records shall, at all times during business hours, be subject to and available for inspection bythe
Village.
Section 7-1006 Government Entity Exemptions. The tax shall not apply to any school district
created and operating under the school code of the State or any unit of local government lying either
in whole or in part within the Village.
Article XI Fees
Ord. #99-033, #00-082)
Section 7-1101 Checks Returned for Non-sufficient Funds. Any person delivering a check
payable to the Village of Arlington Heights for any type of fee, including but not limited to a license,
permit, fine or statement, that is returned to the Village due to insufficient funds, a closed account or
a check marked "stop payment", shall be charged a $25.00 fee in addition to payment in full of the
face value of the check written, to be submitted in the form of cash, a moneyorder or cashier's check.
This section shall apply to any and all sections of the Municipal Code.
Ord. #08-002, #10-003, # 16-044)
Section 7-1102 Freedom of Information Act Request Fee. All requests for information obtained
through the Freedom of Information Act shall be subject to the following fees:
Type of Copy Fee per Page
8-½” x 11”, 8-½” x 14” and 11” x 17” size copies up to 50 pages No Fee
8-½” x 11”, 8-½” x 14” and 11” x 17” size copies over 50 pages* $ . 10
24” x 36” size copies $ 3.00
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-27 REVISED 09/19/16
Police Report $ 5.00
Accident Reconstruction Report $ 20.00
DVD $ 2.00
All requests requiring outside duplication services shall be charged the actual cost for the
duplication.
Ord. #08-002)
Section 7-1103 Requests to Waive Freedom of Information Act Fee. Requests to waive the
Freedom of Information Act fee must be made in writing to the Village Manager and must state how
the primary purpose of the requested information is to access and disseminate information regarding
the health, safety and welfare or the legal rights of the general public and is not for the principal
purpose of personal or commercial benefits.
Ord. #11-034)
Section 7-1104 Building Permit Fees.
a. The schedule of fees shall be as follows:
1. For single-family construction - .35 cents per square foot of livable area, excluding
garage area.
2. For multi-family construction - .70 cents per square foot of livable area, excluding
garage area.
3. Industrial or commercial construction – . 40 cents per square foot area, with a
minimum fee of $330.
4. Where attached garages are included in the building permit, a fee of $30 for each
garage.
5. For construction of detached garages or accessory buildings, the following fees shall
apply:
a) When not more than 300 square feet of area: $35
b) More than 300 square feet of area: $ 70
6. For alteration, addition or repair of any building, the following fee shall apply: $11
per thousand dollars
7. For demolition, the fee shall be computed at the rate of $125 for each floor of such
building or structure including single-family, commercial and accessory structures.
8. There shall be no fee for the initial inspections of the Building, Electrical and
Plumbing Departments. There shall be a fee of $50 for each subsequent inspection
required by these regulations.
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-28 REVISED 10/01/11
9. Architectural Review Fee: $ 25
10. For a Certificate of Occupancy, the fee shall be $60 for each Certificate for singlefamily
dwellings and $120 for multi-family dwellings, commercial, and industrial
uses. For a temporary occupancy certificate, a fee of $100 shall be deducted from the
cash bond.
11. Plans shall be reviewed by a qualified plan review service for all buildings except
single family structures, unless the Director of Building shall determine that the plans
are of such a character that the Village departments can adequately review for life
safety, fire protection, smoke removal system and other aspects. The cost of this
review will be paid by the building permit applicant, in addition to all other related
building permits. The plan review fees for all plans reviewed by the Building
Department are:
Type Per Plan
Single Family Residence (SFR) $ 70/hr.
Additions to SFR $ 60/hr.
Garages $ 35/hr.
Decks $ 30/hr.
Business Alterations $ 60/hr.
Industrial Alterations $ 60/hr.
In-Ground Pools $ 45/hr.
New Buildings (except for Single Family Residence) $60/hr.
12. Fence Fee $ 40
13. Recreational Basketball Poles/Structures Fee $ 25
14. Chimney Fee $ 40
15. Fire Protection Systems Plan Review and Inspection Fees
All plan review fees include a primary plan review and a second review. Anyproject
requiring more than the primary and second review shall be billed at an hourly rate of
70.
Reinspection Fee for each reinspection - $50
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-29 REVISED 07/15/13
a) Sprinkler Systems.
All reviews and tests required but not listed above shall be charged at the rate of $70
per hour, regardless of whether it is for new construction or existing construction.
16. Fees for Conveyance Systems:
a) Upon the initial inspection of each elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator, platform
lift, chair lift, or moving walk, there shall be a $ 100 permit fee for each
elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator, platform lift, chair lift, or moving walk in a
building of four stories or less, with an additional fee of $11 per elevator,
dumbwaiter, escalator, platform lift, chair lift, or moving walk for each
additional floor.
b) The fee for a load test and inspection of hydraulic elevators shall be $100 for
each elevator.
c) The fee for a load test and inspection of traction elevators shall be $110 for
each elevator.
d) The fee for annual inspection of a hydraulic elevator shall be $100 for each
elevator.
e) The fee for annual inspection of a traction elevator shall be $100 for each
elevator.
f) The fee for interim inspections of an elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator,
platform lift, chair lift, or moving walk due to complaints or inspections due
NEW
CONSTRUCTION
EXISTING
CONSTRUCTION
Sprinkler systems
1 to 20
21 to 100
101 to 300
301 to 500+
110
190
350
500
165
250
400
550
Alarm systems 220 330
Standpipes 80 per standpipe 110 per standpipe
Fire pumps
fire pump tests shall
be conducted by a
licensed contractor
provided by the
Owner and approved
by the Village)
110 165
Hood systems 110 165
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-30 REVISED 11/06/17
to repairs required by annual inspection or load test shall be $80.
g) The fee for annual inspection of a dumbwaiter, escalator, platform lift, chair
lift, or moving walk shall be $100 for each dumbwaiter, escalator, platform
lift, chair lift, or moving walk.
h) An additional charge of $165 per elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator, platform
lift, chair lift, or moving walk shall be made for the initial review of plans
and initial inspection.
b. In instances where a building permit was applied for after construction has begun on a
project, the amount of the fee shall be four times the original fee set forth in subsection a.
c. Foundation-Only Permit.
1. The fee for a commercial permit shall be 20 cents per square foot of foundation,
multiplied by the depth of the foundation.
2. The fee for a one or two family residential home permit shall be 10 cents per square
foot of foundation, multiplied by the depth of the foundation.
d. Early-start permits shall apply to partial work or phased construction projects. The fee for
such permits shall be an additional 50% of the original permit fee.
e. A service fee in the amount of $50 shall be charged for failure to call for any required
inspections six months after permit expiration.
f. An application fee in the amount of $110 shall be paid by any applicant filing an appeal
to the Building Code Review Board.
Ord. #17-041)
Section 7-1105 Ambulance Fees. For all transports by ambulance on or after January 1, 2018, each
person who is transported by ambulance shall be charged $1,500 plus a mileage fee equal to the
distance traveled to transport the patient to the hospital of $12 per mile.
a. When the patient being transported by the Village is a Village resident, such person shall
not be billed for the remaining charges which may exist once final payment has been
received from all insurance providers of the resident. A Village resident is any person
whose permanent residence is within the Village’ s corporate limits.
b. When the patient being transported by the Village is a non -resident, such person shall be
billed for the remaining charges which may exist once final payment has been received
from all insurance providers of the non -resident. Unpaid balances shall be assigned to a
debt-collection agency of the Village’ s choice. A non -resident is any person whose
permanent address of residence is outside the Village's corporate limits.
The Village Manager may, in cases of hardship, waive the payment of the ambulance fee. This
provision shall not be construed to hold the Village or any of its officers, agents or employees
responsible for any damages to persons or property by reason of the provision of paramedic service
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-31 REVISED 09/19/16
or ambulance service as provided herein.
Ord. #96-075, #06-078)
Section 7-1106 Fees – Storage Tanks. The fee for the installation and removal of an underground
storage tank containing a flammable or combustible liquid shall be as follows.
SIZE ( Gallons) FEE
0 To 1,000 $ 115.00
1001 And Over $ 115. 00 & $ 11.00 for each 1000 gallons over 1,000
The fee for the installation or removal of above-ground storage tanks containing a flammable or
combustible liquid shall be as follows:
170.00 for each tank. (Maximum tank size 1,000 gallons.)
The fee for the alteration of pumps, piping or any repairs to a tank containing a flammable or
combustible liquid shall be as follows:
140.00 per location
Section 7-1107 Fees for Relocating Buildings. The fees for relocating any building shall be as
follows:
Ord. #06-008)
1. For a permit for the removal of a building or structure from one lot to another, the fee shall
be at the rate of $3 for each $1000 of the estimated value of the building or structure in its
completed condition after removal;
2. For a permit for the removal of a building or structure to a new location within the same lot,
the fee shall be at the rate of $3 for each $1000 of the estimated cost of moving, of new
foundations and of work necessary to put the building or structure in usable condition in its
new location.
Ord. #16-044)
Section 7-1108 Fees for Outdoor Eating Cafes.
a. On public sidewalks in the Downtown District, an annual permit fee of $115 shall be
required.
b. On private property – a one-time permit fee of $115 shall be required at the time of the initial
application for Outdoor Eating Café.
Ord. #16-044)
Section 7-1109 Zoning Board of Appeal Fees. All applications for zoning amendments submitted
to the Zoning Board of Appeals, shall be accompanied by the applicable fee as determined by the
following schedule:
Single Family Residential District $ 200.00
Multiple Family or Commercial District $ 350.00
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-32 REVISED 11/20/17
Commercial District $ 500.00
Institutional District $ 330.00
Ord. #16-044)
Section 7-1110 Plan Commission Fees.
Rezoning to R-E, R-1, R-2 and R-3 District
Classification
Subdivision fees below)
900.00
Rezoning to all other district classifications
0 – 1.99 acres $ 900.00
2 – 4.99 acres $ 1,100.00
5 – 9.99 acres $ 1,300.00
10 - 14.99 acres $ 1,500.00
15 + acres $ 1,700.00
Planned Unit Development
0 – 4.99 acres $ 1,200.00
5 – 9.99 acres $ 1,400.00
10 - 14.99 acres $ 1,600.00
15 + acres $ 1,800.00
Planned Unit Development Amendments
0 – 4.99 acres $ 1,200.00
5 – 9.99 acres $ 1,400.00
10 - 14.99 acres $ 1,600.00
15 + acres $ 1,800.00
Special Use Permits (and Amendments)
Under 3,000 square feet (gross) $ 500.00
3,000 + square feet (gross) $ 850.00
All drive-thoughts $ 1,000.00
Subdivisions, except consolidations $ 900.00
55.00 for each new lot created
Land Use Variation
0 – 1.99 acres $ 900.00
2 – 4.99 acres $ 1,100.00
5 – 9.99 acres $ 1,300.00
10 - 14.99 acres $ 1,500.00
15+ acres $ 1,700.00
Consolidations $ 300.00
Ord. #16-044, #17-042)
Section 7-1111 Design Commission Fees. Aone-time fee for review shall be required as follows:
Single-Family District (Design Commission Review) $ 200.00
Single-Family District (Administrative Approval Design Review) $ 200.00
Multiple Family District $ 350.00
Commercial District $ 500.00
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-33 REVISED 11/20/17
Institutional District $ 300.00
Sign Variation $ 300.00
Downtown Sign Administrative Approval $ 50.00
Conditional Review of Electronic Message Signs $ 500.00
Ord. #16-044)
Section 7-1112 Sign Permit Fee. The fee to be charged for permits issued for the installation,
construction or alteration of any sign, including permanent non-illuminated signs, temporary signs,
canopies and awnings, illuminated signs, street clocks and banners, shall be $80.
Ord. #17-033)
Section 7-1113 Storm Water Utility Fee. A storm water utility fee is established to be used to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Village by reducing damage to
property and infrastructure caused by storm water runoff and floods. The funds raised bythe fee will
help provide a dedicated and stable funding source for storm water management, to be used for the
construction, installation, and operation of flood mitigation and storm water control facilities.
Effective with the water bills issued on and after October 1, 2017, a storm water utility fee shall be
imposed on all property in the Village. Amonthly fee shall be assessed to each water meter servicing
property in the Village. For single-family properties and those properties owned by governmental
entities and not-for-profit organizations the fee per meter shall be $6.25 per month.
For all other properties, the monthly fee shall be determined by taking the total land area of the
property (in square feet) and dividing it by the number of meters servicing that property, to determine
the land area per meter. The square feet of land area per meter shall be used to determine the monthly
fee per meter, based on the chart set forth below:
Square Feet of Land Area Per Meter Monthly Fee Per Meter
Tier 1 0 – 40,000 $ 6.25
Tier 2 40,001 - 80,000 $ 12.50
Tier 3 80,001-160,000 $ 18.75
Tier 4 160,001-320,000 $ 25.00
Tier 5 320,001 and above $ 31.25
As an example, a property that is 100,000 square feet with three meters will be assessed a storm
water utility fee of $6.25 per meter per month, calculated by taking 100,000 (square feet) divided by
three (number of meters) which equals 33,333 square feet per meter, which falls under Tier 1. If a
100,000 square foot property has one meter, it will be assessed as a Tier 3 property, at $18.75 per
meter per month.
Ord. #13-037)
Article XII Affordable Housing Trust Fund
Section 7-1201 Creation. There is hereby established a Housing Trust Fund, to be held as a separate
fund within the Village, for the sole purpose of providing and preserving Attainable Housing
opportunities within the Village The Village, by and through its Director of Finance, shall be
responsible for the day-to-day investment and fiscal maintenance and management of the Housing
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-34A REVISED 07/15/13
Trust Fund. The day-to-day fiscal maintenance and management shall be undertaken pursuant to the
approved investment policies and practices used by the Village for other similarly held funds.
Except for disbursements and other actions taken as part of the day-to-day fiscal maintenance and
management of the Housing Trust Fund, the Director of Finance shall not disburse funds held bythe
Housing Trust Fund except upon the written direction of the Village Board or otherwise pursuant to
the provision of an approved program. The Arlington Heights Housing Commission shall assist the
Village with the organization, operation, and implementation of the Housing Trust Fund as directed
by the Village Board.
Section 7-1202 Purpose. The purpose of the Housing Trust Fund is to address the attainable
housing goals, policies and programs of the Village Board as stated in the Village Board’s annual
goals, the Village Code, and other Village policies by providing sustainable financial resources to
address the Attainable Housing needs of Eligible Households in Arlington Heights; and preserving
and producing dedicated Attainable Housing.
Section 7-1203 Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall
have the following meaning:
a. Attainable Housing: Housing that has a sales price or rental amount that is within the means
of an “ Eligible Household” as defined herein. In the case of dwelling units for sale, housing
that is attainable means housing in which the annual mortgage, amortization, taxes,
insurance, and condominium or association fees (if any), constitute not more than30% of the
gross annual household income of a household of the size that may occupy the unit. In the
case of dwelling units for rent, housing that is attainable means housing for which the annual
rent and utilities constitute no more than 30% of the gross annual household income for a
household of the size that may occupy the unit.
b. Applicant. Any individual or entity, including but not limited to developers, not-for-profit
organizations, housing owner/operators, and units of government, that apply for a grant,
loan, or other resources from the Housing Trust Fund.
c. Eligible Activities. Those activities that are eligible to receive funding or other resources
from the Housing Trust Fund, as set forth in this Article.
d. Eligible Household. A household with an annual income at or below 80% of the Area
Median Income (AMI) for for-sale units and at or below 60% of AMI for rental units as
determined annually by HUD for the Chicago area.
e. Gaming Revenue. Those monies received by the Village from slot machines or video gaming
machines.
Section 7-1204 Distribution of Funds. Distribution of funds from the Housing Trust Fund shall be
in the form of grants or loans or such other funding mechanisms that support the purposes of the
Housing Trust Fund.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-34B REVISED 07/15/13
Section 7-1205 Eligibility Requirements. Each Applicant shall be required to demonstrate that
the requested Eligible Activity will advance and support the purpose of the Housing Trust Fund,
as set forth in this Article.
a. The use of Housing Trust Fund resources shall be limited to supporting, in whole or in part,
one or more of the following Eligible Activities:
1. Creation and preservation of Attainable Housing including, without limitation, new
construction, rehabilitation, and adaptive reuse;
2. Acquisition and disposition, including without limitation, vacant land, single-family
homes, multi-unit buildings, and other existing structures that may be used in whole
or part to provide Attainable Housing;
3. Payments for costs incurred in connection with administering the Housing Trust
Fund. No costs shall be reimbursed except pursuant to a written agreement between
the Village and any third-party approved by the Village to administer a program or a
funded program.
b. All Housing Trust Fund resources shall be applied exclusively to Eligible Activities within
the corporate limits of the Village. Criteria shall be developed by the Village, in consultation
with the Housing Commission, for the award of grants and loans prior to accepting any
applications.
Section 7-1206 Review and Approval of Applications and Programs. The Village Board shall be
solely responsible for the approval of all programs and applications that utilize the expenditure of
Housing Trust Funds. Applications for Housing Trust Fund awards shall be submitted to the
Planning and Community Development Department. Applications/programs that comply with the
applicable requirements shall be forwarded to the Housing Commission. Anyapplications/programs
that do not comply shall be returned to the applicant with a written explanation of why the
application will not be considered. With respect to housing construction or rehabilitation projects,
applications may be submitted but funds will not be disbursed until factors such as zoning
compliance, site control, other funding sources in place, etc. have been established to the satisfaction
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
PAGE
INTENTIONALLY
LEFT
BLANK
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-35 REVISED 01/03/17
of the Village. The Housing Commission shall review and make recommendations to the Village
Board as to which applications/programs are awarded Housing Trust Funds.
The Village Board may, at its discretion, approve a program that delegates the approval of
applications and the dispersal of Housing Trust Fund moneys to the Housing Commission or the
Planning and Community Development Department, provided that provision for the disbursement of
Housing Trust Fund moneys are specifically set forth within the scope of that program, and the
program complies with the provisions of this Article.
Section 7-1207 Condition and Requirements. As a condition of any Housing Trust Fund award
for any Eligible Activity, the Applicant shall execute and record such agreements, conditions,
restrictive covenants, and other similar instruments as may be required by the Village to ensure that
Housing Trust Fund resources will be used efficiently and for the intended purposes.
Among other requirements, these conditions shall require the applicant and the property to comply
with the requirements of this Article and provide that all awards shall be used in strict compliance
with the requirements of the Village Code and any added conditions.
Additionally, for any property or development that ceases to be used for Attainable Housing pursuant
to the requirements of the specific award, the Applicant or successor owner of the property or
development shall be required to reimburse the Housing Trust Fund in accordance with the
development, grant, or loan agreement executed with respect to the specific award involving funds
from the Housing Trust Fund.
Section 7-1208 Sources of Funds. The Village Manager, for the benefit of the Housing Trust Fund,
is authorized to accept funds, property, and other resources from all proper and lawful public and
private resources including, without limitation: 1) cash payments in lieu of constructing Affordable
or Attainable Units as per the Village’ s inclusionary housing policies; 2) income from fees collected
from the transfer of Village annual tax exempt bond cap; and 3) 1% of all gaming revenue received
annually by the Village after the first full fiscal year the Village receives any gaming revenue, as well
as 10% of any gaming revenue from slot machines received by the Village in the first full fiscal year
that any gaming revenue from slot machines is received by the Village. The Village Board, at its sole
discretion, may make funds available as it deems necessary and appropriate.
Ord. #17-002)
ARTICLE XIII ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEM
Section 7-1301 Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to provide a procedure by which charges of
violations of the Village Code (“Code”) can be equitably and efficiently adjudicated administratively
by an administrative hearing officer. The Administrative Adjudication System set forth in this Article
is established pursuant to Division 2.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1 et seq, as
now or hereafter amended. The system created by this Article shall be in addition to the system for
parking offenses established pursuant to Article VIII of Chapter 18 of this Code. In the event of a
conflict between the statutes and this Article, this Article shall prevail. The adoption of this Article
does not preclude the Village from using other lawful methods to enforce the provisions of this
Code.
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-36 REVISED 01/03/17
Section 7-1302 Jurisdiction. Those matters subject to the Administrative Adjudication System
provided for by this Article are charges of violation of any regulation of the Village of Arlington
Heights, so long as the relief sought is not a penalty of incarceration or a total fine in excess of
50,000, excluding allowable costs. The $50,000 limitation shall not apply to those cases brought to
enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the Village. In addition, any matter for
which the Village Manager is the designated hearing officer under this Code may be referred to the
Administrative Adjudication System for hearing and resolution in accordance with this Article.
Section 7-1303 Administrative Hearings Unit. Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/1/1-2.1-4, an administrative
hearings unit is established to provide for and operate a system of administrative adjudication for the
purpose set forth in Section 7-1301. The primary function of this unit is to expedite the prosecution
and/or correction of Code violations subject to the jurisdiction of the Administrative Adjudication
System. The Village Manager shall assign an individual to act as coordinator of this Administrative
Hearings process.
Section 7-1304 Qualifications of Administrative Hearing Officers. Prior to conducting
administrative adjudication proceedings under this section, administrative hearing officers must have
successfully completed a formal training program that includes the following:
a. Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings over which the
administrative hearing officers shall preside;
b. Orientation to each subject area of the Code violations they will adjudicate;
c. Observation of administrative hearings; and
d. Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final orders.
In addition, an administrative hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State
of Illinois for at least three years and be in good standing with the Attorney Registration and
Disciplinary Commission of the Supreme Court of Illinois.
Section 7-1305 Scope of Authority of Administrative Hearing Officers. Administrative hearing
officers shall preside over administrative adjudication hearings. The authority of an administrative
hearing officer shall encompass all acts necessary to conduct fair and impartial adjudicatory hearings,
including, but not limited to:
a. Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the existence of the Code
violation.
b. Administering oaths and affirmations to witnesses.
c. At the request of any party or on the administrative hearing officer’s own motion, issuing
subpoenas for the attendance of relevant witnesses and/or the production of relevant books,
records, or other information.
d. Preserving the record of the hearing, including all exhibits and evidence admitted into the
record at the hearing.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-37 REVISED 01/03/17
e. Issuing a determination based upon a review of the notice of violation, citation, or other
charging document (“ Charging Document”) and on the evidence admitted, which
determination shall be final for purpose of judicial review under the Illinois Administrative
Review Law. The determination shall be in writing, shall be signed by the administrative
hearing officer, shall be designated as findings, decision, and order, and shall include the
fine, penalty or action with which the Respondent must comply.
f. Upon finding a Respondent liable for violating one or more charged Code provisions:
1. Imposing penalties as provided by the governing penalty provision, except, however,
that in no event shall an administrative hearing officer have authority to:
a. Impose a penalty of incarceration; or
b. Impose a fine in excess of $50,000, excluding allowable costs. When
applicable, each day a Code provision is found to have been violated by the
Respondent shall constitute a separate offense, and each separate offense
subjects the Respondent to the penalty provided by the governing penalty
provision.
2. Imposing, in addition to fines, administrative and/or enforcement costs, costs incurred
by the Village for effecting compliance with Code provision(s) for which a
Respondent has been found liable.
3. Notwithstanding fines imposed or costs assessed, ordering the Respondent to comply
with Code provision(s) found to have been violated.
4. Notwithstanding fines imposed or costs assessed, ordering the Respondent to perform
a term of community service.
5. Notwithstanding fines imposed or costs assessed, ordering the payment of an amount
set by the Village for court costs.
g. Adhering to the policies, procedures and legislation set forth in the Code, except where
discretion is specifically vested in the administrative hearing officer; provided, however, that
an administrative hearing officer is authorized to waive the fine and/or costs that otherwise
would be imposed upon finding a Respondent liable for one or more Code violations when
the administrative hearing officer specifically finds as a matter of fact that the violation(s)
occurred under such circumstances that a reasonable person would constitute an excuse for
the violation(s).
h. Asking questions of the parties and witnesses, if necessary, to ensure the clarity and
completeness of the testimony and the record.
i. Regulating the course of the hearing in accordance with this Article, the rules adopted bythe
Village for the conduct of administrative hearings, and other applicable law.
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-38 REVISED 01/03/17
Section 7-1306 Administrative Hearings.
a. All administrative hearings conducted pursuant to this Article are open to the public and shall
be presided over by a duly appointed administrative hearing officer who is charged with
providing the parties a full and fair opportunity to be heard.
b. The Village need not be represented by an employee; provided, however, that documentary
evidence, prepared by an employee of the appropriate department of the Village, may be
presented at the hearing by a Village representative.
c. All administrative hearings shall be conducted on the date set for hearing. For good cause
shown, a continuance may be granted at the discretion of the administrative hearing officer.
The purpose of administrative hearings is to provide a prompt resolution of alleged Code
violations, and accordingly, the request for, and the grant of, continuances shall be curtailed to
the extent fairness permits. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance.
d. Parties to an adjudicatory hearing may be represented by an attorney or other agent, present
witnesses, and cross-examine opposing witnesses. The administrative hearing officer may
issue subpoenas at the request of either party or on their own.
e. The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the conduct of the hearing.
Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by
reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
f. No violation may be established except upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence;
provided, however, that the original or a legible copy of the Charging Document, issued in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code, shall be prima facie evidence of the
correctness of the facts specified therein.
g. The Village shall determine the manner in which the record shall be preserved. Such
preservation may be made by tape recording or other appropriate means. Recording by any
means by any member of the public is prohibited unless expressly authorized by the Village.
The record of all hearings before an administrative hearing officer shall include a copy of the
findings, decision, and order of the administrative hearing officer’ s final determination.
h. At the conclusion of a hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall issue a final
determination. If the administrative hearing officer issues a final determination of liability, the
administrative hearing officer mayimpose fines, assess costs, and make orders, all as provided
herein, and as are consistent with the specific Code provision(s) found to have been violated.
i. At the conclusion of the hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall inform the parties
orally and in writing of the determination, which determination constitutes a final
determination for purposes of judicial review and is subject to review under the Illinois
Administrative Review Law. Based on the Charging Document and the evidence admitted,
the administrative hearing officer may issue the following determinations: liable, not liable,
or liable upon a plea of no contest. The administrative hearing officer also may dismiss the
case with or without prejudice or grant a properly made motion by the Village voluntarily
dismissing the case.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-39 REVISED 01/03/17
Section 7-1307 Procedure. All matters to be adjudicated by the administrative hearing officer shall
be commenced against the party alleged to have violated one or more Code provisions by using the
following procedure:
a. ACharging Document shall be issued by any Village employee authorized to exercise Code
enforcement authority and served as provided for in this Section. Any charging document
issued pursuant to this Article shall contain the following information:
1. The name, Village department, position, and identification number, if applicable,
of the person issuing the Charging Document;
2. The name and address of the person or entity being charged with one or more Code
violations (“ Respondent”);
3. The name and address of the person to whom the Charging Document is given if
that person is not the Respondent;
4. The section(s) of the Code alleged to have been violated;
5. The date, time and place of the alleged violation(s);
6. A legally sufficient description of the activity or conduct alleged to constitute a
violation of each Code section set forth in the charging document or legally sufficient
description of the facts giving rise to the allegations set forth in the charging
document;
7. The complainant’ s name if the complainant is not the issuing Village employee. The
Village employee or the complainant (if applicable), shall certify the correctness of
the information required by this Section by signing his or her name on the Charging
Document.
8. The legal authority and jurisdiction under which an adjudicatory hearing will be held.
b. Notice of the Adjudicatory Hearing shall be given utilizing one of the following methods:
1. The date, time, and place of the adjudicatory hearing to be held with respect to the
violation(s) alleged in the Charging Document may be included in the Charging
Document. If the Charging Document includes the hearing date, it shall also state
whether an appearance is required on the date and time set forth therein or whether,
in lieu of an appearance, a fine may be paid by the Respondent by a date certain in
advance of the scheduled hearing.
2. If notice of the hearing date is not included in the Charging Document, it may be
given in any of the following ways:
a) Byfirst class mail or by overnight or two-day commercial delivery service at
the Respondent’ s last known address or if the Respondent is a business entity,
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-40 REVISED 01/03/17
at any address identified for its registered agent or at its principal place of
business. If service is provided by first class mail or by overnight or two-day
commercial delivery service, the 15 day period shall begin to run on the day
that the notice is deposited in the mail or given to the commercial delivery
service, as applicable; or
b) By personal service; or
c) By posting upon the property that is the site of the alleged violation(s) when
the Respondent is the owner or person in control of the property; or
d) By any other means permitted by law for service of a civil summons.
c. The hearing shall be scheduled with reasonable promptness. For hearings scheduled in all
non-emergency situations, if requested, the Respondent shall have at least 15 days after
service to prepare for a hearing. For purposes of this Section, “ non-emergency situation”
means any situation that does not reasonably constitute a threat to the public interest, safety
or welfare.
d. The original or a legible copy of the Charging Document shall be filed with the
administrative hearing unit coordinator as soon as practicable. Upon receiving the original or
legible copy of the Charging Document, the coordinator shall select a hearing date and give
Respondent notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing in the manner set forth in this
Article, unless the Charging Document sets forth the date, time and location of the hearing
and was served personally on the Respondent.
Section 7-1308 Representation at Hearings.
a. The case for the Village may be presented by a Village employee or by an attorney
designated by the Village Manager. As long as it is in compliance with Section 7-1307, the
Charging Document shall establish a prima facie case.
b. The case for the Respondent may be presented by the Respondent or by an attorney or agent
of the Respondent. An attorney or agent appearing at an adjudicatory hearing on behalf of a
Respondent shall present the administrative hearing officer with a signed appearance form
stating, on oath or affirmation, that he or she has been authorized by the Respondent to
represent the Respondent at the hearing. Any Respondent that is a corporation must be
represented by an attorney.
Section 7-1309 Default.
a. If at the time set for hearing, the Respondent or his attorney or agent of record fails to appear,
the administrative hearing officer may enter a default judgement of liability against the
Respondent and impose fines and assess costs. Acopy of the order of default shall be served
in any manner permitted by this Article and applicable to the violation. Acopy of the default
judgment, which constitutes a final determination for purposes of judicial review and is
subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law, shall apprise the Respondent
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-41 REVISED 01/03/17
of the procedure for setting aside the default judgment and shall also apprise the Respondent
of the availability of an appeal of the default judgment to the Circuit Court of Cook County.
b. ARespondent against whom a default judgment has been entered mayfile a motion with the
coordinator of the administrative hearing unit to set aside the default judgment and request a
new hearing. A motion to set aside a default judgment may be filed at any time if the
Respondent alleges lack of subject matter or personal jurisdiction; in all other cases, the
motion must be filed within 21 days of entry of the default judgment excepting Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays. A motion to set aside a default judgment shall set forth the reason(s)
the Respondent failed to appear on the original hearing date. An administrative hearing
officer shall hear and rule on the motion. If the administrative hearing officer grants the
motion, a hearing will be held immediately on the alleged Code violation(s) set forth in
notice of violation, citation, or other charging document unless the Respondent requests
another hearing date and presents good cause for continuing the hearing.
c. If any default judgment is set aside pursuant to this section, the administrative hearing officer
shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien which has been recorded for any
debt due and owing the Village as a result of the vacated default judgment.
Section 7-1310 Fines. All fines and other monies to be paid to the Village in accordance with this
Article shall be remitted to the Village and deposited in the appropriate Village account as
designated by the Village Manager. All fines and other payments must be made within ten calendar
days, unless otherwise ordered by the administrative hearing officer.
Section 7-1311 Enforcement of Administrative Hearing Officer’s Order.
a. Any fine and any administrative, enforcement, or compliance costs by an administrative
hearing officer’ s order that remain unpaid after the exhaustion of or failure to exhaust,
judicial review procedures, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be a debt
due and owing the Village and may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
b. After the expiration of the period for which judicial review maybe sought, unless stayed bya
court of competent jurisdiction, the determination of liability of an administrative hearing
officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent
jurisdiction. At such time, the coordinator shall send a notice of final determination of
liability to Respondent.
c. Any fine, penalty, and/or cost remaining unpaid after the notice of final determination of
liability is sent shall constitute a debt due and owing the Village. Failure of the Respondent
to pay such fine or penalty within 14 days of the notice may result in a lien against the
Respondent’ s property (and foreclosure of such a lien) or such other remedies as may be
available by law, including the denial of the issuance or renewal of licenses or permits.
d. In any case in which a Respondent fails to comply with an administrative hearing officer’ s
order to correct a Code violation, any expenses incurred by the Village to enforce the
administrative hearing officer’s order, including but not limited to, attorney’s fees, court
costs and costs related to properly clean-up, repair, demolition or foreclosure, after they are
fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or an administrative hearing officer, shall be a debt
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-42 REVISED 05/01/17
due and owing the Village. Prior to any such expenses being fixed by an administrative
hearing officer, the Respondent shall be provided with notice that directs the Respondent to
appear at a hearing before an administrative hearing officer to determine whether the
Respondent has failed to comply with the administrative hearing officer’ s order. The notice
shall set the place and the time for the hearing, which shall not be less than seven days from
the date the notice is served. Notice may be served by first class mail or by an overnight or
two-day commercial delivery service and the seven-day period shall begin to run on the date
that the notice was personally served, deposited in the mail or placed with the overnight or
commercial delivery service.
e. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the Village from enforcing or seeking to enforce any
order of an administrative hearing officer in any manner provided by law.
Section 7-1312 Election Of Remedies. In no case may the Village conduct an adjudicatory hearing
for an alleged Code violation where the remedy provided for is a punishment of imprisonment.
Nothing in this section, however, shall preclude the Village from petitioning a court of competent
jurisdiction to adjudicate any ordinance violation or an ordinance violation which provides the
remedy of imprisonment or from petitioning a court of competent jurisdiction to impose the remedy
of imprisonment for failure to comply with an order of an administrative hearing officer.
Ord. #17-020)
Article XIV Conflicts with Certain Home Rule County Ordinances
Section 7-1401 Minimum Hourly Wages and Paid Sick Leave.
a. Employers located within the Village shall comply with all applicable federal and/or State
laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time with regard to
both the payment of minimum hourly wages and paid sick leave. Employee eligibility for
paid sick leave and minimum hourly wages shall also be in compliance with all applicable
federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations mayexist from time to
time.
b. No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave, or minimum hourly wages,
including, without limitation, any additional obligations byordinance adopted bythe County
of Cook Board of Commissioners, shall apply to employers located within the Village,
except those required by federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and
regulations may exist from time to time.
c. For the purposes of this Section, the term “employee” means an individual permitted to work
by an employer regardless of the number of persons the employer employs, and the term
employer” means any person employing one or more employees, or seeking to employ one
or more employees, if the person has its principal place of business within the Village or does
business within the Village.
d. For the purposes of this Section, the term “ employer” does not mean:
1. the government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the
government of the United States;
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7-43 REVISED 05/07/18
2. an Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe;
3. the government of the State or any agency or department thereof; or
4. the government of any municipality.
Ord. #18-012)
Article XV Hotel Tax
Section 7-1501 Hotel Tax; Amount. There is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege
of engaging in the business of leasing, renting, making, facilitating or servicing the leasing or renting
of a hotel room in the Village of Arlington Heights, a tax of 5% on the gross rental receipts (not
including taxes or other non-room rental charges added to the hotel bill) for each such hotel room
rented for every 24 hour period, or any fraction thereof, excluding, however, from the gross rental
receipts, the proceeds of such renting or leasing or letting to permanent residents of that hotel.
Section 7-1502 Definitions. For purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
a. Gross Rental Receipts. The total amount of consideration for occupancy, valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or
services of any kind or nature, including, but not limited to, amounts charged for the making,
servicing or facilitating reservations.
b. Hotel. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain living
quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term includes inns, motels, tourist
homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses and apartment houses.
c. Permanent Resident. Anyperson who occupied or has the right to occupy anyroom or rooms
in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days.
d. Person. Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint
adventure, public or private corporation, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
e. Room or Rooms. Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
Section 7-1503 Tax Return. Each person, business, corporation, partnership or other entity, subject
to the tax imposed in this Article shall make a tax return using the Village’ s form to the Village’s
Finance Department on or before the 30th day of each month following the month the taxes were
collected (i.e. July taxes are due on or before August 30). Each person making the return shall, at the
time of making such return, pay to the Village’ s Finance Department the amount of tax herein
imposed.
Section 7-1504 Reimbursement of Tax. Persons subject to the tax imposed by this Article may
reimburse themselves for their tax liability for such tax byseparately stating such tax as an additional
charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with the state tax imposed
under "the Hotel Operators Occupation Tax Act”.
Section 7-1505 Books and Records. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this Article shall
keep separate books or records of his business so as to show the rents and occupancies taxable under
OTHER VILLAGE GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
7-44 REVISED 05/07/18
this Article separately from his transactions not taxable hereunder. If any such person fails to keep
such separate books or records, he shall be liable to the tax at the rate designated in Section 7-1501
of this Article upon the entire proceeds from his hotel.
Section 7-1506 Interest, Penalties and Fines. Late payment, underpayment or nonpayment of any
tax due hereunder shall be subject to interest upon the tax at the rate of1% per month. In addition, a
penalty of 10% of the tax and interest due shall be assessed and collected against any person subject
to the tax imposed by this Article who fails to collect and remit the tax imposed by the Article.
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with or
resisting or opposing the enforcement of any provision of this Article, except when otherwise
specifically provided, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $750 for the first offense, and not less than $50 nor more than $750 for the second and
each subsequent offense in any 180 day period; each day of violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
Section 7-1507 Proceeds. All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Article,
including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the Treasury of the Village and shall be credited to
and deposited in the General Fund of the Village.
Section 7-1508 Severability. If any provision of this Article or the application thereof to any person
or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Article and the application of such provision
to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
CHAPTER 8 - PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
Article I Minors
Section 8-101 Definitions
Section 8-102 Curfew
Section 8-103 Cruelty to Minors
Section 8-104 Purchases, Possession or Use of Alcoholic Liquors
Section 8-105 Firearms for Minors
Article II Underage Drinking
Section 8-201 Definitions
Section 8-202 Facilitating the Use of Alcoholic Beverages by Underage
Persons at Residential Premises
Section 8-203 Facilitating the Use of Alcoholic Beverages by Underage
Persons at Commercial Premises
Section 8-204 Use of False Identification
Section 8-205 Operation of a Motor Vehicle by Underage Persons with
an Alcoholic Beverage in or on the Vehicle or when the
Underage Person is Impaired Due to Alcohol
Article III Gambling
Section 8-301 Scope of Article
Section 8-302 Definitions
Section 8-303 Gambling
Section 8-304 Gambling Prohibited
Section 8-305 Unlawful to Assist
Section 8-306 Activities Not Gambling
Section 8-307 Gambling Place Unlawful
Section 8-308 Seizure of Gambling Devises
Article IV Public Morals
Section 8-401 Definitions
Section 8-402 Prostitution
Section 8-403 Sale of Obscene Material
Section 8-404 Solicitation of Minors
Section 8-405 Assists in the Solicitation of Minors
Section 8-406 Offering a Bribe: Public Official
Section 8-407 Accepting a Bribe: Public Official
Section 8-408 Failure to Report Offer of Bribe: Public Official
Section 8-409 Offering a Bribe: Athletic Contests
Section 8-410 Accepting a Bribe: Athletic Contests
Section 8-411 Failure to Report Offer of Bribe: Athletic Contest
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-2 REVISED 11/07/16
Article V Other Offenses Relating to Public Peace and Welfare
Section 8-501 Disorderly Conduct
Section 8-502 Drinking Alcoholic Liquor in Public Places
Section 8-503 Transporting Alcoholic Liquor
Section 8-504 Criminal Trespass to Real Property
Section 8-505 Fighting
Section 8-506 False Alarms
Section 8-507 Disturbing Assemblages
Section 8-508 Damaging Public Property Prohibited
Section 8-509 Weapons
Section 8-510 Advertising Unlawful Business
Section 8-511 Unlawful Assemblages
Section 8-512 Posting Bills
Section 8-513 Littering Prohibited
Section 8-514 Placing Advertising Matter on Vehicles
Section 8-515 Advertising Obstructing Traffic
Section 8-516 Scaffolds
Section 8-517 Articles on Windows
Section 8-518 Whistles
Section 8-519 Obstructing Stairways or Exits
Section 8-520 Shooting Galleries
Section 8-521 Operating Motorized Vehicles on Private Property
Section 8-522 Closing Hours of Village Property
Section 8-523 Loitering on Public Crosswalks
Section 8-524 Truancy Prohibited
Section 8-525 Gang Loitering
Section 8-526 Narcotics Related Loitering
Article VI Penalties
Section 8-601 Penalties
Section 8-602 Revocation of Licenses
Article VII Vandalism
Section 8-701 Definitions
Section 8-702 Offenses
Section 8-703 Penalty
Section 8-704 Liability
Section 8-705 Removal of Graffiti
Article VIII Cannabis Control
Section 8-801 Definitions
Section 8-802 Offenses
Section 8-803 Penalty
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-3
Article IX Prohibition on the Sale and Possession of Items Designed or Marketed
for Use with Illegal Cannabis or Drugs
Section 8-901 Definitions
Section 8-902 Offenses and Penalties
Section 8-903 Civil Forfeiture
Section 8-904 Severability
Article X Theft
Section 8-1001 Definitions
Section 8-1002 Theft
Section 8-1003 Theft by Lessee; Prima Facie Evidence
Section 8-1004 Theft of Lost or Mislaid Property
Section 8-1005 Use of Property; Theft of Labor or Services
Section 8-1006 Interest in Property
Section 8-1007 Theft from Coin-Operated Machines
Section 8-1008 Coin-Operated Machines; Possession of a Key or Device
Article XI Retail Theft
Section 8-1101 Definitions
Section 8-1102 Offense of Retail Theft
Section 8-1103 Presumptions
Section 8-1104 Detention
Section 8-1105 Affirmative Defense
Section 8-1106 Civil Liability
Article XII Protection of Library Materials
Section 8-1201 Definitions
Section 8-1202 Library Theft
Article XIII Deception
Section 8-1301 Definitions
Section 8-1302 Deceptive Practices
Article XIV Severability
Section 8-1401
Article XV Penalties
Section 8-1501
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-4 REVISED 05/17/04
Article I Minors
Section 8-101 Definitions. Whenever any of the following terms shall be used in this Article they
shall have the meanings indicated.
a. Minor. Any male or female under the age of 18 years.
b. Alcoholic Liquor. Any alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or
not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of being consumed as a beverage
by a human being.
c. Person. Any natural person, partnership, trust, corporation or association. Whenever used
with respect to any penalty, the term "person", as applied to partnerships or associations,
shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to trusts or corporations, shall
mean the trustees or officers thereof.
Ord. #04-033)
Section 8-102 Curfew.
a. It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be present at or upon any public
assembly, building, place, street or highway within the Village at the following times unless
one of the exceptions listed in Section 8-102b. applies:
1. Between l2:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;
2. Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and
3. Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on the
following day.
b. Section 8-102a. shall not apply to any person less than 17 years of age who is:
1. accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other responsible
companion at least 21 years of age, if that adult’ s supervision was expressly approved
by the youth’ s parent or legal guardian;
2. engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning from an employment
activity, without any detour or stop;
3. traveling between states or internationally from a location outside of Illinois to
another location outside of Illinois;
4. involved in an emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an
imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
5. attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-5 REVISED 05/17/04
by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that
take responsibility for the minor;
6. exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution such
as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
7. married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the Emancipation of
Mature Minors Act, as now or hereafter amended.
c. A police officer shall not take any enforcement action under this Section unless the police
officer reasonably believes that a violation of this Section has occurred and that no exception
listed in Section b. is applicable.
d. It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a person in his
or her custody or control to violate this Section.
Section 8-103 Cruelty to Minors. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, cause or
knowingly permit any of the following offenses against minors:
a. Abandon any minor;
b. Unnecessarily fail to provide any minor in his charge or custody with proper food, drink,
shelter or clothing;
c. Cruelly beat, torture, overwork or mutilate any child;
d. Unreasonably expose to inclement weather or in any manner injure a minor in health or limb.
Section 8-104 Purchases, Possession or Use of Alcoholic Liquors.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to purchase, solicit another person
to procure, possess or consume alcoholic liquor.
b. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any minor child of which he or she
be parent or guardian to violate this Section. However, nothing in this Article shall limit the
liability of parents and guardians under the provisions of Chapter 13 of this Code.
Section 8-105 Firearms for Minors. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, loan or furnish to
any minor, any gun, pistol or other firearm, except that minors may be permitted, with the consent of
their parents or guardians, to use firearms on the premises of a duly licensed shooting gallery, gun
club or rifle club, or to shoot game birds in accordance with applicable laws.
Article II Underage Drinking
Section 8-201 Definitions. The following words or terms, whenever used in this Article, shall have
the meanings set forth below:
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-6 REVISED 03/07/16
a. Alcoholic Beverage. Any alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented
or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of being consumed as a beverage
by a human being. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to alcohol used in the
manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and
regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one
percent or less of alcohol by volume.
b. Control of Premises. A legal or beneficial ownership, rental, lease or license. Control may
also exist where none of the aforesaid legal relationships apply, but where an adult is
otherwise clearly in charge of and controlling a particular premises.
c. Delivery of Alcoholic Liquor. The sale, gift or exchange of an alcoholic liquor from one
person to another. Delivery is meant to include providing of any alcoholic liquor of whatever
kind or nature from one person to another.
d. False Identification. Any document used for identification or proof of age that has been
altered or defaced or that contains false or misleading information or that contains a name
that is not the actual name of the person using it.
e. Impairment. Because of the consumption of alcoholic beverages, a diminution in a person's
ability, either mentally or physically, or both, to exercise clear judgment in order to operate
an automobile with safety to himself or herself and to the public.
f. Operation of a Motor Vehicle. Physical control of the motor vehicle; the operation or control
of a motor vehicle anywhere in the Village of Arlington Heights, whether on private or
public property. To be in physical control, the person need not be actually driving the motor
vehicle and the vehicle need not be running. If there is only one person inside of a motor
vehicle, that person shall be presumed to be in physical control, regardless of the person's
location within the vehicle. If there is only one person in a front seat or front passenger area
of a motor vehicle, that person shall be presumed to be in physical control regardless of the
person's location in the front passenger area. If there are persons in the vehicle, but not in the
front passenger area, the owner of the vehicle or the person towhom permission was given to
operate the vehicle, shall be presumed to be in physical control.
g. Parent. A biological or adoptive parent or a court designated guardian.
h. Underage Person. Any person under 21 years of age.
Ord. #16-004)
Section 8-202 Facilitating the Use of Alcoholic Beverages by Underage Persons at Residential
Premises.
a. It shall be unlawful to deliver any alcoholic beverage to any underage person.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, on premises under his or her control, the
consumption of an alcoholic beverage by an underage person. Any person in control of a
premises shall be strictly liable for the consumption of an alcoholic beverage byan underage
person on that premises.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-7 REVISED 03/07/16
c. Paragraphs a. and b. above shall not apply in the following circumstances:
1. the performance of a bona fide religious service;
2. the delivery of an alcoholic beverage to an underage person, by that person's parent,
within the home and under the direct supervision of the parent. However, the
following rule shall be applied to this Subsection:
a) in any prosecution of an underage person for the commission of any State or
local offense, the prosecutor, upon reasonable grounds, may request a ruling
and the court shall rule as to whether the consumption of an alcoholic
beverage as permitted by the parent was a contributing factor in the
commission of the offense. If it is so determined in the affirmative, then the
penalty set forth in this Article shall apply.
d. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be subject to the following
mandatory penalties:
1. a fine not less than $1,000 nor more than $5,000; and
2. community service, not less than seven days nor more than 30 days, to be served by
the minor and one of his or her parents or the person in control of the premises; and
3. either evaluation of the minor to be conducted by the Central States Institute of
Addiction and attendance at classes based on that evaluation or attendance at the
Alcohol/Drug Education Deferred Prosecution Program of the Third Municipal
District.
e. In addition to the penalties listed in Subsection d. above, any person violating the provisions
of this Section may be imprisoned for a period not to exceed six months.
Section 8-203 Facilitating the Use of Alcoholic Beverages by Underage Persons at Commercial
Premises.
a. It shall be unlawful to deliver any alcoholic beverage to any underage person.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, on premises under his or her control, the
consumption of an alcoholic beverage by an underage person. Any person in control of a
premises shall be strictly liable for the consumption of an alcoholic beverage by an underage
person on that premises.
c. Paragraphs a. and b. of this Section shall not apply to the performance of bona fide religious
service.
d. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a mandatory
fine of not less than $5 nor more than $750.
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-8
Section 8-204 Use of False Identification.
a. It shall be unlawful for any underage person to obtain or to attempt to obtain delivery of an
alcoholic beverage by use of false proof of age. If the false proof of age was an improperly
used driver's license, the license will be forwarded to the Secretary of State's Office in
accordance with State law.
b. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a mandatory
fine of not less than $5 nor more than $750.
Section 8-205 Operation of a Motor Vehicle by Underage Persons with an Alcoholic Beverage
in or on the Vehicle or when the Underage Person is Impaired Due to Alcohol. The following
shall apply when any underage person is found in the Village of Arlington Heights operating any
motor vehicle in which or on which is found any alcoholic beverage of any kind or nature or when
the underage person is in a state of impairment due to consumption of alcohol:
a. The motor vehicle shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the Arlington Heights
Police Department;
b. The motor vehicle may be released only to another person showing proof of ownership or
lease rights to the motor vehicle; however, if the underage operator is the owner or lessor of
the vehicle, then the vehicle may be released only to a parent or legal guardian of the
underage owner;
c. The motor vehicle may not be released to any person who was a passenger in the motor
vehicle at the time the alcoholic beverage was found unless at least 12 hours have passed
from the time of the finding;
d. The vehicle shall not be released until the person seeking the release has paid an
administrative fee of $200 to the Arlington Heights Police Department, plus any towing or
storage costs;
e. The following factors shall not be considerations in determining whether or not to impound
the motor vehicle:
1. whether the alcoholic beverage is in an opened or an unopened container;
2. whether the operator is the owner of the alcoholic beverage or the vehicle;
3. whether the operator had knowledge of the existence of the alcoholic beverage within
the motor vehicle.
f. The above obligations and penalties shall be in addition to the penalties that maybe assessed
in a court of law for any charges incident to the stop.
g. Any person violating the provision of this Section shall be subject to the following
mandatory penalties:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-9
1. a fine not less than $5 nor more than $750; and
2. community service, not less than seven days nor more than 30 days;
3. either evaluation of the minor to be conducted by the Central States Institute of
Addiction and attendance at classes based on that evaluation or attendance at the
Alcohol/Drug Education Deferred Prosecution Program of the Third Municipal
District.
Article III Gambling
Section 8-301 Scope of Article. It is the purpose of this Article to have broad application in order
to encompass all existing activities which are considered gambling and any such activities which
may be conceived in the future.
Section 8-302 Definitions.
a. Gambling Device. Any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other machines or devices for
the reception of money or other thing of value on chance or skill or upon the action of which
money or other thing of value is staked, hazarded, bet, won or lost; or any mechanism,
furniture, fixture, equipment or other device designed primarily for use in a gambling place.
This does not include vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for the
money invested and in which there is no element of chance or hazard.
b. Lottery. Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed by chance
among persons who have paid or promised consideration for a chance to win such prizes,
whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle, gift, sale or some other name.
c. Policy Game. Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or guarantees by any
instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other device that any particular number,
character, ticket, or certificate shall in the event of any contingency in the nature of a lottery
entitle the purchaser or holder to receive money, property or evidence of debt.
d. Gambling Place. Any real estate, vehicle, boat or any other property whatsoever used for the
purposes of gambling.
Section 8-303 Gambling. A person commits gambling when he does any of the following:
a. Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of value, unless excepted in Section
8-206; or
b. Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or any political nomination,
appointment or election; or
c. Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells, bargains for the sale or lease of,
manufactures or distributes any gambling device; or
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-10
d. Contracts to have or give himself or another the option to buy or sell, or contracts to buy or
sell at a future time, any grain or other commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of
any company, where it is at the time of making such contract intended by both parties thereto
that the contract to buy or sell, or the option, whenever exercised, or the contract resulting
therefrom, shall be settled, not by the receipt or delivery of such property, but bythe payment
only of differences in prices thereof, however, the issuance, purchase, sale, exercise,
endorsement or guarantee, by or through a person registered with the Secretary of State or
which are exempt from such registration under Section 3 of the Illinois Securities Law of
1953 is not gambling; or
e. Knowingly uses or keeps any book, instrument or apparatus for the purpose of recording or
registering bets or wagers or holds any funds which have been bet or wagered, or knowingly
possesses any money which he has received in the course of a bet or wager; or
f. Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or chance, political nomination,
appointment or election; or
g. Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell or transfers any ticket or share for any
lottery, except for such activity related to the Illinois State Lottery; or
h. Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or knowingly possesses or
transfers any policy ticket, or other similar device; or
i. Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game or drafts, prints or publishes any lottery
ticket or share, or any policy ticket or similar device, or any advertisement of any lottery or
policy game, except for such activity related to the Illinois State Lottery, bingo games and
raffles authorized by and conducted in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois or any
other state; or
j. Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds or changes in betting odds by
telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar means; or knowingly installs or maintains
equipment for the transmission or receipt of such information except that nothing in this
Subsection prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting of
sporting events or contests.
Section 8-304 Gambling Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any type of
gambling within the Village.
Section 8-305 Unlawful to Assist. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly assist or aid in
any way the organization of or functioning of any gambling activity.
Section 8-306 Activities Not Gambling. Participants in any of the following activities shall not be
convicted of gambling:
a. Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance including, without
limitation, contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life, health or accident insurance; and
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-11 REVISED 09/19/16
b. Offers of prizes, award or compensation to the actual contestants in any bonafide contest for
the determination of skill, speed, strength or endurance or to the owners of animals or
vehicles entered in such contest; and
c. Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the laws of this State; and
Ord. #16-044)
d. Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of essential parts and the
assembly thereof, for transportation in interstate, intrastate or foreign commerce to any place
outside this State when such transportation is not prohibited by any applicable Federal law;
and
e. The game commonly known as " bingo," when conducted in accordance with the " Bingo
License and Tax Act," as enacted and amended by the Illinois General Assembly; and
f. Lotteries when conducted by the State of Illinois in accordance with the " Illinois Lottery
Law," as enacted and amended by the Illinois General Assembly;
g. Possession of a slot machine manufactured at least 25 years ago that is neither used nor
intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any unlawful gambling activity or
enterprise;
h. Raffles, when conducted in accordance with "An Act to provide for licensing and regulating
certain games of chance," as enacted and amended by the Illinois General Assembly; and
licensed in accordance with applicable provisions of this Code;
i. Charitable games when conducted in accordance with the "Charitable Games Act" as enacted
by the Illinois General Assembly;
j. Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act;
k. Gambling games conducted on riverboats when authorized by the Illinois Riverboat
Gambling Act.
Section 8-307 Gambling Place Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit
any premises or property owned or occupied by him or under his control to be used as a gambling
place. Gambling places are declared to be public nuisances.
Section 8-308 Seizure of Gambling Devices. Every gambling device shall be subject to seizure,
confiscation and destruction by the Police Chief. No seizure shall occur until after a forfeiture
hearing as required by 720 ILCS 5/28-5, as now or hereafter amended.
Article IV Public Morals
Section 8-401 Definitions. Whenever any of the following terms are used in this Article, they shall
have the meanings indicated.
a. Prostitution. Prostitution means any sale or offer of sale of the use of one's body to another
for purposes of sexual intercourse, or any touching or fondling of the sex organs of one
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-12
person by another person for money or anything of value for the purpose of sexual arousal or
gratification.
b. Obscene Material. Material shall be deemed " obscene" for the purpose of this Ordinance
when to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, the dominant
theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to prurient interests, and, taken as a whole,
lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. Obscenity shall be judged with
reference to ordinary adults, except that it shall be judged with reference to children or other
specially susceptible audience if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to such an
audience.
Section 8-402 Prostitution. It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to engage in the
practice of prostitution.
a. Solicitations. It shall be unlawful for any person to seek business for any prostitute.
b. Assisting Prostitution. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly assist or to attempt
to assist any prostitution activity at any level of the entire development of such activity.
c. Use of a Prostitute. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage the services of a prostitute
or to attempt to engage the services of a prostitute.
Section 8-403 Sale of Obscene Material. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
knowingly to exhibit, sell, print, offer to sell, give away, circulate, publish, distribute or attempt to
distribute any obscene book, magazine, pamphlet, paper, writing, card advertisement, circular, print,
picture, photograph, motion picture film, play, image, instrument, statue, drawing, phonograph
records or other article which is obscene.
Section 8-404 Solicitation of Minors. It shall be unlawful for any person to contact minor children
directly, either in person or by mail, with the purpose of distributing in any manner any material
which has emphasis on nudity, sexual immorality, deviate sexual conduct or other matter which is
obscene or purports to be obscene. The purpose of this Section is to prevent the direct solicitation of
minors and not necessarily the same of obscene material.
Section 8-405 Assists in the Solicitation of Minors. Any person who knowingly assists or
attempts to assist in a violation of Section 8-304 of this Article shall likewise be guilty of a violation
thereof.
Section 8-406 Offering a Bribe: Public Official. It shall be unlawful for any person who, with
intent to influence any public official in any way, to give, offer or promise any money, bribe or other
thing of value or advantage to induce such public official to say or do a certain thing or not to say or
not to do a certain thing in connection with any matter whatsoever relating to said public official's
public responsibilities.
Section 8-407 Accepting a Bribe: Public Official. It shall be unlawful for any public official to
accept, to agree to accept, or be influenced by any offer of money, bribe or other thing of value or
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-13 REVISED 08/03/98
advantage with the intent, understanding or agreement that he will say or do a certain thing or will
not say or do a certain thing in connection with said public official's public responsibilities.
Section 8-408 Failure to Report Offer of Bribe: Public Official. Every public official must
report forthwith to the Board of Trustees, Village Manager, and to the Police Chief any offer or
promise made to him in violation of Section 8-406.
Section 8-409 Offering a Bribe: Athletic Contests. It shall be unlawful for any person who, with
intent to influence any person participating in, officiating or connected with any professional or
amateur athletic contest, sporting event or exhibition, to give, offer or promise any money, bribe or
other thing of value or advantage to induce such participant, official or other person not to use his
best efforts in connection with such contest, event or exhibition.
Section 8-410 Accepting a Bribe: Athletic Contests. It shall be unlawful for any person
participating in, officiating or connected with any professional or amateur athletic contest, sporting
event or exhibition to accept or agree to accept any money, bribe or other thing of value or advantage
with the intent, understanding or agreement that he will not use his best efforts in connection with
such contest, event or exhibition.
Section 8-411 Failure to Report Offer of Bribe: Athletic Contest. Every person participating,
officiating or connected with any professional or amateur athletic contest, sporting event or
exhibition must report forthwith to his employer, the promoter of such contest, event or exhibition
and to the Police Chief any offer or promise made to him in violation of Section 8-409.
Article V Other Offenses Relating to Public Peace and Welfare
Section 8-501 Disorderly Conduct. A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she
knowingly does any act in such an unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to
provoke a breach of the peace.
Ord. #98-047)
Section 8-502 Drinking Alcoholic Liquor in Public Place. It shall be unlawful for any person to
be in possession of an alcoholic beverage in a public street, or other public place, unless the alcoholic
beverage is in its original container with the seal unbroken or unless the possession is on the
premises of an establishment holding a valid Village liquor license. For the purpose of this Section,
a public place shall include, but not be limited to, all Village streets, Village owned parking
facilities, all parking lots and common areas serving commercial establishments and all parking areas
and common areas serving multi-family residential structures containing four or more dwelling units,
provided that this prohibition shall apply to such multi-family common areas only if the owner,
manager or owners association has stated, in writing, that it is the intention of the ownership of such
common area that the prohibition be applied. The written statement may reserve the right of
management to give one-day permits for residents or tenants to hold social gatherings in a common
area.
Section 8-503 Transporting Alcoholic Liquor. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport,
carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor upon his person or in or upon any motor vehicle in or on
any street, alley or other public place within the Village except in an unopened original package or
container.
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-14 REVISED 10/05/15
Ord. #12-014, #15-041)
Section 8-504 Criminal Trespass to Real Property. There is adopted byreference 720 ILCS 5/21-
3 and 720 ILCS 5/21-5, as now or hereafter amended.
Section 8-505 Fighting. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any assault or battery or to
fight in any public place in the Village.
Ord. #03-078)
Section 8-506 False Alarms.
a. Definition. For the purpose of this Chapter, false alarm shall mean the activation of a
burglary and/or robbery and/or trespass alarm or fire or elevator emergency alarm, by other
than a forced entry or attempted forced entry to the premises and at a time when no burglary,
robbery, trespass, fire condition or elevator emergency exists or is being committed or
attempted on the premises.
b. Notification. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to have or maintain on
any premises an audible type burglary and/or robbery, trespass, fire or elevator emergency
alarm, unless the telephone numbers at which the person or persons who are authorized to
enter such premises and turn off such alarm and who can be reached at all times have been
submitted and filed with the Arlington Heights Police Department.
c. False Alarms, It is unlawful for any person to knowingly activate or cause to be activated any
robbery, burglary, trespass, fire or elevator emergency alarm for the purpose of summoning
Police or Fire Department response except in the event of an actual or attempted burglary,
robbery, trespass, fire or elevator emergency or for any person to notify the Police or Fire
Departments of an activated alarm and having knowledge that such activation was apparently
caused by an electrical or other malfunction of the alarm system, to fail at the same time to
notify the Police or Fire Department respectively of such apparent malfunction.
d. Approval of Alarm Systems. No person, firm or corporation shall use or cause or permit to
be used or engage in the business of providing any telephone device or telephone attachment
that automatically selects a public trunk line of the Police or Fire Department of the Village
and then reproduces any prerecorded message to report any robbery, burglary, fire or other
emergency unless previously approval by the Village.
e. Costs and Penalties. For a police or fire department response to any false activation of an
alarm within a twelve month period, the Village of Arlington Heights shall issue a ticket and
assess a fine to the person having or maintaining such burglary and/or robbery or trespass,
elevator emergency or fire alarm on premises owned or occupied by him, as follows:
Number of False Alarms in a 12-Month Period Fine
1st Fine $ 50
2nd Fine $ 100
3rd Fine $ 150
4th Fine $ 250
5th Fine $ 500
Subsequent Fines $ 500
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-15 REVISED 12/01/03
In the event that payment has not been made within 90 days of the original issue date, an additional
cost of 30% of the fine amount shall be assessed to defray the cost of collection.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the filing of a complaint in the first instance in the Circuit
Court of Cook County and the payment of any fine and court costs which shall be determined by the
Circuit Court.
Section 8-507 Disturbing Assemblages. It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful
assemblage or gathering in the Village.
Section 8-508 Damaging Public Property Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
carelessly or maliciously break, deface, carry away or in any way injure or destroy any electric light,
telephone or telegraph wire, or any appurtenance thereto, or public lamp or lamp post, street sign or
other sign, gate, sidewalk, fence, tree shrub, sewer, pipe or hydrant in the Village or any public
property whatsoever, or to climb upon any public lamps, or hang or place any goods or merchandise
thereon, or to place any goods, boxes, wood or any other heavy material upon or against the same.
Section 8-509 Weapons.
a. Possession or Use of Dangerous or Deadly Weapons. It shall be unlawful for any person to
have in his possession, except within his own domicile, or carry, use or discharge within the
Village, a revolver or pistol of any description, shotgun or rifle which may be used for the
explosion of cartridges, or any air rifle, gas-operated gun or spring gun, or any instrument,
toy or weapon commonly known as a "peashooter," " slingshot" or "beany," or anybow made
for the purpose of throwing or projecting missiles of any kind by any means whatsoever,
whether such instrument is called by any name set forth above or by any other name.
b. Exception for Specific Premises. The prohibition of subsection (a) above shall not apply to
the firing or discharging of bows or air and gas-operated guns on private property under
circumstances when such instrument can be fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as
not to endanger persons or property, and also in such manner as to prevent the projectile from
traversing any grounds or space outside of the limits of such grounds or residence; and,
further provided, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the carrying of
any type of gun whatsoever when unloaded and properly cased, to or from an area where
hunting is allowed by law.
c. Exception for Authorized Officials. The prohibition of subsection (a) above does not apply
to the following persons while engaged in the discharge of their official duties: sheriffs,
coroners, constables, policemen or other duly constituted peace officers, and wardens,
superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries, jails and other institutions for the
detention of persons accused or convicted of crime; nor to the following employees or agents
while engaged in the discharge of the duties of their employment: private security
contractors, private detectives, drivers, watchmen, special agents and policemen employed
by railroads or express companies; nor to persons lawfully summoned by an officer to assist
in making arrests or preserving the peace while so engaged in assisting such officer; nor to
any person when lawfully defending his person or property.
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-16
d. Throwing of Missiles. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any stone or other missile
upon or at any vehicle, building or other public or private property, or upon or at any person
in any public or private way or place or enclosed or unenclosed ground; and it shall be
unlawful to throw or deposit any glass, nails, tacks or other similar articles on any street,
alley, sidewalk, or other public place in the Village.
Section 8-510 Advertising Unlawful Business. It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful
business or article in the Village and it shall be unlawful to injure or deface any lawful advertisement
or notice.
Section 8-511 Unlawful Assemblages. It shall be unlawful to collect, gather or be a member of any
disorderly crowd, or any crowd gathered together for any unlawful purpose.
Section 8-512 Posting Bills. It shall be unlawful to post any bills or advertisement on any public
property without the permission of the Village Manager; and it shall be unlawful to post any bill or
advertisement on any property without the written consent of the owner thereof.
Section 8-513 Littering Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw garbage, trash,
paper or any item on a public street or for any person to cause such littering.
Section 8-514 Placing Advertising Matter on Vehicles. No person shall place any advertising
matter in or on any automobile, bike or any vehicle operating or standing on any public way or on
any vehicle standing on private property, except with the owner's permission.
Section 8-515 Advertising Obstructing Traffic. No advertising shall be done, or fences or signs
erected, which shall in any way obstruct the free flow of traffic or which shall in any unsafe manner
obstruct the clear vision of drivers of automobiles, bikes and trucks.
Section 8-516 Scaffolds. Any scaffold or ladders placed in such a position that they overhang or
can fall onto any public street, alley or other public place in the Village, shall be firmly and properly
constructed and safeguarded; and it shall be unlawful to place or leave any tools or article on any
place in such a manner that it can fall into any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way from a
height greater than four feet.
Section 8-517 Articles on Windows. It shall be unlawful to place any movable article on any
window ledge, or other place abutting a public street, alley or other place at a height above four feet
from the ground, in such a manner that the same can be or in danger of falling onto such sidewalk,
street, alley or other public place.
Section 8-518 Whistles. It shall be unlawful to blow or cause to be sounded any steam whistles of
any stationary engine or steam engine in the Village except as a signal for starting or stopping works
or in emergencies to avoid or to prevent injury to persons or property.
Section 8-519 Obstructing Stairways or Exits. It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the
obstruction of any stairway, aisle, corridor, or exit in any office building, factory, hotel, school,
church, theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public hall, or any building used by two or more
tenants or families in such manner that it interferes with the free use of such stairway, aisle, corridor
or exit.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-17a REVISED 09/04/18
Section 8-520 Shooting Galleries. It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate or patronize any
shooting gallery in the Village.
Section 8-521 Operating Motorized Vehicles on Private Property. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate motorcycles, mini-bikes, go-carts, snowmobiles and similar vehicles upon any
unpaved private property, without the written consent of the owner of the property.
Section 8-522 Closing Hours of Village Property. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in
or on any land or facility owned or operated by the Village between the hours of 9 P.M. and 6 A.M.
when such property or facility shall have been posted in an appropriate manner indicating said
closing hours.
Section 8-523 Loitering on Public Crosswalks. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to
loiter, linger, collect, gather or assemble on any public crosswalk of 20 feet or less in width for
pedestrian travel between residences in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with the passage of
persons along said crosswalk or in such a manner as to disturb or threaten the public peace.
Ord. #18-031)
Section 8-524 Truancy Prohibited.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person enrolled in grades 1 through 12 who:
1. Is required by law to attend school; and/ or
2. Is subject to the compulsory attendance requirements of the Illinois School Code;
and/ or
3. Is enrolled in a public, private or parochial school within the corporate limits of the
Village, to absent himself or herself from attendance at school without parental or
school permission. Any person who shall so absent himself or herself shall be guilty
of the offense of truancy.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person who induces or attempts to induce any child to be absent
from school in violation of this Section, or who knowingly employs or harbors, while school
is in session, any child absent from school in violation of this Section.
c. No individual shall be cited under this Section until the school has fulfilled all of the steps
required for truant students as set forth in applicable State law.
d. Penalties for violations of this Section shall be in accordance with applicable State law.
Ord. #16-051)
Section 8-525 Gang Loitering.
a. Whenever a police officer observes a member of a criminal street gang engaged in gang
loitering with one or more other persons in any public place designated for the enforcement
of this Section under subsection b., the police officer shall, subject to all applicable
procedures promulgated by the Police Chief:
1. inform all such persons that they are engaged in gang loitering within an area in
which loitering by groups containing criminal street gang members is prohibited;
2. order all such persons to disperse and remove themselves from within sight and
hearing of the place at which the order was issued; and
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-17b REVISED 11/07/16
3. inform those persons that they will be subject to arrest if they fail to obey the order
promptly or engage in further gang loitering within sight or hearing of the place at
which the order was issued during the next eight hours.
b. The Police Chief shall by written directive designate areas of the Village in which the Chief
has determined that enforcement of this Section is necessary because gang loitering has
enabled criminal streets gangs to establish control over identifiable areas, to intimidate others
from entering those areas, or to conceal illegal activities. Prior to making a determination
under this Subsection, the Police Chief shall consult as he deems appropriate with persons
who are knowledgeable about the effects of gang activity in areas in which the ordinance may
be enforced. Such persons may include, but need not be limited to, members of the police
department with special training or experience related to criminal street gangs; other
personnel of that department with particular experience related to criminal street gangs; other
personnel of that department with particular knowledge of gang activities in the proposed
designated area, and elected and appointed officials of the area. The Police Chief shall
develop and implement procedures for the periodic review and update of designations made
under this Subsection.
c. The Police Chief shall by written directive promulgate procedures to prevent the enforcement
of this Section against persons who are engaged in collective advocacy activities that are
protected by the Constitution of the United States or the State of Illinois.
d. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words or terms, whenever used
in this Section, shall have the following meanings:
1. Gang Loitering. Remaining in any one place with the intent to enable a criminal
street gang to establish control over identifiable areas, to intimidate others from
entering those areas or to conceal illegal activities.
2. Criminal Street Gang. Any ongoing organization, association in fact or group of
three or more persons, whether formal or informal, having as one of its substantial
activities the commission of one or more of the criminal acts enumerated in
paragraph 3., and whose members individually or collectively engage in or have
engaged in a pattern of criminal gang activity.
3. Criminal Gang Activity. The commission, attempted commission or solicitation of
the following offenses, provided that the offenses are committed by two or more
persons or by an individual at the direction of, or in association with, any criminal
street gang, with the specific intent to promote, further or assist in any criminal
conduct by gang members. The following sections of the Illinois Criminal Code
720) of the Illinois Compiled Statutes:
5/9-1 Murder
5/9-3.3 Drug-induced homicide
5/10-1 Kidnapping
5/10-4 Forcible detention
5/12-2(a)(13) Aggravated assault – discharging firearm
5/12-4 Aggravated battery
5/12-4.1 Heinous battery
5/12-4.2 Aggravated battery with a firearm
5/12-4.3 Aggravated battery of a child
5/12-4.6 Aggravated battery of a senior citizen
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-17c REVISED 11/07/16
5/12-6 Intimidation
5/12-6.1 Compelling organization membership of persons
5/12-11 Home invasion
5/12-14 Aggravated criminal sexual assault
5/18-1 Robbery
5/18-2 Armed robbery
5/19-1 Burglary
5/19-3 Residential burglary
5/19-5 Criminal fortification of a residence of building
5/20-1 Arson
5/20-1.1 Aggravated arson
5/20-2 Possession of explosives or explosive or incendiary devices
5/24-1(a)(6),
a)( 7), (a)(9),
or (a)(12) Unlawful use of weapons
5/24-1.1 Unlawful use or possession of weapons by felons or persons in
custody of the department of corrections facilities
5/24-1.2 Aggravated discharge of a firearm
5/25-1(d) Mob action – violence
5/33-1 Bribery
5/33A-2 Armed violence
5, 5.1, 7, 9 Cannabis Control Act where the offense is a felony:
Manufacture or delivery of cannabis
Cannabis trafficking
Calculated criminal cannabis conspiracy and related offenses
401, 401.1 Sections of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act:
405, 406.1 Illegal manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance
407, 407.1 Controlled substance trafficking
Calculated criminal drug conspiracy and related offenses
4. Pattern of criminal gang activity means two or more acts of criminal gang activity of
which at least two such acts were committed within five years of each other.
5. Public place means the public way and any other location open to the public, whether
publicly or privately owned.
e. Any person who fails to obey promptly an order issued under subsection a., or who engages
in further gang loitering within sight or hearing of the place at which such an order was
issued during the eight-hour period following the time the order was issued, is subject to a
fine in accordance with Section 8-601a of this Chapter.
Ord. #16-051)
Section 8-526 Narcotics Related Loitering.
a. Whenever a police officer observes one or more persons engaged in narcotics-related
loitering in any public place designated for the enforcement of this Section under subsection
b., the police officer shall:
1. inform all such persons that they are engaged in loitering within an area in which
loitering is prohibited;
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-17d REVISED 11/07/16
2. order all such persons to disperse and remove themselves from within sight and
hearing of the place at which the order was issued; and
3. inform those persons that they will be subject to arrest if they fail to obey the order
promptly or engage in further narcotics-related loitering within sight or hearing of the
place at which the order was issued during the next eight hours.
b. The Police Chief shall by written directive designate areas of the Village in which
enforcement of this Section is necessary because the areas are frequently associated with
narcotics-related loitering. Prior to making a determination under this Subsection, the Police
Chief shall consult as he deems appropriate with persons who are knowledgeable about the
effects of narcotics-related activity in areas in which the ordinance may be enforced. Such
persons may include, but need not be limited to, members of the police department with
special training or experience related to narcotics-related activity; other personnel of that
department with particular knowledge of narcotics-related activities in the proposed
designated area, and elected and appointed officials of the area. The Police Chief shall
develop and implement procedures for the periodic review and update of designations made
under this Subsection.
c. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words or terms, whenever used
in this Section, shall have the following meanings:
1. Narcotics-related Loitering. Remaining in any one place with the intent to facilitate
the distribution of substances in violation of the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act.
2. Public Place. The public way and any other location open to the public, whether
publicly or privately owned.
d. Any person who fails to obey promptly an order issued under subsection a., or who engages
in further narcotics-related loitering within sight or hearing of the place at which such an
order was issued during the eight-hour period following the time the order was issued, is
subject to a fine in accordance with Section 8-601a of this Chapter.
Article VI Penalties
Section 8-601 Penalties.
a. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than $5 nor
more than $750 for each offense. A separate offense shall be committed for each section of
this Chapter and for each day during or on which such offense occurs or continues.
b. In addition to any fine imposed under subsection a hereof and any order for restitution to be
paid to the victim of such offence, any person violating the provisions of Sections 8-104, 8-
503, 8-508 or 8-509 shall be required to pay to the Village of Arlington Heights for deposit to
the account of the Crime Prevention Bureau, the amount of $50 for each offense.
Section 8-602 Revocation of Licenses. Any person in possession of a Village license to operate
some sort of establishment and who is found guilty of using that establishment for purposes violative
of this Chapter may, along with the penalties provided for in Section 8-601, have his license revoked.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-18
Article VII Vandalism
Section 8-701 Definitions. Whenever any of the following terms shall be used in this Article, they
shall have the meanings indicated:
a. Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization
of any kind.
b. Property. Any real estate including improvements thereof, and personality, whether tangible
or intangible.
c. Parents. The lawful father or mother of an unemancipated juvenile, whether by birth or
adoption.
d. Legal Guardian. A person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a juvenile by a circuit
court of this State or any other State, but does not include a person appointed guardian, or
given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act.
e. Juvenile. Aperson who has attained ten years of age but who has not yet reached 18 years of
age.
Section 8-702 Offenses. No person shall commit any of the following acts within the corporate
limits of the Village of Arlington Heights:
a. Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly damage, deface or destroy any property of another
person without his consent; or
b. Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly by means of fire or explosive device damage, deface, or
destroy any property of another person without his consent; or
c. Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly start a fire on the land of another person without his
consent; or
d. Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly deposit on the land or in a building of another person,
without his consent, any stink bomb, or any offensive smelling compound and thereby
interfere with the use and occupancy by another of the land or building; or
Section 8-703 Penalty. The following penalties shall be imposed upon any person convicted of a
violation of this Ordinance:
a. Such restitution or reparation as the court may require in an amount not to exceed actual loss
or damage to property or pecuniary loss. Nothing in this paragraph shall preclude such
additional civil remedies available to a complaining party for any sum not recovered.
b. In addition or in lieu of such restitution or reparation as hereinabove provided, a fine of not
in excess of $500 for each such offense. Said fine may be imposed upon the parent or legal
guardian pursuant to Section 8-704 of this Article.
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-19 REVISED 10/01/11
c. In addition to any restitution or reparation and any fine imposed under subsections a and b
hereof, a payment to the Village of Arlington Heights, for deposit to the account of the Crime
Prevention Bureau, the amount of $50 for each offense.
Section 8-704 Liability.
a. The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated juvenile who resides with such parent or
legal guardian is liable for actual damages for the willful or malicious acts of such juvenile
which cause injury to a person or property.
Said juvenile shall be deemed to have committed the offense or offenses enumerated in this
Article with the knowledge, consent, acquiescence, and permission of the parent or legal
guardian, in violation of this Ordinance.
The said parent or legal guardian shall be liable for fine, requirement of restitution or
reparation imposed by a court upon the minor defendant for violation of this ordinance.
b. The sanctions of this Article shall apply after the parent or legal guardian has received a
written notice, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by personal
service, with a certificate of personal service returned from the Police Department of the
Village of Arlington Heights, prior to the institution of any judicial sanction or penalty.
In any action brought pursuant to the provisions of this Article, the parent or legal guardian
shall be made a party defendant. Failure to include such parent or legal guardian as a party
defendant shall release such parent or legal guardian from any liability for fine, restitution or
reparation imposed upon the minor defendant.
Ord. #11-034)
Section 8-705 Removal of Graffiti
a. For purposes of this Section, the term "graffiti" shall mean the inscription on a wall, fence,
sign, other structure, sidewalk, pavement, post, stone, tree or other natural object bycarving,
application of paint or other substance, or other means of any symbol (including any letter,
word, numeral, emblem or combination thereof), picture or other character placed thereon,
other than as permitted by the ordinances of the Village.
b. It shall be unlawful for the owner of the real property on which is located any structure,
improvement or object on which any graffiti is placed to fail to remove, cover or otherwise
eradicate such graffiti within seven days from its placement on his or her property. In the
event the owner fails to remove, cover or otherwise eradicate the graffiti within such time,
the Director of Building shall cause notice to be served, either by personal service on the
owner or agent or mailed by certified mail to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the
general taxes for the last preceding year. The notice shall state a date, no less than seven days
later than the date of personal service or mailing, after which the Village will invoke the
remedies provided in this Section.
c. In addition to any fine or penalty which may be imposed, if the owner fails to remove, cover
or otherwise eradicate the graffiti by the date stated in the notice, or such later date as the
Director of Building may allow in the reasonable exercise of his or her discretion, the Village
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-20
may enter upon the property and remove such graffiti, by the use of its employees,
contractors or other persons, and the cost of removal may be collected from the owner of the
property.
d. The cost of removal will be a lien placed upon the real estate affected, superior to all other
items and encumbrances, except tax liens; provided that within 60 days after such cost and
expense is incurred, the Village files notice of lien in the office of the Cook County Recorder
The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:
1. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof.
2. The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service.
3. The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the municipality.
However, the lien of the Village shall not be valid as to any purchaser, mortgagee, judgment
creditor or other lienor, whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the
removal and prior to the filing of such notice. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the
owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien
shall be released by the Village and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing
notice of lien.
e. The Village's exercise of the remedies provided in this Section shall not prevent the owner
from recovering, through civil suit or otherwise, the cost of removal or other reparation from
the person or persons responsible for placing the graffiti on the property.
f. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be fined not less than $50 or
more than $500 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Article VIII Cannabis Control
Section 8-801 Definitions.
a. Cannabis. Marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any
parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin
extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol
THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly byextraction, or independently
by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical syntheses;
but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or
cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil
or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
b. Local authorities. A duly organized State, county, or municipal peace unit or police force.
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-21 REVISED 05/04/15
c. Manufacture. The production, preparation, propagation, compounding, conversion or
processing of cannabis, either directly or indirectly, by extraction from substances of natural
origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction
and chemical synthesis, and includes any packaging or repackaging of cannabis or labeling of
its container, except that this term does not include the preparation, compounding, packaging
or labeling of cannabis as in incident to lawful research, teaching or chemical analysis and
not for sale.
d. Person. Any individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency,
business, trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any other entity.
e. Produce or production. Planting, cultivating, tending or harvesting.
Ord. #15-013)
Section 8-802 Offenses. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly grow, produce,
manufacture, possess, trade, exchange, distribute or administer Cannabis as defined in Section 8-801,
Definition, unless specifically permitted by the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act, 410 ILCS 130 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
Ord. #15-013)
Section 8-803 Penalty. Any person who violates Section 8-802 of the Arlington Heights Municipal
Code with respect to not more than 30 grams of Cannabis shall be fined in the following manner:
a. First offense: Not less than $50, nor more than $750.
b. Second offense: Not less than $100, nor more than $750.
c. Third and subsequent offenses: Not less than $250, nor more than $750.
d. In addition to any fine imposed pursuant to this Section, any person violating Section 8-702
shall be required to pay to the Village of Arlington Heights, for deposit to the account of the
Crime Prevention Bureau, the amount of $50 for each offense.
e. In addition to the monetary assessments provided herein, no provision of this Section shall be
construed to preclude or limit the presiding judge in each case from exercising his discretion
to further issue and order such other corrective measures of the defendant as may be
reasonable, equitable and appropriate and as in each case may be necessary, including court
supervision, probation, drug abuse counseling or psychiatric or social service counseling.
Article IX Prohibition on the Sale and Possession of Items
Designed or Marketed for Use with Illegal Cannabis or Drugs
Section 8-901 Definitions. Drug paraphernalia. All equipment, products and materials of any kind
which are peculiar to and marketed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Cannabis Control Act and
the Controlled Substance Act in 720 ILCS 550, 720 ILCS 570. It includes but is not limited to:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-22
a. Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing
or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a
controlled substance can be derived;
b. Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing or preparing controlled substances;
c. Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of
any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
d. Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing
the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;
e. Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring
controlled substances;
f. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and
lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;
g. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and
seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana;
h. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed
for use in compounding controlled substances;
i. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use
in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;
j. Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or
concealing controlled substances;
k. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in
parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body;
l. Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
1. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without
screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
2. Water pipes;
3. Carburetion tubes and devices;
4. Smoking and carburetion masks;
5. Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana
cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-23 REVISED 05/04/15
6. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
7. Chamber pipes;
8. Carburetor pipes;
9. Electric pipes;
10. Air-driven pipes;
11. Chillims;
12. Bongs;
13. Ice pipes or chillers.
Ord. #15-013)
Section 8-902 Offenses and Penalties. Unless specifically permitted bythe Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, 410 ILCS 130 et seq., as now or hereafter amended, the
following shall apply:
a. Possession of Drug Paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to use drug paraphernalia
peculiar to and marketed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body, a controlled
substance in violation of this Chapter. Any person who violates this Section maybe fined up
to $500.
b. Manufacture or Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to deliver,
possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture, with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia,
knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this Chapter.
Any person who violates this Section upon conviction, may be imprisoned for not more than
three months or fined $500 or both.
c Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia to a Minor. Any person 18 years of age or over who violates
Section b by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age, who is at least
three years his junior, upon conviction, may be imprisoned for not more than six months or
fined $500 or both.
d. Advertisement of Drug Paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to place in any
newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in
whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects peculiar to and marketed for use as drug
paraphernalia. Any person who violates this section, upon conviction, maybe imprisoned for
not more than 30 days or fined $500 or both.
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-24
Section 8-903 Civil Forfeiture. All drug paraphernalia manufactured, delivered, possessed,
intended for use or designed for use defined in Section 8-901 of this Article shall be seized without a
warrant by a peace officer and the same shall be subject to forfeiture, pursuant to appropriate
procedures as set forth in 410 ILCS 615/2105, as now or hereafter amended.
Section 8-904 Severability. If any provision of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or other applications of
the Chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end
the provisions of this Chapter are severable.
Article X Theft
Section 8-1001 Definitions. The following words or terms, whenever used in this Article, shall
have the meanings set forth below:
a. Property. Anything of value, including real estate, money, commercial instruments,
admission or transportation tickets, written instruments representing or embodying rights
concerning anything of value, labor, or services, or otherwise of value to the owner; things
growing on, affixed to, or found on land, or part of or affixed to any building, electricity, gas
and water, birds, animals and fish, which ordinarily are kept in a state of confinement; food
and drink, samples, cultures, microorganisms, specimens, records, recordings, documents,
blueprints, drawings, maps, and whole or partial copies, descriptions, photographs, computer
programs or data, prototypes or models thereof or any other articles, materials, devices,
substances and whole or partial copies, descriptions, photographs, prototypes or models
thereof which constitute, represent, evidence, reflect or record a secret scientific, technical,
merchandising, production or management information, design, process, procedure, formula,
invention or improvement, with a value less than $300.
b. Owner. Aperson, other than the offender, who has possession of or any other interest in the
property involved, even though such interest or possession is unlawful, and without whose
consent the offender has no authority to exert control over the property.
c. Permanently Deprive. To permanently deprive means to:
1. Defeat all recovery of the property by the owner; or
2. Deprive the owner permanently of the beneficial use of the property; or
3. Retain the property with intent to restore it to the owner only if the owner purchases
or leases it back, or pays a reward or other compensation for its return; or
4. Sell, give, pledge or otherwise transfer any interest in the property or subject it to the
claim of a person other than the owner.
d. Deception. Knowingly to:
1. Create or confirm another's impression which is false and which the offender does
not believe to be true; or
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-25
2. Fail to correct a false impression which the offender previously has created or
confirmed; or
3. Prevent another from acquiring information pertinent to the disposition of the
property involved; or
4. Sell or otherwise transfer or encumber property, failing to disclose a lien, adverse
claim, or other legal impediment to the enjoyment of the property, whether such
impediment is or is not valid, or is or is not a matter of official record, or
5. Promise performance which the offender does not intend to perform or knows will
not be performed. Failure to perform standing alone is not evidence that the offender
did not intend to perform.
e. Threat. A menace, however communicated, to:
1. Inflict physical harm on the person threatened or any other person or property; or
2. Subject any person to physical confinement or restraint; or
3. Commit any criminal offense; or
4. Accuse any person of a criminal offense; or
5. Expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or
6. Harm the credit or business repute of any person; or
7. Reveal any information sought to be concealed by the person threatened; or
8. Take action as an official against anyone or anything, or withhold official action or
cause such action or withholding; or
9. Bring about or continue a strike, boycott or other similar collective action if the
property is not demanded or received for the benefit of the group which he purports
to represent; or
10. Testify or provide information or withhold testimony or information with respect to
another's legal claim or defense; or
11. Inflict any other harm which would not benefit the offender.
f. Stolen Property. Property over which control has been obtained by theft.
g. Obtain.
1. In relation to property, to bring about a transfer of interest or possession, whether to
the offender or to another; and
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-26
2. In relation to labor or services, to secure the performance thereof.
h. Obtains or Exerts Control. Includes but is not limited to the taking, carrying away or the
sale, conveyance or transfer of title to, or interest in, or possession of property.
i. Value. Value of property consisting of any commercial instrument or any written instrument
representing or embodying rights concerning anything of value, labor or services or otherwise
of value to the owner shall be:
1. The " market value" of such instrument if such instrument is negotiable and has a
market value; and
2. The " actual value" of such instrument if such instrument is not negotiable or is
otherwise without a market value. For the purpose of establishing such " actual
value," the interest of any owner or owners entitled to part or all of the property
represented by such instrument, by reason of such instrument, may be shown, even if
another "owner" may be named in the complaint, information or indictment.
3. The criteria used in determining property value in theft cases is the fair cash market
value at the time and place of the theft, cost shall not be the standard whether it be
original cost or replacement cost.
Section 8-1002 Theft. A person commits theft when he knowingly:
a. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
b. Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
c. Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
d. Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen by another or
under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to believe that the property was
stolen; and
1. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property; or
2. Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as to deprive the
owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
3. Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment or
abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit.
Section 8-1003 Theft by Lessee; Prima Facie Evidence. It shall be prima facie evidence that a
person "knowingly obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner" when a lessee
of the personal property of another fails to return it to the owner within 30 days after written demand
from the owner for its return. A notice in writing, given after the expiration of the leasing
agreement, addressed and mailed, by registered mail, to the lessee at the address given by him and
shown on the leasing agreement, shall constitute proper demand.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-27
Section 8-1004 Theft of Lost or Mislaid Property. A person who obtains control over lost or
mislaid property commits theft when he:
a. Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, or is aware of, or learns of a reasonable
method of identifying the owner; and
b. Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the owner; and
c. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property.
Section 8-1005 Use of Property; Theft of Labor or Services. A person commits theft when he
obtains the temporary use of property, labor or services of another which are available only for hire,
by means of threat or deception or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person
providing the property, labor or services.
Section 8-1006 Interest in Property.
a. It is no defense to a charge of theft of property that the offender has an interest therein, when
the owner also has an interest to which the offender is not entitled.
b. Where the property involved is that of the offender's spouse, no prosecution for theft maybe
maintained unless the parties were not living together as man and wife and were living in
separate abodes at the time of the alleged theft.
Section 8-1007 Theft from Coin-Operated Machines.
a. A person commits theft from a coin-operated machine when he knowingly and without
authority and with intent to commit a theft from such machine opens, breaks into, tampers
with or damages a coin-operated machine.
b. As used in this Article, " coin-operated machine" shall include any automatic vending
machine or any part thereof, parking meter, coin telephone, coin laundry machine, coin dry
cleaning machine, amusement machine, music machine, vending machine dispensing goods
or services, money changer.
Section 8-1008 Coin-Operated Machines; Possession of a Key or Device. Whoever possesses a
key, tool, instrument, explosive or device or a drawing, print or mold of a key, tool, instrument,
explosive or device designed to open, break into, tamper with or damage a coin-operated machine as
defined in paragraph b of Section 8-1007 of this Article, with intent to commit a theft from such
machine, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation as set forth herein.
Article XI Retail Theft
Section 8-1101 Definitions. The following words or terms, whenever used in this Article, shall
have the meanings set forth below:
a. Conceal merchandise. Although there may be some notice of its presence, that merchandise
is not visible through ordinary observation.
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-28
b. Full Retail Value. The merchant's stated or advertised price of the merchandise.
c. Merchandise. Any item or tangible personal property.
d. Merchant. An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any agent,
employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or independent contractor of such
owner or operator.
e. Minor. A person who is less than 19 years of age, is unemancipated and resides with his
parents or legal guardian.
f. Person. Any natural person or individual.
g. Peace Officer. The meaning ascribed to that term in 720 ILCS 5/2-13.
h. Premises of a Retail Mercantile Establishment. Includes, but is not limited to, the retail
mercantile establishment; any common use areas in shopping centers and all parking areas
set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the
convenience of the patrons of such retail mercantile establishment.
i. Retail Mercantile Establishment. Any place where merchandise is displayed, held, stored or
offered for sale to the public.
j. Shopping Cart. Those push carts of the type or types which are commonly provided by
grocery stores, drug stores or other retail mercantile establishments for the use of the public
in transporting commodities in stores and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a
place outside the store.
k Under-ring. To cause the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect less than the
full retail value of the merchandise.
Section 8-1102 Offense of Retail Theft. A person commits the offense of retail theft when he or
she knowingly:
a. Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred, any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment
with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying
the full retail value of such merchandise; or
b. Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or any other
markings which aid in determining value affixed to any merchandise displayed, held, stored
or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such
merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the
intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
c. Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile
establishment from the container in or on which such merchandise is displayed to any other
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-29
container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise; or
d Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the
merchandise.
e. Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the
consent of the merchant given at the time of such removal with the intention of depriving the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart.
Section 8-1103 Presumptions. If any person:
a. Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her belongings, unpurchased merchandise
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment; and
b. Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving payments for that
merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment, such person shall be presumed to have
possessed, carried away or transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or
with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of
such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise.
Section 8-1104 Detention. Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has
committed retail theft may detain such person, on or off the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time for all or any of the
following purposes:
a. To request identification;
b. To verify such identification;
c. To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his possession unpurchased
merchandise and, to make reasonable investigation of the investigation of the ownership of
such merchandise;
d. To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and surrender that person to the
custody of a peace officer;
e. In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents, guardian or other private person
interested in the welfare of that minor of this detention and to surrender custody of such
minor to such person.
Amerchant may make a detention as permitted herein off the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment only if such detention is pursuant to an immediate pursuit of such person.
Section 8-1105 Affirmative Defense. A detention as permitted in this Article does not constitute
an arrest or an unlawful restraint, as defined in 720 ILCS 5/10-3, as now or hereafter amended, or
shall it render the merchant liable to the person so detained.
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-30
Section 8-1106 Civil Liability. The parents or legal guardian of a minor who commits the offense
of retail theft as herein defined shall be civilly liable for the full retail value or cost of repair or cost
of replacement of the merchandise and actual damages not to exceed the limitations provided by740
ILCS 115/5, approved October 6, 1969, as now or hereafter amended. Aconviction or plea of guilty
of the retail theft is not a prerequisite to the bringing of a civil suit hereunder. Recovery under this
Section may be had in addition to, and is not limited by, any other provision of law which limits the
liability of a parent or legal guardian for tortious conduct of a minor.
Article XII Protection of Library Materials
Section 8-1201 Definitions. The following words or terms, whenever used in this Article, shall
have the meanings set forth below:
a. Library facility. Any public library or museum, or any library or museum of an educational,
historical or eleemosynary institution, organization or society.
b. Library material. Any book, plate, picture, photograph, engraving, painting, sculpture,
statute, artifact, drawing, map, newspaper, pamphlet, broadside, magazine, manuscript,
document, letter, microfilm, sound recording, audio-visual material, magnetic or other tape,
electronic data processing record or other documentary, written or printed material regardless
of physical form or characteristics, or any part thereof, belonging to, or on loan to or
otherwise in the custody of library facility.
c. Premises of a library facility. The interior of a building, structure or other enclosure in which
a library facility is located and in which the library facility keeps, displays and makes
available for inspection or borrowing library material, but for purposes of this Article, such
premises do not include the exterior appurtenances to such building, structure or enclosure
nor the land on which such building, structure or other enclosure is located.
d. Library card. Acard or plate issued by a library facility for purposes of identifying the person
to whom the library card was issued as authorized to borrow, subject to all limitations and
conditions imposed on such borrowing by the library facility issuing such card.
Section 8-1202 Library Theft. A person commits the offense of library theft when he or she:
a. Knowingly and intentionally removes any library material from the premises of a library
facility without authority to do so; or
b. Knowingly and intentionally conceals any library material upon his or her person or among
his or her belongings, while still in the premises of a library facility and in such manner that
the library material is not visible through ordinary observation although there may be some
notice of its presence, and removes such library material beyond the last point in the premises
of that library facility at which library material may be borrowed in accordance with
procedures established by that library facility for the borrowing of library material; or
c. With the intent to deceive, borrows or attempts to borrow any library material from a library
facility by (i) use of a library card issued to another without the other's consent, or (ii) use of
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
8-31
a library card knowing that it is revoked, canceled or expired, or (iii) use of a library card
knowing that it is falsely made, counterfeit or materially altered.
Article XIII Deception
Section 8-1301 Definitions. The following words or terms, whenever used in this Article, shall
have the meanings set forth below:
a. Account holder. Any person having a checking account or savings account in a financial
institution.
b. Financial institution. Any bank, savings and loan association, credit union or other
depository of money, or medium of savings and collective investment.
c. Intent to defraud. To act willfully, and with the specific intent to deceive or cheat, for the
purpose of causing financial loss to another, or to bring some financial gain to oneself. It is
not necessary to establish that any person was actually defrauded or deceived.
Section 8-1302 Deceptive Practices.
a. A person commits a deceptive practice when, with intent to defraud, obtains control over
property or to pay for property, labor or services of another, the person delivers a check or
other order upon a real or fictitious depository for the payment of money, knowing that it will
not be paid by the depository. Failure to have sufficient funds or credit with the depository
when the check or other order is issued or delivered, or when such check or other order is
presented for payment and dishonored on each of two occasions at least seven days apart, is
prima facie evidence that the offender knows that it will not be paid by the depository, and
that he or she has the intent to defraud.
b. A person shall be deemed in violation of this Article when the value of the property so
obtained, in a single transaction, or in separate transactions within a 90 day period, does not
exceed $300.
Article XIV Severability
Section 8-1401 If any Section, clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this Chapter, or any Article or
subdivision thereof is for any reason adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment will not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its
operation to the action, clause, sentence, paragraph or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
Article XV Penalties
Section 8-1501 Any person violating any of the provisions of Articles X, XI, XII and XIII of this
Chapter shall be subject to the following penalties:
a. Restitution. Such restitution or reparation as the court may require in an amount not to
exceed the actual loss or damage to property or pecuniary loss. Nothing in this Article shall
PUBLIC SAFETY, MORALS AND WELFARE
8-32
preclude such additional civil remedies available to a complaining party for any sum not
recovered.
b. Fines. In addition to, or in lieu of such restitution or reparation as hereinabove provided, a
fine shall be imposed for each offense in an amount not less than $50.00 nor in excess of
500.00.
c. Parental Responsibility. The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated juvenile, who
resides with such parent or legal guardian, is liable for actual damages, restitution or
reparation, plus fines which are assessed upon such juvenile by the court for any violation
subject to this Article.
Said juvenile shall be deemed to have committed the offense or offenses enumerated in this
Article with the knowledge, consent, acquiescence, and permission of the parent or legal
guardian, in violation of this Chapter. The said parent or legal guardian shall be liable for
fine, requirement of restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon the minor defendant
for violation of this Chapter.
d. The sanctions of this Article shall apply after said parent or legal guardian shall have
received a written notice thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested or by personal service with a certificate of personal service returned from the
Police Department of the Village of Arlington Heights, prior to the institution of any judicial
sanction or penalty.
In any action brought pursuant to the provisions of this Article, the parent or legal guardian
shall be made a party defendant. Failure to include such parent or legal guardian as a party
defendant shall release such parent or legal guardian from any liability for fine, restitution or
reparation imposed upon the minor defendant.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
CHAPTER 9 - GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Article I Licensing Procedure
Section 9-101 License Required; Subjects of Licensing Authority
Section 9-102 Registering of Commercial Occupants
Section 9-103 Exemption from Double Licensing
Section 9-104 Application for Licenses
Section 9-105 Investigations
Section 9-106 Bond
Section 9-107 Approval; Disapproval
Section 9-108 Bond Requirements for Clean Up
Article II License Fees and Term
Section 9-201 Amount of Fees
Section 9-202 Non-Approval of License
Section 9-203 Term of License
Section 9-204 Notice of Expiration
Section 9-205 Renewal of Licenses
Section 9-206 Prorating of License Fee
Section 9-207 Rebate of Fee
Section 9-208 Fee Adjustment
Section 9-209 Change of Location
Section 9-210 Prohibition against Transfer
Article III Regulations
Section 9-301 Building and Premises
Section 9-302 Maintenance of Buildings and Premises - Responsibilities of Owners and
Occupants
Section 9-303 Restroom Facilities
Section 9-304 Nuisances
Section 9-305 Inspections
Section 9-306 Posting License
Section 9-307 Tags or Stickers for Vehicles and Machines
Section 9-308 Loss of License Certificate or Insignia
Section 9-309 Alteration or Removal of License Certificate or Insignia
Section 9-310 Unlawful Transfer or Use of License Certificate or Insignia
Article IV Enforcement and Penalties
Section 9-401 Duty of Director of Building
Section 9-402 Duty of Department Directors and Officials of the Village
Section 9-403 Revocation of Licenses, Suspension of Licenses, Notice and Hearings
Section 9-404 Penalty
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
2 REVISED 10/05/09
Article I Licensing Procedure
Section 9-101 License Required; Subjects of Licensing Authority. Except as otherwise provided
in Section 9-103, Exemption from Double Licensing, of this Code, it shall be unlawful for any
person to conduct, engage in, maintain, operate, carry on or manage a business, occupation or
activity, either by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, for which a license is required by
any provision of this Code without first having obtained a license for such business, occupation or
activity.
Whenever a license or permit is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business
or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person, firm or
corporation shall be subject to the requirement, if, by himself, herself or itself, or through an agent,
employee or partner, he, she or it is held forth as being engaged in the business, activity or
occupation, or if he, she or it solicits patronage, actively or passively, or if he, she or it performs or
attempts to perform any part of such business, activity or occupation in the municipality.
Section 9-102 Registering of Commercial Occupants. Every person owning or in control of any
premises used for any purpose other than residential occupancy shall furnish to the Director of
Building each year the names and businesses or occupations of all persons occupying such premises.
This information shall be provided whether or not the uses are subject to licensing or other
regulations under the terms of the Arlington Heights Village Code. This information shall be
provided on forms provided by the Village and shall be filed no later than January 30th of each
calendar year.
Section 9-103 Exemption from Double Licensing. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Code to the contrary, any person licensed under this Code to engage in a business, occupation or
activity may engage in any other business, occupation or activity mentioned in this Code on the
licensed premises and in connection with the licensed business, occupation or activity without
obtaining and paying for any additional license; provided that the fee paid for the licensed business,
occupation or activity is at least equal in amount to the highest license fee required for the other
business, activity or occupation. This Section shall not be so construed as to relieve any person from
complying with the regulatory requirements applicable to such other business.
This exemption, however, shall not apply to any person engaging in the sale of cigarettes or alcoholic
beverages, and this dealer shall be required to purchase a license for the cigarette and alcoholic
beverage business notwithstanding the fact that this person may be engaging in some other business,
occupation or activity for which a license was obtained.
Ord. #09-038)
Section 9-104 Application for Licenses. All applications for licenses of any kind, except those
licenses specifically excepted, shall be made in writing to the Director of Building on a form
provided for that purpose. The applicant should also provide a statement as to whether the applicant
has ever been arrested or convicted on a charge of committing any crime except minor traffic
violations. If the answer is in the affirmative, a statement must be made giving the date, city and
state where the arrest took place, the name of the arresting agency, the date and location of the court
in which such conviction was had, including the specific charge under which the conviction was
obtained and the sentence imposed as a result thereof.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
9-3 REVISED 09/19/16
Every application for a license shall contain the name, date of birth, residence address and phone
number of the person applying. If the applicant is a partnership or firm, the application shall contain
the names, dates of birth and residence addresses of each of its members; if a limited partnership, the
names, dates of birth and addresses of each general partner; and if a corporation, the names, dates of
birth and residence addresses of its principal officers. In addition, the application shall state the type
or kind of license desired, the location or proposed location of the place of business, occupation or
activity for which the license is sought, and copies of any other licenses and/or certificates obtained
for the business from any other governmental entity. The application must be accompanied by the
required license fee and such other information as may be required by this Code or by the Village
Manager or Director of Building.
The Director of Building shall be the custodian of all applications for licenses which, under the
provisions of this Code, are required to be made. The failure to supply required information, or
providing false information on the license application shall be grounds for refusal to issue a license
or for the revocation of a license in the event that the information is determined to be false after the
issuance of a license.
Section 9-105 Investigations.
a. Where this Code authorizes or requires an investigation or inspection by any department or
official of the Village before the issuance of a license, and requires the approval by the
department or official regarding the character or fitness of an applicant, or regarding the
proper location or condition of the premises in which the business, occupation or activity is
to be managed, conducted, operated or carried on, or regarding the condition and nature of
the equipment and methods intended to be used by the applicant in such business, occupation
or activity, then the Director of Building shall transmit, within 48 hours of the time an
application is received by him or her, to the appropriate department or official, the
information necessary for the required investigation or inspection.
b. The designated department or official shall, within ten days:
1. make all necessary investigations and inspections, and report the results to the
Director of Building; and
2. indicate on the application a recommendation for approval or disapproval.
c. Upon receipt of all related investigative and inspection reports, the Director of Building shall
forward the reports, together with the application, to the Village Manager for final
determination.
Section 9-106 Bond. If any bond or insurance is required under the licensing provisions of this
Code, it must be approved as to form by the Director of Building before a license will be granted.
Ord. #16-044)
Section 9-107 Approval; Disapproval.
a. Prior to issuing any license, the Director of Building shall confirm that there are no unpaid
fees, fines, or debts to the Village. If an applicant has any unpaid fees, fines or debts owed to
the Village, no license shall be issued until such time as the applicant presents proof that the
fees, fines or debts owed to the Village have been paid in full.
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
9-4 REVISED 09/19/16
If, after due consideration of the information provided in the application and related
investigative and inspection reports, the Village Manager determines that the application is
satisfactory, he or she shall approve the application and grant the license which shall be
attested by the Village Clerk except where provision is expressly made for the granting of
licenses by some other officer of the Village. The Director of Building will then issue the
license. All licenses will bear the seal of the Village, the name and business address of the
licensee, the nature or kind of business, occupation or activity licensed, the amount of fee
paid, the license term and any other material information required by the this Code or
prescribed by the Village Manager or the Director of Building.
b. The Village Manager may refuse to grant any license, after notice and hearing as provided in
Section 9-403b and c, Revocation of Licenses, Suspension of Licenses, Notice and Hearings,
for any of the following causes:
1. Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for a
license or permit;
2. Failure by the applicant to comply with any provision of this Code or any Statutes of
the State of Illinois relating to the business, occupation or activity for which a license
application has been made;
3. Conviction of the applicant of any felony or misdemeanor when the conviction
indicates an inability to operate a safe, honest or legitimate business operation within
the Village;
4. Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any interference with a duly
authorized Village employee while in the reasonable performance of his or her duties
in making such inspections.
The Director of Building will then notify the applicant that the application has not been
approved and that no license will be issued along with the reasons for disapproval. The
denial may be in addition to any fine imposed.
Section 9-108 Bond Requirements for Clean Up. When a license is requested for an activity of a
transitory nature, including, but not limited to, circus, carnivals, street shows or other activities
which, in the judgment of the Village Manager, may cause the accumulation of litter, debris or other
undesirable accumulation of material on the site after the conclusion of the activity, the Village
Manager may, in addition to the other requirements of this Chapter, require the posting of a bond in
an amount of not less than $100 nor more than $750 sufficient to guarantee the clean up and
restoration of the site following the conclusion of such activities. The bond shall be approved bythe
Village Manager and filed with the Director of Building.
Article II License Fees and Term
Section 9-201 Amount of Fees. Except where otherwise expressly provided in this Code to the
contrary, all fees and charges for licenses shall be paid at the time of application to the Director of
Building and shall be in the amount established by the applicable provisions of this Code. These
fees, upon collection, shall become a part of the corporate fund.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
5
Section 9-202 Non-Approval of License. Whenever a license is not approved and the applicant
has not engaged in the business, occupation or activity for which the license was sought, the
license fee paid shall be refunded to the applicant upon authorization from the Village Manager.
Section 9-203 Term of License. Except where otherwise expressly provided in this Code to the
contrary, no license shall be granted for a period longer than one year, every license shall expire on
the 31st day of December following the date of its issuance, and no license shall be granted for a sum
less than the full annual license fee except as qualified by Section 9-206, Prorating of License Fee.
Section 9-204 Notice of Expiration. It shall be the duty of the Director of Building, 20 to 60 days
prior to the expiration of the license period, to cause a written notice to be mailed to each licensee
informing the licensee that a new license will be required on the day following the expiration of the
existing license. The notice will also provide the amount of the license fee and the penalty for failure
to procure a license, in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Failure by the Director of
Building to cause such notice to be mailed to each licensee shall not, however, excuse the licensee
from a failure to secure a new license or a renewal, nor shall it be a defense to a suit brought by the
Village to recover the penalty for a violation of the provision of this Code under which the licensee is
required to obtain a license.
Section 9-205 Renewal of Licenses. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code to the
contrary, the Village Manager may renew any license at the beginning of a new license period upon
proper application and payment of the required fee. The procedure for the application, granting and
issuance of a renewed license shall be the same as for the first license.
Section 9-206 Prorating of License Fee. If application for a license is made on or between July 1
and December 31 of any year, the applicant shall be required to pay only one-half of the annual
license fee as specified in this Code.
Section 9-207 Rebate of Fee. In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any license fee or
part by reason of the death of the licensee or because of non-use of the license, or because of a
change in the location of the business, occupation or activity; provided, however, that the provisions
of this Section shall not be construed to prevent the Board of Trustees from authorizing a refund of a
license fee or a portion thereof, where the license fee was collected through an error or where a
licensed business is forced to close before the expiration of the licensed period by reason of the
taking over of the licensed premises by the U. S. Government or any agency thereof.
Section 9-208 Fee Adjustment. When any licensee, by increasing the number of employees, or the
amount of business done or the size of the plant, or the number or size of the vehicles, or by making
any change of any kind in the business, occupation or activity, places himself or herself in a class
where the provisions of the Code require a higher license fee, the licensee must pay the additional
fee, based on the annual license fee prorated monthly to the nearest full month for the balance of the
licensed period, and shall be entitled to receive a supplemental license and such additional license
plates, badges, tags, emblems or insignia as may be required.
Section 9-209 Change of Location. If any person licensed to engage in a business, occupation or
activity at a particular place shall, before the expiration of the license period, changes the location of
the place of business, occupation or activity, he or she shall give at least ten days' notice to the
Director of Building. No business, occupation or activity shall be conducted at the new location until
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
6
notice of the change has been given in this manner and until the licensee has complied with all
relevant provisions of this Code including approval of the department head or official of the Village
who originally approved the application for the license and compliance with the fire prevention,
health, building and zoning regulations.
Section 9-210 Prohibition Against Transfer. No licensee may assign, sell or transfer a license to
any other person, even if such person intends to conduct the same business, occupation or activity as
the licensee at the location used by the licensee. Such other person must apply and pay for the fee for
a new license as required by this Code.
Article III Regulations
Section 9-301 Building and Premises. No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business,
occupation or activity if the premises and building to be used for such purpose do not fully comply
with all applicable provisions of this Code.
Section 9-302 Maintenance of Buildings and Premises - Responsibilities of Owners and
Occupants.
a. Cleanliness and Sanitation. Every owner, agent or person in possession, charge or control of
a building and the surrounding premises shall be responsible for maintaining the shared or
public area, including parking lots, in a safe, clean and sanitary condition. Every licensee
shall keep the part of the building that he or she occupies and controls, in a clean and sanitary
condition. Refuse shall be disposed of as required by the applicable provisions of this Code.
Insects, rodents, or other pests shall be exterminated. Every public hall, stairway,
passageway and parking area shall be adequately lighted, ventilated and well maintained at
all times that the public is being served or that employees are present.
b. Maintenance - General Requirements for Safety and Health. Every owner, agent or person in
possession, charge or control of a building and the surrounding premises, shall be responsible
for complying with the following requirements:
1. Electrical. Every electrical outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, maintained
in a good and safe working condition, and connected to the source of electric power
in a safe manner;
2. Buildings.
a) Every building shall be provided an adequate level of maintenance, to include
repainting exterior surfaces when needed, maintaining windows and doors in
good order, maintaining porches, steps, walks, fences, and driveways,
maintaining roofs and proper drainage of surface water;
b) Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be weather tight,
watertight and rodent-proof; shall be capable of affording privacy; and, shall
be kept in good repair;
c) Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be weather tight,
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7
watertight and rodent-proof, in good repair, and clean enough to allow
reasonable passage of sunlight except when shades are drawn;
d) Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be maintained in a
good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks and obstructions;
e) Every water closet compartment, floor surface and bathroom floor surface
shall be constructed and maintained so as to be impervious to water and so as
to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
Carpeting is prohibited on bathroom floors;
3. Signs. Every sign shall be maintained in good condition and shall comply with the
applicable regulations of this Code;
4. Utilities.
a) Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility shall be maintained in
satisfactory working condition so that it will function safely and effectively;
b) No owner, operator or occupant shall cause or allow any service facilities,
equipment or utility which is required under this Chapter to be removed from
or shutoff from or discontinued from any occupied building let or occupied
by him, except such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual
repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when
discontinuance of service is approved by the Village Manager;
5. Heat.
a) Every building shall be heated to a minimum of 65 degrees while the building
is occupied. Every building shall be adequately ventilated while the building
is occupied;
b) Failure to furnish the heat required by this Section shall not constitute an
offense where it is due to a breakdown of the heating plant, if diligence is
used to have the plant repaired (unless the breakdown has been caused by a
violation of this Chapter), nor where it is due to strikes, to a general shortage
of fuel, to any act of the tenant who makes the complaint or to any cause
beyond the owner's control;
6. Out Buildings. All garages, tool sheds and all other out buildings shall be kept in
good repair so as not to be unsafe or become a potential harborage for rodents or
other wild animals. Nor shall any wood or lumber or any other material or object be
stored, kept or permitted to remain except temporarily on the premises in such a
manner that will be unsafe or afford harborage for rats.
c. Noise. No person owning or in possession or control of any building or premises shall use,
permit the use, or rent the building or premises to be used, for any business, employment or
residential use, or for any purpose that by its boisterous nature disturbs or destroys the peace
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
8 REVISED 04/05/99
of the neighborhood in which the building or premises is located or is
dangerous or detrimental to health.
Section 9-303 Restroom Facilities. It shall be unlawful to deny the public use of restroom facilities
located in commercial operations, schools, gymnasiums, hotels, public buildings, restaurants, public
comfort stations or places to which the public is invited or that are frequented by the public without
special permission or special invitation.
Section 9-304 Nuisances. No business, occupation or activity, licensed or not, shall be so
conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact; and no building, vehicle structure, yard, lot,
premises, or part shall be used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any business or
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance, or so as to be dangerous to life or detrimental to health.
Any charge of conducting or operating a nuisance may be made under this Chapter or under the
provision of this Code prohibiting nuisances generally.
Section 9-305 Inspections. Whenever inspections of the premises, vehicles, equipment or methods
of operation used in conducting a licensed business, occupation or activity are authorized or required
by this Code, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any provision of this Code or to
detect violations, it shall be the duty of the licensee or person in charge of the premises, vehicles,
equipment or methods of operation to permit, at any reasonable time, any officer or employee of the
Village who is authorized or directed to make such inspections to be admitted to the premises, to
have access to the vehicles or equipment, and to observe methods of operation for the purpose of
making inspections.
Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance
with any provision of this Code or to detect violations, it shall be the duty of the licensee, upon
request, to give any authorized officer or employee of the Village requesting the sample, a sufficient
amount for analysis.
In addition to any other penalty that may be provided, the Village President and Board of Trustees
may revoke the license of any licensee who refuses to permit any such officer or employee to make
inspections or to take samples of materials or commodities, or who interferes with the officer or
employee while in the performance of his or her duties in making inspections; provided, however,
that no license shall be revoked for this reason unless written demand is made upon the licensee or
person in charge of the premises, stating that an inspection or sample is necessary.
Ord. #99-018)
Section 9-306 Posting License. It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business,
occupation or activity in the Village to display his or her license certificate at all times in a prominent
place on the premises used for such business, occupation or activity.
Section 9-307 Tags or Stickers for Vehicles and Machines. Whenever the number of vehicles or
machines used is a basis for a licensee fee, the Director of Building shall furnish each licensee with a
tag or sticker for each vehicle covered by the license, each automatic food-vending machine, each
ice-vending machine, each cigarette-vending machine and each coin operated amusement device
licensed. The licensee shall post each tag or sticker in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle or
machine while it is in use.
Section 9-308 Loss of License Certificate or Insignia. If any license certificate, license plate,
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
9
badge, tab, sticker or other insignia provided under this Code is lost, the Village Manager may,
within his or her discretion, authorize the issuance of a duplicate once the licensee executes an
affidavit of loss and pays $1.00 per lost item to the Director of Building.
Section 9-309 Alteration or Removal of License Certificate or Insignia. No person shall add to,
alter, deface, forge or counterfeit any license certificate or license plate, tag, badge, sticker or other
insignia which has been issued by the Village.
No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove or carry away, without the consent of the owner,
any license certificate or license plate, tag, badge, sticker or other insignia which has been issued by
the Village, except after the licensed business, occupation or activity has been discontinued or the
licensed premises have been abandoned. Nothing shall prevent the Village Manager or his or duly
authorized representative from removing any license certificate or license plate, tag, badge, sticker or
other insignia from the possession of a former licensee when the license has been revoked under the
provisions of this Code.
Section 9-310 Unlawful Transfer or Use of License Certificate or Insignia. It shall be unlawful
for any licensee to transfer, loan or give away any license certificate or any license plate, tag, badge,
sticker or other insignia issued to the licensee. It shall also be unlawful for any person to use or
display any license certificate or license plate, tag, badge, sticker or other insignia which has been
unlawfully acquired.
Article IV Enforcement and Penalties
Section 9-401 Duty of Director of Building. The Director of Building, with the aid of the Police
Department if necessary, shall examine or cause to be examined, all persons and places of business
subject to the licensing requirements to ascertain whether or not the license has been acquired. In
case of the neglect or refusal of any person to procure a license as required by this Code, the Director
of Building has the authority to initiate such action as deemed necessary to enforce the license
requirement.
The Director of Building and all license investigators and employees who may be designated by the
Director of Building shall have the power to enforce the license provisions of this Code and to cause
a complaint to be filed against any person who violates any of the license provisions of this Code,
and shall have the right of entry at any reasonable time, to any place of business for which a license
is required by this Code, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the license provisions have
been complied with.
Section 9-402 Duty of Department Directors and Officials of the Village. Any department
director or official of the Village charged with the enforcement of any regulatory provision of this
Code has the duty to take such action as maybe necessary to compel compliance with the regulatory
provisions. Adepartment director or official has the authority to call upon the Police Department for
aid in the enforcement of regulatory provisions, and it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, when
called upon, to act upon the instructions of the department director or official and to perform the
duties that may be required to enforce the regulatory provision.
Section 9-403 Revocation of Licenses, Suspension of Licenses, Notice and Hearings.
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
10
a. Revocation. The Village President and Board of Trustees may revoke any license issued
under this Chapter, after notice and hearing as provided in Section 9-403b and c, for any of
the following causes:
1. Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for a
license or permit;
2. Failure by the licensee to comply with any provision of this Code or any Statutes of
the State of Illinois relating to the business, occupation or activity for which a license
has been granted;
3. Conviction of the licensee of any felony or misdemeanor when the conviction
indicates an inability to operate a safe, honest, or legitimate business operation within
the Village;
4. Failure of the licensee to pay any fine, penalty, or charge owed to the Village;
5. Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any interference with a duly
authorized Village employee while in the reasonable performance of his or her duties
in making such inspections.
Revocation of a license may be in addition to any fine imposed. No person whose license
has been revoked shall be eligible for a new license during the period for which the original
license was originally issued.
b. Notice for License Denial or Revocation. When the Village Manager or the Village
President and Board of Trustees discover that any applicable provisions of this Code or any
Statutes of the State of Illinois have not been complied with or have been violated, the
applicant or licensee shall be notified, in writing, of such non-compliance or violation. Such
notification shall:
1. Set forth the specific nature of the non-compliance or violation discovered;
2. Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of such noncompliance
or violation, if correction is possible;
3. State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter may result in a denial or an immediate revocation, as the case may be,
of the license; and
4. State that an opportunity for appeal from any notice or inspection findings will be
provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the Village President and
Board of Trustees within the period of time established in the notice for correction.
Any notice shall be deemed to have been properly served when it has been delivered
personally to the applicant or licensee or when it has been sent byregistered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known residence or business address of the applicant or
licensee.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
11
c. Hearings. The hearings on license denial or revocation matters shall be conducted by the
Village Board at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the record of such hearings,
the Village President and Board of Trustees shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify or
rescind and official notice or order considered at the hearing. Awritten report of the hearing
decision shall be furnished to the applicant or licensee by the Village President and Board of
Trustees.
d. Suspension.
1. The Village Manager may suspend for a period not to exceed 30 days, after providing
written notice as described in Section 9-403b, any license issued under this Chapter
during the term of such license upon conviction of the licensee of violation of any
provision of this Code or any Statutes of the State of Illinois relating to the conduct
of a legitimate business or to the business, occupation or activity for which such
license was issued.
2. The Village Manager may suspend, for a period not to exceed 30 days, without prior
warning, notice or hearing, any license issued under this Chapter during the term of
such license for the failure of any licensee to comply with any provision of this Code
or any Statutes of the State of Illinois relating to the business, occupation or activity
for which such license was issued if, in the judgment of the Village Manager, such
failure constitutes an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare.
3. Any person whose license is suspended shall immediately discontinue the business,
occupation or activity for which the license was issued.
4. Any person whose license is suspended may make written application to the Village
Manager for reinstatement of the license. The written application should include a
statement signed by the applicant that in the applicant's opinion the conditions
causing suspension have been corrected. Where applicable, the Village Manager
shall cause a reinspection to be made within ten days following receipt of the
application. If the applicant is found to comply with all applicable provisions of this
Code and Statutes of the State of Illinois, the license shall be reinstated.
5. Any person whose license is suspended may, at any time, petition the Village
Manager in writing for a hearing for the purpose of reinstatement of the license. Any
hearing shall be held as soon as possible and shall be conducted by and before the
Village Manager at a time and place designated by him or her. Based upon the record
of the hearing, the Village Manager shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify or
rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. The Village Manager
will furnish a written report of the hearing decision to the person whose license was
suspended.
Section 9-404 Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this Chapter, where no other penalty
is specifically provided, shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 08/05/19
CHAPTER 10 - AMUSEMENTS
Article I Definitions and General Provisions
Section 10-101 Definitions
Section 10-102 General Application
Section 10-103 Licenses Required
Section 10-104 Applications
Section 10-105 Inspections
Section 10-106 Fees
Section 10-107 Exceptions
Section 10-108 Prohibited Locations
Section 10-109 General Regulations
Section 10-110 Gambling
Section 10-111 Gross Receipts - Verification and Payment
Section 10-112 Local Amusement Tax on Horse Race Meetings
Section 10-113
Article II Theaters, Cabarets and Night Clubs
Section 10-201 Intent and Purposes
Section 10-202 Definitions
Section 10-203 License Required
Section 10-204 Exceptions
Section 10-205 Application
Section 10-206 Fee
Section 10-207 Regulations
Article III Athletic Contests
Section 10-301 Definition
Section 10-302 License Required
Section 10-303 Application
Section 10-304 Fee
Article IV Billiard Halls and Bowling Alleys
Section 10-401 License Required
Section 10-402 Application
Section 10-403 Fee
Section 10-404 Hours of Operation
Section 10-405 Minors
Article V Regulations for Mechanical Amusement Riding Devices and Circuses
Section 10-501 General Regulations for Mechanical Amusement Riding Devices
Section 10-502 Signal Systems
Section 10-503 Electrical Requirements
Section 10-504 Safety
Section 10-505 Inspection
Section 10-506 Permit
Section 10-507 Insurance
Section 10-508 General Regulations for Circuses
Section 10-509 Inspection of Circuses
AMUSEMENTS
10-2 REVISED 10/01/11
Section 10-510 Bond Required
Section 10-511 Limitation on Number
Section 10-512 Parades with a Circus
Section 10-513 Penalty
Article VI Circuses and Carnivals
Section 10-601 License Required
Section 10-602 Application
Section 10-603 Fee
Section 10-604 Parade
Article VII Public Place of Amusement
Section 10-701 Definition
Section 10-702 License Required
Section 10-703 Application
Section 10-704 Fee
Article VIII Public Dances
Section 10-801 License Required
Section 10-802 Application
Section 10-803 Fee
Article IX Exhibitions
Section 10-901 License Required
Section 10-902 Application
Section 10-903 Investigations
Section 10-904 Fees
Section 10-905 Exceptions
Section 10-906 Prohibited Locations
Section 10-907 General Regulations
Section 10-908 Gambling
Section 10-909 Inspections
Section 10-910 Penalty
Article X Raffles
Section 10-1001 Licensing Raffles
Section 10-1002 Definitions
Section 10-1003 Application
Section 10-1004 Restrictions on Operations
Section 10-1005 Restrictions on Licensees
Section 10-1006 Conduct of Raffles
Section 10-1007 Raffles-Manager-Bond
Section 10-1008 Records
Section 10-1009 Liability of Village
Article XI Penalties
Section 10-1101 Penalties
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
10-3 REVISED 08/05/19
Article I Definitions and General Provisions
Ord. #19-027)
Section 10-101 Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words or terms, for
purposes of this Chapter, shall have the meaning indicated in this Section.
a. Amusement. Any theatrical, dramatic, musical or spectacular performance; any motion
picture show; any flower, poultry or animal show or animal act; any circus, rodeo, carnival or
bazaar; any musical concert; any dance; any race, auto or aerial show; any athletic contest,
game, sport or similar exhibition for public entertainment and/or participation, whether
performed indoors or outdoors, or both.
b. Electronic machine or device. Amechanically, electrically or electronically operated machine
or device, that is owned, leased or otherwise possessed by a sweepstakes sponsor or promoter,
or any of the sweepstakes sponsor's or promoter's partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors,
that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes entrant, that uses energy, and that is capable of
displaying information on a screen or other mechanism.
c. Enter or Entry. The act or process by which a person becomes eligible to receive any prize
offered in a sweepstakes.
d. Entertainment display. Visual information capable of being seen bya sweepstakes entrant that
takes the form of actual game play or simulated game play of games, including, but not limited
to, a poker game or any other kind of playing card game; a bingo game; a craps game; a keno
game; a lotto game; an eight-liner game; a pot-of-gold game; a game based on or involving the
random or chance matching of different pictures, words, numbers or symbols not dependent on
the skill or dexterity of the player; a casino or gambling game; and any other video game the
outcome of which is not in whole or in part dependent on the skill or dexterity of the player that
is played in the course of revealing a prize as a result of an entry into a sweepstakes.
e. Premises. Any building, hall, auditorium, park, or place where an amusement is to be
presented, performed or offered.
f. Prize. Any gift, award, gratuity, goods, service, credit or anything else of value, which may be
transferred to a person, whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an
account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
g. Sweepstakes. Any game, advertising scheme or plan, or other promotion, which, with or
without payment of any consideration, a person may enter to win or become eligible to receive
any prize, the determination of which is based upon an element of chance.
Section 10-102 General Application. The regulatory provisions of this Article are applicable to all
amusements licensed by this Chapter.
Section 10-103 Licenses Required. No person shall own, promote, operate, conduct, manage or
sponsor any amusement without first having obtained a license therefor.
Section 10-104 Applications. Applications for a license to own, promote, operate, conduct, manage
or sponsor an amusement made in conformity with the requirements of Chapter 9 of this Code
AMUSEMENTS
10-4 REVISED 05/01/07
relating to applications for licenses. Such applications shall also state the seating capacity of the
premises where the amusement is to be presented or performed and the location where the coin
operated amusement device is to be used.
Section 10-105 Inspections. The Fire Chief, the Police Chief and the Director of Building shall
make or cause to be made such inspections as they deem necessary to determine whether the
applicant's proposed operations and premises comply with all the applicable regulations of this Code
relating to amusements, fire prevention, building and zoning and all other applicable provisions of
this Code. No license shall be issued to any applicant whose proposed operations and premises do
not comply with the applicable provisions of this Code. The Village officials shall indicate on the
application for a license the results of their inspections and their approval or disapproval of said
application. This inspection procedure shall be followed for all license applications made under this
Chapter.
Ord. #02-018, #06-078)
Section 10-106 Fees. The daily fee for an amusement license under the provisions of this Article,
for each day the amusement is to be performed or presented, shall be $25 or3% of gross receipts on
the paid admissions to the amusement, whichever is more. The annual fee for a coin operated
amusement device license shall be $45 per device.
When application is made for an amusement license for which 3% of gross receipts is the required
fee, the applicant shall, with the application, post a cash bond or a surety bond to be approved by the
Finance Director in an amount equal to 110% of the estimated fee, but in no event less than $2,500.
The total amount of the fee due and owing shall be payable in accordance with Section 10-111. The
remaining balance, if any, of the cash bond shall be returned to the applicant upon filing of a verified
statement required under Section 10-111. Any additional amounts shall be due and payable in
accordance with Section 10-111 and the surety bond, if any, shall be released upon payment of all
amounts due under the provisions of this Section.
Ord. #02-018)
Section 10-107 Exceptions. Acharitable, eleemosynary, fraternal or non-profit organization which
complies with the requirements of this Section may receive any license required bythis Chapter at no
charge. Any such organization desiring a license under this section must first submit a sworn
statement by a duly authorized officer to the Village Manager containing the following information:
a. The name of the organization and the names and addresses of its officers;
b. Where and when the organization was legally established, the form of the organization and
its tax exempt status, if any;
c. The purpose for which the organization is organized and the purpose or purposes for which
the amusement is to be presented or performed;
d. Whether the organization is authorized by any other government authority to solicit
contributions and whether it is or has ever been enjoined by any court from soliciting
contributions; and
e. The name and address of the person having custody of the financial records, books and
accounts of the organization.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
10-5 REVISED 03/04/02
The Village Manager shall grant such license to any organization operating, maintaining, promoting
or conducting an amusement or coin operated amusement device the proceeds from which, after
payment of reasonable expenses, shall inure exclusively to the benefit of a philanthropic, fraternal,
charitable, eleemosynary or non-profit organization, society or institution including, but not
necessarily limited to, those with religious, educational, health, youth, civic or patriotic purposes.
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any amusement operated, owned, or conducted by
any person for any profit although sponsored or conducted under the auspices of any organization
eligible under this Section. The provisions of this Section shall also not apply, and a request for a
license may be denied, if the Village President and Board of Trustees determine that an amusement is
likely to require unusual demands of the Village Fire or Police force or the Public Works
Department, including, but not necessarily limited to, the attendance of a police officer on duty for
more than one hour.
Section 10-108 Prohibited Locations. No license shall be issued to any person who intends to
present or perform any amusement on any premises within 200 feet of any church, hospital or
building used exclusively for educational purposes; provided, however, that if any such premises
were designed for the purpose of presenting an amusement and were built prior to the establishment
of such church, hospital or building used exclusively for educational purposes, then, this Section
shall not apply; and provided, further, that this Section shall not apply to a church, hospital or
building used exclusively for educational purposes which has acquired a license to present or
perform an amusement on its premises.
Section 10-109 General Regulations. All persons licensed hereunder shall strictly comply with all
State Statutes and all applicable regulations of this Code.
Section 10-110 Gambling. No person shall gamble, bet or partake in games of cards or dice for any
purposes in any building or hall used for amusement purposes. This Section shall not apply to any
pari-mutuel betting, bingo games or the sale of lottery tickets on a location licensed by the State of
Illinois.
Section 10-111 Gross Receipts - Verification and Payment. Any fee for a daily license which is
based on gross receipts shall be paid within seven after the date of such amusement. Any fee for an
annual license based on gross receipts must be paid within 30 days following December 31.
A sworn statement of the gross receipts for each period shall be filed with the Finance Director
within the above period. Acceptance by the Village of any amount tendered in payment of the fee
shall be without prejudice to any claim, demand or right of account of any deficiency. Canceled
admission tickets and complete and accurate books, records and accounts in detail of all such gross
receipts shall be kept by the licensee, and the Finance Director or designee shall have access to the
books, records and receipts at all reasonable times for purposes of audit.
Section 10-112 Local Amusement Tax on Horse Race Meetings. There is hereby imposed on any
horse race meeting at a racetrack wholly within the corporate limits of the Village which is licensed
by the Illinois State Racing Board, a local amusement tax of ten cents for each admission to each
such horse race meeting. The tax levied hereunder shall be payable to the Village every 30 days
following the opening of the horse race meeting and payable within each 30 day period thereafter.
The first installment shall be for the amusement tax collected for the first thirty-day period or
AMUSEMENTS
10-6 REVISED 08/05/19
portions thereof. Provided, however, that no charge shall be made on tickets of admission issued to
and in the name of directors, officers, agents or employees of the licensee, or to owners, trainers,
jockeys, and their employees or to any person or persons entering the grounds or enclosure for the
transaction of business in connection with such race meeting. The licensee may, if it desires, collect
such amount from each ticket holder in addition to the amount charged for a ticket of admission.
A verified statement of the number of admissions for each period shall be filed with the Finance
Director at the time of each payment. Acceptance by the Village of any amount tendered in payment
of the tax shall be without prejudice to any claim, demand or right of account of any deficiency.
Complete and accurate books, records and accounts in detail of all such admissions shall be kept by
the party licensed to conduct a race horse meeting and the Finance Director or designee shall have
access to such books, records and receipts at all reasonable times for purposes of an audit.
Ord. #19-027)
Section 10-113 It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or place into operation, an electronic
machine or device for the following purposes:
a. To conduct a sweepstakes through the use of an entertainment display, including the entry
process or the reveal of a prize; or
b. To promote a sweepstakes that is conducted through the use of an entertainment display,
including the entry process or the reveal of a prize.
Article II Theaters, Cabarets and Night Clubs
Section 10-201 Intent and Purposes. The purpose of a theater, cabaret or nightclub license is to
require a permit for entertainment offered beyond music which is incidental to food service.
Generally, the criteria for requiring an establishment to obtain a cabaret, theater or nightclub license
is that a separate charge is levied by the licensee for the entertainment, exhibition or performance.
The offering of a special menu or increased price for drinks in conjunction with any entertainment is
considered a separate charge for entertainment, exhibition or performance.
Section 10-202 Definitions. The following terms, when used in this Article, shall have the
meanings set forth below:
a Theater, cabaret, or night club. Any establishment offering entertainment, exhibition or
performance, musical, dramatic, vaudevillian, satirical or variety in nature, including the use
of Karaoke machines, or any moving picture show or musical concert. Such entertainment,
exhibition or performance may be offered in a theater or restaurant with or without the
serving of food or drinks.
b. Background music. Music, including singing, which is provided by the management for the
enjoyment of diners incidental to food service. Background music is distinguished from
entertainment, exhibition or performance" in that there is no charge for background music
nor is there any difference in the menu or other costs whether or not the background music is
available.
c. Any non-musical exhibition or performance, including, but not limited to the following, is
considered "entertainment, exhibition or performance" within the context of that requiring a
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
10-7 REVISED 05/01/07
cabaret, theater or night club license: magic acts, fashion shows, acrobatics, movies (except
those shown on television sets), plays, dramatics, skits, athletic contests or any performance
which includes a master of ceremonies or announcer.
Section 10-203 License Required. No person shall operate a theater, cabaret or nightclub without
first having obtained a license therefor.
Section 10-204 Exceptions. The playing of background music in a restaurant, whether recorded or
live, and provision of facilities for dancing while listening to background music, does not constitute
operating a theater, cabaret or nightclub.
Section 10-205 Application. An application for a license to operate a theater, cabaret or nightclub
shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for
licenses. Such applications shall also state the seating capacity of the premises where it is intended
to produce the exhibition, entertainment or performance.
Ord. #06-078)
Section 10-206 Fee. The annual fee for a license to operate a theater, cabaret or nightclub at a
specified place or building until December 31 next following shall be $575. The daily fee for a
license to operate a theater, cabaret or nightclub shall be $25 for each day the theatrical is to be
performed or presented.
Section 10-207 Regulations. Every holder of a theater, cabaret or night club license shall comply
strictly with all the regulations of this Code relating to amusements, the sale of alcoholic liquor, fire
prevention, the public morals and all other applicable provisions of this Code.
Article III Athletic Contests
Section 10-301 Definition. Athletic contest, when used in this Article, shall mean any race between
persons, vehicles or animals or any baseball, football, basketball, softball, boxing, wrestling or other
athletic exhibition for which the public pays admission and is admitted to participate or view.
Section 10-302 License Required. No person shall own, operate, present, sponsor or promote any
athletic contest without first having obtained a license therefor.
Section 10-303 Application. An application for a license to own, operate, present, sponsor or
promote an athletic contest shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of this Code
relating to applications for licenses. The application shall also specify the seating capacity of the
premises where such athletic contest is to be performed or presented.
Ord. #06-078)
Section 10-304 Fee. The fee for any athletic contest license shall be $175 or3% of gross receipts on
the paid admissions to the athletic contest, whichever is more.
Article IV Billiard Halls and Bowling Alleys
Section 10-401 License Required. No person shall own, operate, maintain, or conduct any billiard,
pocket billiard, bagatelle, pool or pigeon table or bowling alley open to the public without first
having obtained a license therefor.
AMUSEMENTS
10-8 REVISED 10/01/11
Section 10-402 Application. An application for a license to own, operate, manage or conduct a
billiard, pocket billiard, bagatelle, pool or pigeon table or bowling alley shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses.
Ord. #06-078)
Section 10-403 Fee. The annual fee for a bowling alley license shall be $29 per lane. The annual
fee for a billiard, pigeon, bagatelle or pool table license shall be $115 per table.
Ord. #02-091)
Section 10-404 Hours of Operation. No person licensed to own, operate, manage or conduct a
bowling alley under this Article shall permit the bowling alley to be used, open for business or
operated between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. No building or hall containing, operating or
maintaining a billiard, pocket billiard, pool, bagatelle, or pigeon hold table shall remain open for
business of any kind between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M.; provided, however, that if the
tables are an ancillary use to a restaurant, the restriction on hours set forth in this paragraph will not
apply.
Section 10-405 Minors. No person licensed to own, operate, maintain or conduct any billiard,
pocket billiard, pool or pigeon table shall permit any minor under the age of 16 years to enter the
premises where such amusements are maintained, operated or conducted, except upon the written
permission of the parents or guardian of such minor.
Ord. #11-034)
Article V Regulations for Mechanical Amusement
Riding Devices and Circuses
Section 10-501 General Regulations for Mechanical Amusement Riding Devices.
a. All equipment and installation shall meet the requirements of the Carnival and Amusement
Rides Safety Act (430 ILCS 85/1 et al).
b. All riding devices shall be fenced, enclosed, barricaded or otherwise guarded, at exits and
entrances for public protection.
c. Amusement rides or grandstand shall be erected on stable ground or on a surface that has a
slope not exceeding one inch in 12 inches except as approved by the Director of Building.
The use of shim blocks shall be kept to a minimum.
Section 10-502 Signal Systems. Signal systems for the starting and stopping of amusement riding
devices shall be provided where the operator of the device does not have a clear view of the point at
which passengers are loaded or unloaded. Any code of signals adopted shall be printed and kept
posted at both the operator's and signalman's stations. All persons who may use these signals shall be
carefully instructed in their use. Signals for the movement or operation of an amusement device shall
not be given until all passengers and other persons who may be endangered are in a position of
safety.
Section 10-503 Electrical Requirements.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
10-9 REVISED 10/01/11
a. All mechanical amusement riding devices shall be provided with electric lighting if they are
to be used after sunset.
b. Complete electrical layout must be furnished to the Director of Building and the Fire
Department for approval prior to installation.
c. An emergency lighting system, approved by the Director of Building, to provide adequate
lighting for orderly evacuation in event of disaster or emergency shall be provided by the
permittee.
d. For grounding requirements, see Chapter 25 of the Arlington Heights Municipal Code
relating to electricity.
e. All mechanical amusement riding devices shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 25 of
the Arlington Heights Municipal Code relating to electricity.
Section 10-504 Safety.
a. During a lightning storm, high wind storm, a period of tornado alert or warning, fire or when
violence, riot or other civil disturbance occurs or threatens in an amusement park or carnival
lot or in the area adjacent thereto, passengers shall be unloaded or evacuated from a ride or
device and the ride or device shut down and secured immediately. Operation shall not resume
until the situation has returned to a normal, safe operating condition.
b. No ride or device shall not be closer than ten feet from overhead power lines.
c. If water is required a meter and check valve shall be obtained from the Village of Arlington
Heights public works Department.
Section 10-505 Inspection.
a. Any person granted a permit to conduct or carry on an amusement activity regulated hereby
shall be responsible to meet the requirements of the State of Illinois Department of Labor,
Carnival and Amusement Ride Inspection Division, and for keeping the area or parcel of land
used for the amusement activity, including off-street parking areas, free and clear of all
rubbish, waste matter and debris during the time such amusement is carried on or conducted
and the time of departure from the area.
b. Permittee shall abide by the regulations set forth by the Arlington Heights Municipal Code
Fire Regulations regarding the proper number and type of fire extinguishers; proper storage
of flammables in properly identified containers; proper posting of "No Smoking” signs and
such other necessary regulations as the Code requires for the safety and welfare of the general
public.
Section 10-506 Permit.
Ord. #06-078)
a. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct or operate any mechanical amusement riding devices
in connection with a carnival without first securing a permit for same from the Director of
AMUSEMENTS
10-10 REVISED 10/01/11
Building. The fee shall be $100 a day for each day in operation, with a minimum fee of $400.
b. Prior to issuance of a permit, applicant must submit a layout plan establishing where each
ride and tent is to be located, along with a detailed electrical layout. This layout shall be
approved by the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Director of Building, Superintendent of Public
Works, and property owner.
c. Every permit application for a mechanical amusement riding device shall be accompanied by
a letter from the organization sponsoring the carnival, a letter from the owners of the property
where the rides are to be located, and a description of the toilet facilities; also a street permit
when a mechanical amusement riding device is to be located upon a public way.
d. Every carnival permit and inspection for a mechanical amusement-riding device shall be for a
term certain, but not to exceed 14 days. Arenewal of every carnival permit and reinspection
for a mechanical amusement-riding device shall be made every 14 days.
Section 10-507 Insurance. Every permit application for a mechanical amusement riding device shall
be accompanied by a certificate of insurance, which will include coverage of the Village, the
Director of Building, and his or her agents, in an amount of $100,000 for any one person and
1,000,000 for any one accident, and $ 25,000 Property Damage, to be filed with the Finance
Director.
Section 10-508 General Regulations for Circuses. No person, firm or corporation shall conduct or
operate a circus in the Village without having first obtained a license. The application for such
license shall be made to the Village and shall specify the place in or on which the circus is to be
conducted. The application shall also state the seating capacity of the place where such amusement is
to be performed or exhibited. The fee for the circus license shall be $175 per day or 3% of gross
receipts including parking, whichever is greater.
Section 10-509 Inspection of Circuses. It shall be the duty of the Director of Building, or designee,
and the Fire Chief to inspect the circus premises prior to any performance for the purpose of
ascertaining compliance with all municipal ordinances. All tents and grandstands shall conform with
National Fire Protection Association Standard Number 102. Adequate ventilation must be provided
for tents. Four exits shall be required for a tent with a seating capacity of more than 1,000. Exits shall
be clearly marked. Stands shall be of substantial construction and erected in a manner which will
sustain the weight to be placed upon them. Adequate fire extinguishers shall be provided on the
premises.
Section 10-510 Bond Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a circus in the
Village unless the application for license shall be accompanied by a bond in the sum of $100,000,
conditioned to indemnify the Village for any loss, damage or liability incurred or caused by the
conduct of such circus.
Section 10-511 Limitation on Number. Not more than one circus or carnival shall be permitted to
operate within the Village on any day. If two or more applications for circus or carnivals are made
for the same day, the first application received which meets the requirements of this Code shall be
granted, and another date assigned to any subsequent application which meets the requirements of
this Code.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
10-11 REVISED 10/01/11
Section 10-512 Parades with a Circus. No person shall conduct any parade connected with a circus
on any public street, alley or other public way or place in this Village unless a permit is first obtained
from the Village Manager. The permit shall specify the route to be followed and shall be issued only
upon presentation of liability insurance on the operation of the circus, including the parade, for a
combined single limit of $500. Such insurance should also include automobile insurance on any
vehicle operated in connection with the circus in the parade or elsewhere for a limit of not less than
250,000 one person/$500,000 one accident of bodily injury and $100,000 for property damage.
Such insurance policies shall bear the endorsement naming the Village as an additional insured, and
shall include a Certificate of Insurance stipulating that the coverage may not be cancelled or
materially changed during the term of the permit.
Section 10-513 Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
Article shall be fined not more than $500 for each such offense.
Article VI Circuses and Carnivals
Section 10-601 License Required. No person shall conduct, operate or promote a carnival,
sideshow, menagerie or circus without first having obtained a license.
Section 10-602 Application. An application for a license to operate, manage or conduct any
carnival, menagerie, side show, or circus shall be made in conformity with the general requirements
of this Code relating to applications for licenses. The application shall also state the seating capacity
of the place where such amusement is to be performed or exhibited.
Ord.#02-018, # 06-078)
Section 10-603 Fee. The fee for a circus license shall be $175 per day or 3% of gross receipts
including parking; whichever is greater.
Section 10-604 Parade. No person shall conduct any parade connected with a circus on any public
street, alley or other public way or place in this Village unless a permit is first obtained from the
Village Manager. The permit shall specify the route to be followed and shall be issued only upon
presentation of liability insurance on the operation of the circus, including the parade, for a combined
single limit of $500. Such insurance should also include automobile insurance on any vehicle
operated in connection with the circus in the parade or elsewhere for a limit of not less than $250,000
one person/$500,000 one accident of bodily injury and $ 100,000 for property damage. Such
insurance policies shall bear the endorsement naming the Village as an additional insured, and shall
include a Certificate of Insurance stipulating that the coverage may not be cancelled or materially
changed during the term of the permit.
Article VII Public Place of Amusement
Section 10-701 Definition. Public place of amusement, when used in this Article, shall mean any
building, hall or place to which the public is admitted to engage in or witness any of the following
amusements: ice or roller skating, mechanical baseball pitching, golf driving range, miniature golf
range or public dances.
Section 10-702 License Required. No person shall maintain, conduct, operate or manage for profit
any public place of amusement without first having obtained license therefor.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
10-12 REVISED 10/01/11
Section 10-703 Application. An application for a license to maintain, conduct, operate or manage
for profit a public place of amusement shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of
this Code relating to application for licenses. Such applications shall also state the seating capacity
and the number of participants who can be accommodated on the premises of the public place of
amusement.
Ord. #06-078)
Section 10-704 Fee. The annual fee for a public place of amusement license shall be $175 or3% of
gross receipts on the paid admissions to public place of amusement, whichever is more.
Ord. #09-038)
Article VIII Public Dances
Section 10-801 License Required. No person shall operate or conduct a public dance in the Village
without first having obtained a license therefor.
Section 10-802 Application. An application for a license to operate or conduct a public dance shall
be made in conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for
licenses. Such application shall also state the location of the proposed dance or dances and the
person or organization sponsoring the same.
Ord. #06-078)
Section 10-803 Fee. The fee for a license to operate or conduct a public dance to be held in any one
premises shall be $ 115 for each dance; provided, however, that if the person or organization
sponsoring such public dance has paid a total of $575 for such licenses for public dances on the same
premises within one calendar year, additional licenses maybe issued to such persons or organizations
for additional public dances on the same premises for a fee of $5 for each dance. Notwithstanding
the provisions of this Section, no additional license fee will be charged if a person is already licensed
under Article VI of this Chapter.
Article IX Exhibitions
Section 10-901 License Required. No person shall own, promote, operate, conduct, manage or
sponsor any exhibition in the Village without first having obtained a license therefor.
Section 10-902 Application. An application for a license to operate or conduct an exhibition shall
be made 15 days prior to opening date of said exhibition in conformity with the requirements of this
Code. Such applications shall also state location and dates of exhibition.
Section 10-903 Investigations. The Director of Building and Life Safety shall make or cause to be
made such investigations as deemed necessary to determine whether the applicant's proposed
operations and premises comply with all the applicable regulations of this Code relating to
exhibitions, fire prevention, building and zoning and all other applicable provisions of this Code.
Village officials shall indicate on the application for a license the results of their investigations and
their approval or disapproval of said application. This investigation procedure shall be followed for
all license applications made under this Chapter.
Ord. #06-078)
Section 10-904 Fees. The daily fee for an exhibitor's license under provisions of this Article, for
each day the exhibition is presented, shall be $115 if the exhibition is conducted on private property;
AMUSEMENTS
10-13 REVISED 10/01/11
and $12 if the exhibition is conducted on public property. All applicable fees shall be paid five days
prior to opening of the exhibition and said fee shall be the obligation of the licensee. The maximum
license fee applicable herein shall be $860.
Ord. #06-078)
Section 10-905 Exceptions. Acharitable, eleemosynary, fraternal or non-profit organization which
complies with the requirements of this Section may receive any license required by this Chapter at a
nominal fee of $6. Any organization desiring a $5 license under this Section must first submit a
sworn statement by a duly authorized officer to the Village Manager containing the following
information:
a. The name of the organization and the names and addresses of its officers;
b. Where and when the organization was legally established, the form of the organization and
its tax exempt status, if any;
c. The purpose for which the organization is organized and the purpose or purposes for which
the exhibition is to be presented or performed;
d. Whether the organization is authorized by any other government authority to solicit
contributions and whether it is or has ever been enjoined by any court from soliciting
contributions; and
e. The name and address of the person having custody of the financial records, book and
accounts of the organization.
The Village Manager shall grant such license to any organization operating, maintaining, promoting
or conducting an exhibition the proceeds from which, after payment of reasonable expenses, shall
inure exclusively to the benefit of a philanthropic, fraternal, charitable, eleemosynary or non-profit
organization, society or institution including, but not necessarily limited to, those with religious,
educational, health, youth, civic or patriotic purposes.
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any exhibition operated, owned or conducted byany
person for any profit although sponsored or conducted under the auspices of any organization eligible
under this Section for the nominal license fee of $5. The provisions of this Section shall also not
apply, and a request for a $5 license fee may be denied, if the Village President and Board of
Trustees determine that an exhibition is likely to require unusual demands of the Village Fire or
Police force or the Village Public Works Department, including, but not necessarily limited to, the
attendance of a policeman on duty for more than one hour.
Section 10-906 Prohibited Locations. No license shall be issued to any person who intends to
present or perform any exhibition on any premises within 200 feet of any church, hospital or building
used exclusively for educational purposes; provided, however, that if any such premises were
designed for the purpose of presenting an exhibition and were built prior to the establishment of such
church, hospital or building used exclusively for educational purposes, then this Section shall not
apply; and provided further, that this Section shall not apply to a church, hospital or building used
exclusively for educational purposes which has acquired a license to present or perform an exhibition
on its premises.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
10-14 REVISED 10/01/11
Section 10-907 General Regulations. All persons licensed hereunder shall strictly comply with all
State Statutes and all applicable regulations of this Code.
Section 10-908 Gambling. No person shall gamble, bet or partake in games of cards or dice for any
purpose, in any building or hall used for exhibition purposes. This Section shall not apply to any
pari-mutuel betting on a location licensed by the State of Illinois.
Section 10-909 Inspections. The Director of Building and Life Safety and the Director of Health
shall inspect or cause to inspect as often as deemed necessary, the operations and premises of any
licensee under this Chapter to determine whether all applicable provisions of this Code are being
complied with.
Section 10-910 Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined
not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each offense. Aseparate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Article X Raffles
Section 10-1001 Licensing Raffles. Asystem is hereby established for the licensing of organizations
to operate raffles within the boundaries of Arlington Heights, pursuant to 230 ILCS 15/1 et seq. as
amended, the provisions of which are hereby incorporated herein by reference.
Section 10-1002 Definitions. For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions apply:
a. Charitable. An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite
number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must also confer
some benefit on the public.
b. Educational. An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic
instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to schools and institutions of
learning which compare favorable in their scope and intensity with the course of study
presented in tax-supported schools.
c. Fraternal. An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of
which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general
public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that
otherwise would be cared for by the government.
d. Labor. An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of
the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the development of a higher degree of
efficiency in their respective occupations.
e. Non-profit. An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-profit basis
with no personal profit inuring to any one as a result of the operation.
f. Religious. Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for the purpose of
religious worship.
AMUSEMENTS
10-15 REVISED 10/01/11
g. Veterans. An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially are
all individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, the primary
purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the
general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit.
Ord. #02-018)
Section 10-1003 Application. An application for license to operate a raffle shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. The
Village Manager shall cause a license to be issued upon compliance with the provisions of this
Article. The applicant mayappeal a decision of the Village Manager in the manner provided by this
Code. The application shall be in a form provided by the Village and shall contain such pertinent
information as the Village Manager shall require in order to determine compliance with the
provisions of this Code and the Statutes of the State of Illinois.
Section 10-1004 Restrictions on Operations. Any raffle license issued pursuant to the provisions
of this Article shall be subject to the following restrictions:
a. The aggregate retail value of all prizes and merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single
raffle shall not exceed $100,000;
b. The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not
exceed $50,000;
c. The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold shall not
exceed $100;
d. The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold shall not exceed
180 days.
The restrictions set forth above may be varied by the Village Board upon showing of unusual
circumstances or hardship. Licenses to operate raffles shall be granted only to bona fide religious,
charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veteran's organizations that operate without profit to their
members, and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five years immediately
before making application for a license and which have had during the entire five year period, a bona
fide membership engaged in carrying out their objects or to a non-profit fundraising organization that
the licensing authority determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance
to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result
of an illness, disability, accident, or disaster.
Section 10-1005 Restrictions on Licensees. The following further restrictions apply with respect to
the issuance of licenses:
a. The license and application for license must specify the area or areas within the Village
where the raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during which raffle chances
will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances and the locations at
which winning chances will be determined;
b. The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit
character of the prospective licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and the
secretary of that organization;
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
10-16 REVISED 10/01/11
c. The application for license shall be prepared in accordance with applicable provisions of this
Code;
d. A license authorizes the licensee to conduct raffles as defined in this Article.
e. The following are ineligible for any license under this Article:
1. any person who has been convicted of a felony;
2. any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter;
3. any person who is not of good moral character;
4. any firm or corporation in which a person defined in 1, 2, or 3 has a proprietary,
equitable or credit interest, or in which such a person is active or employed;
5. any organization in which a person defined in 1, 2 or 3 is an officer, director, or
employee, whether compensated or not;
6. any organization in which a person defined in 1, 2 or 3 is to participate in the
management or operation of a raffle as defined in this Article.
Section 10-1006 Conduct of Raffles. The conducting of raffles is subject to the following
restrictions:
a. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of
the organization permitted to conduct that game;
b. No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the
management or operation of the raffle;
c. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or
operation of the raffle;
d. A licensee may rent premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a
raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under this Chapter, or a non-profit
corporation or organization approved in the license, or a commercial entity approved in the
license, but only if no rent or other charge is made or to be made for the renting of the
premises above the lowest rates that are being charged by the entity for use of the same
space.
e. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license and
winning chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license;
f. No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances.
Aperson under the age of 18 years may be within the area where winning chances are being
determined only when accompanied by his parent or guardian.
AMUSEMENTS
10-17 REVISED 10/01/11
Section 10-1007 Raffles - Manager - Bond. The operation and conduct of raffles shall be under the
supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The manager shall give a
fidelity bond in the sum of an amount equal to the total value of prizes to be awarded in favor of the
organization conditioned upon honesty in the performance of duties. Terms of the bond shall
provide that notice shall be given in writing to the Village not less than 30 days prior to its
cancellation. The Village may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the
license issued to an organization under this Article, provided that a license containing such waiver
provision shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the numbers of the Village Board.
Section 10-1008 Records. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep records of its
gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning
chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion
shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net
proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.
Gross receipts from the operation of raffles shall be segregated from other revenues of the
organization, including bingo gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit
organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the State of
Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles.
The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles
shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly after the conclusion of each raffle
to its membership, and to the Village, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and
the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this Section.
Records required by this Section shall be preserved for three years, and organizations shall make
available their records relating to operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and
places.
Section 10-1009 Liability of Village. The issuance of license hereunder shall not constitute an
endorsement by the Village of any raffle. The Village shall not be liable to any person, firm or
organization for any claim, damage or liability arising from holding of raffle pursuant to license. The
licensee by account of the license agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Village for such claims.
Article XI Penalties
Section 10-1101 Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
Chapter shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each offense. Aseparate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or in which a violation occurs or continues.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 09/19/16
CHAPTER 11 - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Article I General Provisions
Section 11-101 Intent and Purpose
Article II Adoption of the Illinois Department of Public Health Food Service Sanitation
Code
Section 11-201 Adoption
Article III General Regulations
Section 11-301 Exemptions
Section 11-302 Inspection of Food Establishments
Section 11-303 Suspension of Licenses
Section 11-304 Hearings
Section 11-305 Examination and Condemnation of Food
Section 11-306 Planned Review of Future Construction
Section 11-307 New or Replacement Equipment
Section 11-308 Conflicts
Section 11-309 Storage
Article IV Additional Regulation of Restaurants
Section 11-401 Responsibility of Owner
Section 11-402 Requirements for Outdoor Dining Areas
Section 11-403 Requirements for Drive-Through Windows
Section 11-404 Cumulative Effect
Article V Automatic Food Vending Machines
Section 11-501 Definition
Section 11-502 General Regulations
Section 11-503 Operator’ s Place of Business
Section 11-504 Premises
Section 11-505 Inspections
Article VI Food Vehicles
Section 11-601 License Required
Section 11-602 Regulations
Section 11-603 Inspections
Article VII Licensing
Section 11-701 License Required
Section 11-702 Application
Section 11-703 Investigation
Section 11-704 Licensing Fees
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
11-2
Article VIII Prepared Food and Liquor Tax
Section 11-801 Definitions
Section 11-802 Tax Imposed
Section 11-803 Collection of Tax by Retailer
Section 11-804 Books and Records
Section 11-805 Transmission of Tax Collection
Section 11-806 Late Payment Penalty
Section 11-807 Transmittal of Excess Tax Collections
Section 11-808 Enforcement License Suspension, Revocation
Section 11-809 Penalty
Article IX Penalties
Section 11-901 Penalties
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
11-3 REVISED 04/16/18
Article I General Provisions
Ord. #11-006)
Section 11-101 Intent and Purpose. The purpose of this regulation is to assure that appropriate
standards of food handling and service are maintained.
Ord. #11-006, #16-044, # 18-008)
Article II Adoption of the Illinois Department of Public Health
Food Service Sanitation Code
Section 11-201 Adoption. There is hereby adopted by reference the Illinois Department of Public
Health Food Service Sanitation Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 750, effective June 29, 2016,
as now or hereafter amended. In addition, Section 8-103.10, 8-103.11, 8-103-12, 8-201.13 and 8-
201.14 of the Federal Food Code 2013 are hereby adopted.
Ord. #11-006)
Article III General Regulations
Section 11-301 Exemptions. The Health Services Director may exempt any food establishment
that deals only in completely sealed and packaged foods, or in which no food contact activities are
carried on, from any of the requirements of this Chapter which, in his judgment, would serve no
health purpose as applied to such food establishment.
Section 11-302 Inspection of Food Establishments.
a. The Health Services Director shall cause each food establishment located in, or food vehicle
operated in the Village, to be inspected as often as is necessary for the enforcement of this
Chapter.
b. Village inspectors, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter, at any reasonable
time, any food establishment or food vehicle in the Village, for the purpose of making
inspections to determine compliance with this Chapter. They shall be permitted to examine
the records of the establishment and operator to obtain pertinent information pertaining to
food and supplies purchased, received or used, and persons employed.
c. Whenever an inspector makes an inspection of a food establishment or food vehicle, the
findings shall be recorded in writing, and a copy of such inspection report shall be furnished
to the licensee or operator.
d. Whenever a food establishment or food vehicle is inspected and it is determined that any of
the applicable requirements of this Chapter has been violated, the licensee or operator shall
be notified of such violation(s) by means of an inspection report or other written notice.
Such notification shall (1) set forth the specific violation(s) found; (2) establish a specific and
reasonable period of time for the correction of the violation(s) found; (3) state that failure to
comply with any notice issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter mayresult in
immediate suspension of the license; and (4) state that an opportunity for appeal from any
notice or inspection findings will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with
the Health Services Director within the period of time established in the notice for correction.
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
11-4
e. Notices provided for under this Chapter shall be deemed to have been properly served when
a copy of the inspection report or other notice has been delivered personally to the licensee or
person in charge of the food establishment or food vehicle, or such notice has been sent by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the license
holder, and a copy of the notice shall be filed with the records of the Village Health
Department.
Section 11-303 Suspension of Licenses.
a. Any license issued under this Chapter may be suspended temporarily bythe Village Manager
for failure of the licensee to comply with the requirements of this Chapter or for violation of
any other provision of this Code relating to the conduct of the business, the condition of the
premises or vehicle, the article of food dealt in, or the license required; provided, however,
that no license shall be suspended hereunder until notice has been given to the licensee as
provided in Section 11-302, Inspection of Food Establishments, of this Code and until a
reasonable time has elapsed to enable the licensee to comply with the provisions of this
Code. Such notice shall state that the licensee is entitled to a hearing before the Village
Manager if a written request for such a hearing is filed by the licensee with the Manager.
b. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section to the contrary, whenever the Village
Manager finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a food establishment or food
vehicle which, in his judgment, constitute a substantial hazard to the public health, he may
without warning, notice or hearing, issue a written notice to the license holder or operator
citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and specifying the time
period within which such action shall be taken; and if deemed necessary, such order shall
state that the license is immediately suspended, and all food operations are to be immediately
discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately
therewith, but upon written petition to the Village Manager shall be afforded a hearing as
soon as possible.
c. Any person whose license under this Chapter has been suspended, may, at any time, make
application for reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the license. Within ten days
following receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that in
his opinion the conditions causing suspension of the license have been corrected, the Health
Services Director shall make a reinspection. If the applicant is complying with all applicable
provisions of this Code, the license shall be reinstated.
Section 11-304 Hearings. The hearings provided for hereunder shall be conducted by the Village
Manager at a designated time and place. Based upon the record of such hearing, the Village
Manager shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any official notice or order
considered in the hearing. Awritten report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the licensee
by the Village Manager.
Section 11-305 Examination and Condemnation of Food.
a. Food may be examined or sampled by the appropriate Village employees as often as may be
necessary to determine freedom from adulteration or misbranding.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
11-5 REVISED 02/21/11
b. The Health Services Director may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge,
place a hold order on any food which he determines or has probable cause to believe to be
unwholesome or otherwise adulterated or misbranded. Under a hold order, food shall be
permitted to be suitably stored. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or alter a hold
order, notice or tag placed on food by the Health Services Director, and neither such food nor
the containers thereof shall be relabeled, repacked, reprocessed, altered, disposed of and
destroyed without permission of the Health Services Director, except on order by a court of
competent jurisdiction. After the owner or person in charge has had a hearing as provided in
this Article and on the basis of evidence produced at such hearing, or on the basis of his
examination in the event the written request for a hearing is not received within ten days, the
Health Services Director may vacate the hold order, or mayby written order direct the owner
or person in charge of the food which was placed under the hold order to denature or destroy
such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this Chapter; provided, that
such order of the Health Services Director to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be stayed if the order is appealed to a
court of competent jurisdiction within three days.
Section 11-306 Planned Review of Future Construction. When a food establishment is hereafter
constructed or extensively remodeled, or when an existing structure is converted for use as a food
establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or
alteration, showing layout, arrangement and construction materials of work areas, and the location,
size and type of fixed equipment and facilities, shall be submitted to the Health Services Director for
approval before such work is begun and such construction or remodeling shall be in accordance with
such approved plans.
Section 11-307 New or Replacement Equipment. New or replacement equipment, which includes
equipment new to the food service establishment, shall meet, or be equivalent to, the current
standards of the National Sanitation Foundation as to construction and installation.
Section 11-308 Conflicts.
a. The provisions of this Article shall apply to all food establishments within the Village and all
food vehicles operated within the Village, except that where a provision of this Article
conflicts with any applicable provision of any other Article of this Chapter, the provisions of
such other Article shall prevail.
b. Any person who has obtained a license under any of the Articles of this Chapter, and has paid
the appropriate fee, may conduct on the same premises and in connection with the licensed
business any other business licensed by this Chapter without paying any additional fee
therefor, provided that the fee paid for the licensed business is at least as great in amount as
the fee required for the other business so conducted, and provided that this subsection shall
not be so construed as to relieve any such applicant from the regulatory requirement for such
additional business.
Ord. #99-045)
Section 11-309 Storage. In newly constructed or substantially remodeled restaurants, (remodeling
value is more than 50% of the value of the restaurant) the size of the dry storage facilities shall be
25% of the food preparation area unless an alternate is approved by the Health Services Director.
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
11-6 REVISED 04/18/16
Ord. #11-006)
Article IV Additional Regulation of Restaurants
Section 11-401 Responsibility of Owner. It is hereby declared to be a duty of the owner or
operator of a free standing fast food restaurant to provide not less than two receptacles for the receipt
of trash, litter, paper, napkins, cups and remnants of food at each exit, available to the patrons as they
leave the premises, unless the owner shall provide trash receptacles inside the lot no more than 15
feet from any parking space. It shall be the duty of the restaurant operator to exercise due care to
keep the premises whereon a restaurant is located, together with the parking area and that portion of
any alley adjoining said restaurant, free from rubbish, waste products and debris, including napkins,
straws, paper cups and plates, and other waste material. Each free standing fast food restaurant
operator shall, at least once in 24 hours, empty all waste receptacles, and in any event shall empty
each waste receptacle when full. At least once in each 24 hours each such restaurant operator shall
pick up and remove all waste material from the ground on the premises of the restaurant.
Section 11-402 Requirements for Outdoor Dining Areas. Mechanical air curtains must be
installed over all doors used by waitstaff to access outdoor dining areas at restaurants.
Section 11-403 Requirements for Drive-Through Windows. Self-closing windows equipped
with mechanical air curtains must be installed for all newly constructed or remodeled drive-through
windows at restaurants.
Section 11-404 Cumulative Effect. It is declared to be the intention and purpose of this Article not
to repeal any other ordinance or ordinances now in effect, and it is hereby declared that the purpose
of this Article is to make this Article cumulative with all other such applicable ordinances; provided,
however, that in any conflict in language between this Article and any other ordinances applicable to
free standing fast food restaurants, the language of this Article shall prevail.
Ord. #16-009)
Section 11-405 Outdoor Dining Facility. A hose-bib equipped with an atmospheric backflow
preventer must be provided in all outdoor dining facilities to facilitate cleaning.
Article V Automatic Food Vending Machines
Section 11-501 Definition. Automatic food vending machine, when used in this Article, means any
mechanical container or device used for the sale of any beverage or article of food, the operation of
which is governed or controlled by the deposit of a coin or token.
Section 11-502 General Regulations. All persons licensed hereunder to install, keep, maintain or
use an automatic food vending machine, whether licensed under this Article or under another Article
in this Chapter, shall comply strictly with all the regulations of this Article and all applicable
regulations of Article III of this Chapter, except that no lavatory or toilet facilities or clothing storage
areas need be provided where employees in food contact activities are not present for more than one
hour a day.
Section 11-503 Operator's Place of Business.
a. The Village Manager shall be notified of any change in the address of this place of business,
and the current address along with the operator's name shall be indicated in some
conspicuous place on each of the machines.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7
b. There shall be posted in a conspicuous place on each machine the name, address and
telephone number of the person responsible for the maintenance of such machine.
Section 11-504 Premises. No automatic food vending machine shall be located in any premises that
expose the food to danger from improper handling, dust, dirt, flies, vermin or other contamination.
No automatic food vending machine shall be installed or kept in any toilet or washroom.
Section 11-505 Inspections. The Health Services Director shall inspect or cause to be inspected as
often as deemed necessary, every automatic food vending machine and automatic food vending
machine operation located and conducted in the Village to determine whether all applicable
provisions of this Code are being complied with. Such investigation shall be made in accordance
with Article II of this Chapter.
Article VI Food Vehicles
Section 11-601 License Required. No person shall operate, use, or cause the operation or use in
the Village, of any food vehicle without first having obtained a license therefor; provided, however,
that no license need be obtained hereunder for food vehicles to be used to deliver food from a food
establishment licensed under this Chapter or to be used by a peddler licensed under this Code, but
such vehicles shall comply with the regulatory provisions of this Article.
Section 11-602 Regulations. Every holder of a food vehicle license shall comply strictly with all
the provisions of this Code relating to health, sanitation and food vehicles and all other applicable
provisions of this Code.
Section 11-603 Inspections. The Health Services Director shall inspect or cause to be inspected as
often as deemed necessary the vehicle and operations of every food vehicle operated in the Village to
determine whether all applicable provisions of this Code are being complied with. The inspections
shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Article III of this Chapter.
Food vehicles shall be equipped with adequate, properly constructed and located mechanical
refrigeration equipment for cold or frozen food, and adequate, properly located and constructed
heating equipment shall be provided for hot foods.
If an applicant’ s type of operation is such that the applicant feels an exemption from the mechanical
equipment requirement is warranted, the Health Services Director shall make or cause to be made
such investigation as deemed necessary to determine whether the applicant's proposed business,
equipment and methods of operation comply with the regulations of this Code relating to health,
sanitation and food establishments and with all other provisions of this Code. No license shall be
issued to any applicant whose proposed business, equipment and methods of operation do not
comply with the applicable provisions of this Code. The Health Services Director shall indicate on
the application for a license, the results of the investigation and approval or disapproval of the
application.
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
8 REVISED 05/01/07
Article VII Licensing
Section 11-701 License Required. No person shall conduct or operate a food vending, a food
vehicle, a mobile food operation, a food processing establishment, food service establishment, retail
food establishment without first having obtained a license.
Section 11-702 Application. An application for a license to conduct or operate food vending, a
food vehicle, a mobile food operation, a food processing establishment, food service establishment,
retail food establishment, shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of this Code
relating to application of license.
Section 11-703 Investigation. The regulatory authority shall make or cause to be made such
investigation as deemed necessary to determine whether the applicant's proposed place of business
and equipment and methods of operation comply with the regulations of this Code relating to health,
sanitation and food establishments and with all other provisions of this Code. No license shall be
issued to any applicant whose proposed place of business and equipment and methods of operation
do not comply with the applicable provisions of this Code. The regulatory authority shall indicate on
the application the results of the investigation and approval or disapproval of the application.
Ord. #03-078, #05-020, # 06-078)
Section 11-704 Licensing Fees.
LICENSING
FEES
Food
Vending
Food
Vehicle
Food
Mobile
50* 105 315
Food Processing Food Service
Establishment
Retail Food
5 employees or less 260 260 260
6 - 21 employees 360 360 360
more than 21 employees 500 500 500
See Chapter 14 for business license requirements and 65 ILCS 5/11-55-2 for fee amount changes.
Article VIII Prepared Food and Liquor Tax
Section 11-801 Definitions. For the purpose of this Article, unless the context otherwise requires,
the following words or terms shall have the meanings respectively applied to them:
a. Liquor. Any alcohol, spirits, wine or beer as defined, set forth and regulated in Chapter 13 of
the Municipal Code, which is sold at retail either for consumption on the premises where
sold or is sold in its original package for consumption off the premises.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
9 REVISED 07/06/2004
Ord. #96-002)
b. Prepared Foods. Any solid, liquid (including both alcoholic and non-alcoholic liquid),
powder or other food substance used or intended to be used for human consumption and
which has been prepared for immediate consumption on and/or off the premises.
c. Purchase at Retail. To obtain for use or consumption in exchange for a consideration,
whether in the form of money, credits, barter or any other nature, and not for resale.
d. Retailer. Any person who sells or offers for sale, prepared food and/or liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale.
Ord. #96-002)
e. Prepared Food Facility. Establishments subject to the licensing requirements of Chapter 11
of the Municipal Code as a food service establishment which sells prepared food at retail for
immediate consumption and which provides for on and/or off premises consumption whether
or not such facility is conducted along with any other use(s) in a common premise or
business establishment.
A "Prepared Food Facility" does not include food store (except facilities therein which sell
prepared food and liquor), churches, public or private schools, boarding houses, day care
centers, nursing homes, retirement centers or similar residential care facilities or programs
for the central preparation of meals to be delivered and consumed at private residences of
invalids or the elderly, coin-operated automatic food item dispensing machines, hospital
except facilities therein, subject to the State of Illinois Retailer Occupation Tax pertaining to
food sales) and facilities of not-for-profit associations or corporations.
f. Retailer Liquor Facility. Any establishment licensed under the provisions of Article II of
Chapter 13 of the Municipal Code of the Village of Arlington Heights.
Ord. #04-040)
Section 11-802 Tax Imposed. Commencing on the first day of July, 1990, a tax, in addition to any
and all other taxes, is imposed upon the purchase of prepared foods and liquor at retail at any
Prepared Food Facility or Liquor Facility within the Village. The rate of said tax shall be 1-1/4
percent of the purchase price of such prepared food and liquor, the ultimate incidence of any liability
for payment of which shall be borne by the purchaser.
Section 11-803 Collection of Tax by Retailer. The owner and operator of each Prepared Food
Facility and each Liquor Facility within the Village shall jointly and severally, have the duty to
collect and account for the tax from each purchase at the time that the consideration for the purchase
is paid.
Section 11-804 Books and Records. The owner and operator of each Prepared Food Facility and
each Liquor Facility within the Village shall jointly and severally have the duty to maintain complete
and accurate books, records and accounts, showing the gross receipts for sale of prepared food and
liquor and the taxes collected each day, which shall be made available to the Village for examination
and for audit by the Village upon reasonable notice and during customary business hours.
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
10 REVISED 03/06/06
Section 11-805 Transmission of Tax Collection. The owner and the operator of each Prepared
Food Facility and each Liquor Facility within the Village shall jointly and severally have the duty
to cause to be filed, a sworn return with the Finance Director for each facility and for each
licensed premises located in the Village. The return shall be prepared and submitted on forms
prescribed by the Village and filed with the Village by the filing date and at the same time
intervals or frequencies as the Sales and Use Tax Return, form ST-1, is due to be filed with the
Illinois Department of Revenue. The return shall also be accompanied by payment to the Village
of all taxes imposed by this Article which are due and owing for the period covered by the return.
The return shall also be accompanied by a copy of the return filed with the Illinois Department of
Revenue for sales within the Village of Arlington Heights covering the same reporting period.
Ord. #06-008)
Section 11-806 Late Payment Penalty. If any tax imposed by this Article is not paid when due, a
late payment penalty equal to 10% of the unpaid tax shall be added for each month, or any portion
thereof, that the tax remains unpaid and the late payment penalty shall be paid along with the tax
imposed.
Section 11-807 Transmittal of Excess Tax Collections. If any person collects an amount upon a
sale not subject to the tax imposed hereby, but which amount is purported to be the collection of the
tax, or if a person collects an amount upon a sale greater than the amount of the tax imposed herein
and does not for any reason return it to the purchaser who paid it before filing the return for the
period in which it occurred, that person shall account for and pay over those amounts to the Village
along with the tax properly collected.
Section 11-808 Enforcement License Suspension, Revocation. Payment and collection of the tax
and any late payment penalty may be enforced by action in any court of competent jurisdiction and
failure to collect, account for and pay over the tax and any late payment penalty shall be cause for
suspension or revocation of any Village license issued for the Prepared Food Facility or Liquor
Facility applicable to the premises thereof, all in addition to any other penalties in this Chapter.
Section 11-809 Penalty. Any person operating a Prepared Food Facility or a Liquor Facility within
the Village failing or omitting to pay the tax when due, or failing or omitting to collect, or to account
for, or to pay over the tax and any late payment penalty, or failing to maintain or allow examination
of the penalty provided herein or elsewhere by law or ordinance, upon conviction, shall be fined not
less than $200 dollars nor more than $ 1,000 dollars for each offense, and each day a violation
continues shall be considered a separate violation.
Article IX Penalties
Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than $5
and not more than $ 750 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 10/05/09
CHAPTER 12 MERCHANTS
Article I Auctioneer
Section 12-101 Definition
Section 12-102 License Required
Section 12-103 Application
Section 12-104 Fee
Section 12-105 Licensed Employee
Section 12-106 Terms of Sale
Section 12-107 False Representations
Section 12-108 Substitution
Section 12-109 Fictitious Bids
Section 12-110 Special Permit for Auction Sales
Section 12-111 Transfer of License
Section 12-112 Auctions on Public Ways
Section 12-113 Exemptions
Article II Tobacco Dealers
Section 12-201 Definitions
Section 12-202 License Required
Section 12-203 Application
Section 12-204 Fee
Section 12-205 Transfer of License
Section 12-206 Sanitary and Health Requirements
Section 12-207 Prohibition of Sales to, Sales by, Purchase by and Possession by
Minors
Section 12-208 Prohibition of Sales by Self-Service
Section 12-209 Sales Near Schools
Section 12-210 Annual Registration of Cigarette and Cigar Vending Machines
Section 12-211 Application for Registration
Section 12-212 Approval of Application
Section 12-213 Registration Sticker
Section 12-214 Registration Fee
Article III Solid Fuel and Fuel Oil Dealers
Section 12-301 Definitions
Section 12-302 License Required
Section 12-303 Application
Section 12-304 Fee
Section 12-305 Fire Limits
Section 12-306 Piling Solid Fuel
Section 12-307 Zoning
Section 12-308 Regulations Relating to Dealers in Solid Fuel and Storers of Solid
Fuel
Section 12-309 Regulations Relating to Fuel Oil Dealers and Fuel Oil Storers
Section 12-310 Inspections
Section 12-311 Fire Prevention Regulations
MERCHANTS
2 REVISED 10/05/09
Article IV Florists
Section 12-401 Definition
Section 12-402 License Required
Section 12-403 Application
Section 12-404 Sanitary Regulations
Section 12-405 Inspection
Section 12-406 Off Premises Sales Prohibited
Article V Ice Dealers
Section 12-501 License Required
Section 12-502 Application
Article VI Junk Dealers
Section 12-601 Definitions
Section 12-602 License Required
Section 12-603 Application
Section 12-604 Junk Yards
Section 12-605 Stolen Goods
Section 12-606 Minors
Section 12-607 Fences
Section 12-608 Identity of Junk Received
Section 12-609 Restrictions on Sales
Section 12-610 Prohibited Activities
Section 12-611 Inspection
Article VII Lumber and Wood Dealers
Section 12-701 Definitions
Section 12-702 License Required
Section 12-703 Application
Section 12-704 Fire Limits
Section 12-705 Fire Apparatus
Section 12-706 Fire Prevention Regulations
Section 12-707 Piling Lumber
Section 12-708 Inspections
Article VIII Pawnbrokers
Section 12-801 Definition
Section 12-802 License Required
Section 12-803 Application
Section 12-804 Fee
Section 12-805 Records
Section 12-806 Weapons
Section 12-807 Prohibited Pledges and Purchases
Section 12-808 Stolen Goods
Section 12-809 Interest Charges
Section 12-810 Second-Hand Dealer
Article IX Brokers
Section 12-901 Definitions
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
12-3 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 12-902 License Required
Section 12-903 Application
Section 12-904 Business at More than One Place
Section 12-905 Employees Acting as Brokers
Article X Peddlers and Solicitors
Section 12-1001 Definitions
Section 12-1002 Permit Required
Section 12-1003 Application
Section 12-1004 Administrative Procedures for Application for Permit
Section 12-1005 Solicitation Upon the Public Streets
Section 12-1006 Fraud
Section 12-1007 Hours of Operation
Section 12-1008 Conducting Business
Section 12-1009 Food Peddlers
Section 12-1010 Notice Regulating Soliciting and Peddling
Section 12-1011 Duty of Solicitors or Peddlers
Section 12-1012 Convicted Felons as Solicitors
Section 12-1013 Revocation
Section 12-1014 Penalty
Article XI Second-Hand Dealers
Section 12-1101 License Required
Section 12-1102 Application
Section 12-1103 Records
Section 12-1104 Weapons
Section 12-1105 Prohibited Transactions
Section 12-1106 Stolen Goods
Section 12-1107 Pawnbrokers
Section 12-1108 Use of Unlicensed Premises
Article XII Feed Dealers
Section 12-1201 License Required
Section 12-1202 Application
Section 12-1203 Sanitary Requirements
Article XIII Hardware and Paint Store Operators (Retail)
Section 12-1301 Definitions
Section 12-1302 License Required
Section 12-1303 Application
Section 12-1304 Inspection
Section 12-1305 Fire Prevention
Section 12-1306 Ventilation
Section 12-1307 Sanitary Requirements
Article XIV Filling Station Operators
Section 12-1401 Definition
Section 12-1402 License Required
Section 12-1403 Application
MERCHANTS
12-4 REVISED 04/04/16
Section 12-1404 Fee
Section 12-1405 Building and Fire Regulations
Section 12-1406 Inspections
Section 12-1407 Accessory Sales
Section 12-1408 Maintenance
Article XV Pet Shop Operators
Section 12-1501 License Required
Section 12-1502 Definition
Section 12-1503 Application
Section 12-1504 Fee
Section 12-1505 Operation
Sectuib 12-1506 Disclosures Required
Article XVI Kennels and Catteries
Section 12-1601 Definitions
Section 12-1602 License Required
Section 12-1603 Application
Section 12-1604 Removal of Dog or Cat
Section 12-1605 Sanitary Provisions
Section 12-1606 Inspection
Article XVII Itinerant Dealers and Stands
Section 12-1701 Definition
Section 12-1702 License Required
Section 12-1703 Application
Section 12-1704 Fee
Section 12-1705 Records
Section 12-1706 Stolen Goods
Article XVIII Garage Sales
Section 12-1801 Definition
Section 12-1802 Limits on Frequency and Hours of Sales
Article XIX Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation & Service Occupation Tax
Section 12-1901 Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation and Service
Occupation Tax
Article XX Penalties
Section 12-2001 Penalties
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
12-5 REVISED 10/05/09
Ord. #09-038)
Article I Auctioneer
Section 12-101 Definition. "Auctioneer" when used in this Article shall mean any person who sells
real estate or personal property at public or private auction for another or for himself or herself,
regardless of who owns such property.
Section 12-102 License Required. No person shall conduct an auction or engage in the business of
an auctioneer in the Village without first having obtained a license therefor.
It shall also be unlawful for any employee of an auctioneer to conduct an auction in the Village
without first having obtained a license therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any auctioneer to permit
an auction to be conducted by an unlicensed employee. Not more than two employees of an
auctioneer may be authorized by such auctioneer and licensed hereunder to conduct auctions on his
or her behalf if such person meets the prerequisites of a licensee hereunder, and such auctioneer's
license shall constitute a license for such named person.
Section 12-103 Application. An application for an auctioneer's license shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. An auctioneer shall
use the same application form in obtaining a license for not more than two of his or her employees by
stating in such application, in addition to the other information required, the name and residence
address of any employee who is to be authorized by the applicant to conduct auctions on applicant's
behalf.
Ord. #06-078)
Section 12-104 Fee. The annual license fee for an auctioneer's license shall be $115 plus $35 for
each employee of the auctioneer. The daily license fee for an auctioneer's license shall be $12 plus
12 for each employee of the auctioneer. No daily license fee shall be required if an annual license is
obtained, and no annual license shall be required if a daily license is obtained.
Section 12-105 Licensed Employee. All the provisions of this Code relating to an auctioneer shall
apply equally to any licensed employee of an auctioneer, and should any licensed employee of an
auctioneer violate any provisions of this Code concerning auctioneers, such licensed employee shall
be subject to all the penalties herein imposed upon licensed auctioneers for violating any of the
provisions of this Article.
If any licensed auctioneer shall permit any person other than an authorized and licensed employee to
conduct an auction on his or her behalf, the auctioneer shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
Article. In addition, his or her license shall be revoked and no other license shall be issued to him or
her for a period of one year.
Section 12-106 Terms of Sale. It shall be the duty of every auctioneer, before beginning any
auction sale of real or personal property of any kind whatever, to state fully the terms and conditions
upon which the sale will be made and to announce to the persons present the character, quality and
description of the property offered for sale.
Section 12-107 False Representations. No auctioneer or person being present when any real or
personal property is offered for sale shall knowingly, with intent to induce any person to purchase
the same or any part thereof, make any false representations or statement as to the ownership of, or
the character or quality of, the property so offered for sale, or as to the poverty or circumstances of
the owner or pretended owner of such property; and if such false representation is made by the
auctioneer, or by any other person with such auctioneer's knowledge and consent or connivance, the
license of such auctioneer shall be revoked.
MERCHANTS
12-6 REVISED 01/03/19
Section 12-108 Substitution. No auctioneer shall exhibit and offer for sale at auction any article
and induce its purchase by any bidder, and then afterward substitute any article in lieu of that offered
to and purchased by the bidder.
Section 12-109 Fictitious Bids. No auctioneer shall procure any person to make a fictitious bid, or
shall conspire with any person to make a fictitious bid, or shall fictitiously raise any bids at any
auction sale of real or personal property.
Ord. #06-078)
Section 12-110 Special Permit for Auction Sales. No licensed auctioneer shall sell or offer for
sale at public auction any real or personal property at or in any place, house, store or building, other
than in the place, house, store or building designated in his or her license and where he or she is
authorized to act as auctioneer, except upon a special permit therefor issued bythe Village Manager.
An application for a special permit shall be made in writing to the Village Manager, setting forth the
place at which he or she desires to conduct an auction, the number of days to be occupied in making
such sale or conducting such auction and a schedule of property to be sold at such auction sale. If a
special permit is issued by the Village Manager, the applicant therefor shall pay to the Finance
Director, at or before the delivery of the special permit, a fee of $6 per day for each day or part of a
day such sale shall occupy. No special permit shall be issued to any person except a licensed
auctioneer. The special permit shall be valid only for the sale of the particular property described in
the application therefor, and at the particular time and place stated therein. Anyrenewal, addition or
substitution of property, or change of time or place for such sale, shall be unlawful.
Section 12-111 Transfer of License. No license granted under the provisions of this Article shall
be transferred to another person.
Section 12-112 Auctions on Public Ways. No real or personal property shall be sold at auction, or
exposed for sale, by any person in any public way in the Village.
Section 12-113 Exemptions. Nothing in this Article shall apply to any public auction or sale made
or conducted by a public officer by virtue of any jurisdictional order or process or by virtue of any
power or authority contained in a mortgage or trust deed.
Ord. #09-038)
Article II Tobacco Dealers
Ord. #96-004, #14-009, # 18-027, #19-003)
Section 12-201 Definitions. For the purposes of this Article, the following words have the
definitions listed:
a. Alternative Nicotine Product. A product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco
that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking,
absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing or by any other means. This does not
include tobacco products as that term is defined in this Section or any product approved by
the United States Food and Drug Administration as a non-tobacco product for sale as a
tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medicinal purposes.
b. Cigarette-vending machine. Any mechanical container or device used or intended to be used
for retail sales of cigarettes, the operation of which is governed or controlled by the deposit
of a coin or token.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
12-7 REVISED 01/03/19
c. Electronic Smoking Devices. Adevice as defined by federal, state, or nationally recognized
health organizations which device is capable of providing nicotine or any other substances
through vapor or inhalation. This device shall be considered a tobacco product for purposes
of this Municipal Code.
d. False Identification. Any document used for identification or proof of age that has been
altered or defaced or that contains false or misleading information or that contains a name
that is not the actual name of the person using it.
e. Minor. Any person under the age of 21 years.
f. Operator. Any person who owns a cigarette-vending machine and who consigns such
machine for use and undertakes to maintain it in proper operating condition and keep it
supplied with such cigarettes as are ordered by the retail tobacco dealer while on
consignment to him or her.
g. Owner. Includes an operator or retail tobacco dealer who has acquired possession and
exclusive control of a cigarette-vending machine by purchase, lease or otherwise.
h. Retail tobacco dealer. Any person selling, offering for sale, exposing for sale or keeping,
with the intention of selling or exchanging at retail, cigarettes, cigars or tobacco in any form.
i. Tobacco products. Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to,
cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.
Section 12-202 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of a retail tobacco dealer
in the Village, without first having obtained a license therefor; provided, however, that no such
license will be required of a retail tobacco dealer who makes no over-the-counter sales of cigarettes,
cigars or tobacco in any form, but merely permits the sale of cigarettes from cigarette-vending
machines located on his or her premises which are all properly registered and for which registration
stickers have been purchased as hereinafter provided.
Section 12-203 Application. An application for a retail tobacco dealer's license shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses.
Ord. #05-020, #06-078)
Section 12-204 Fee. The annual fee for a retail tobacco dealer's license shall be based on the
standardized calculation fee schedule located in Section 14-102, License Required, of this Code, plus
105 for each cigarette-vending machine in excess of one which is located on the premises of the
retail tobacco dealer and which is not properly registered and for which a registration sticker has not
been purchased by the owner of such machine as hereinafter provided.
Section 12-205 Transfer of License. The transfer of any license issued hereunder is hereby
expressly prohibited.
Section 12-206 Sanitary and Health Requirements. It shall be the duty of all persons licensed
hereunder, upon the demand of the Health Services Director, to furnish for inspection samples of all
cigarettes, cigars or tobacco in any form sold or offered for sale by them, and it shall be the duty of
such person to keep their premises and buildings in a clean and sanitary condition. No person shall
expose for sale, sell or offer for sale to any person, directly or indirectly, within the Village, any
cigarettes, cigars or tobacco in any form containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, belladonna,
strychnia, cocaine or any other poisonous or deleterious drug or drugs.
MERCHANTS
12-8 REVISED 01/03/19
The Director of Building shall cause to be inspected and examined, as often as deemed necessary, all
places where cigarettes, cigars or tobacco in any form are licensed to be sold at retail within the
Village, and all such cigarettes, cigars or tobacco, to determine whether all applicable laws of the
State and provisions of this Code are being complied with.
Ord. #96-004, #98-011, # 02-009, #14-009, # 18-027, #19-003)
Section 12-207 Prohibition of Sales to, Purchase by and Possession by Minors.
a. Possession. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or electronic smoking devices.
b. Sales or delivery. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, give away or deliver
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or electronic smoking devices to any person
under 21 years of age. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee to engage, employ or permit any person
under the age of 18 years of age to sell tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or
electronic smoking devices in any licensed premises.
c. Purchase. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products or electronic smoking devices to misrepresent their
identity or age or to use false identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products or electronic smoking devices.
d. Signs required. Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for in this Section
shall be posted by every retail tobacco dealer at or near every display of tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products or electronic smoking devices and on or upon every vending
machine which offers tobacco products, alternative nicotine products or electronic smoking
devices for sale. Posted signs shall be plainly visible and shall measure at least 8-1/2 inches
by 11 inches. Lettering on posted signs shall be at least one- inch in height. Each sign shall
be plainly visible and shall state:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS OR ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES TOPERSONS
UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
e. Penalties. Retail tobacco dealers engaging in the conduct prohibited by this Section may be
subject to license suspension or revocation, in accordance with the applicable provisions of
Chapter 9, General Licensing Procedure, concerning revocation and suspension of business
licenses. Additionally, any person violating any provisions of this Section shall be subject to
prosecution and a fine of not less than $ 5 nor more than $ 750.
f. Enforcement at schools. The extent of enforcement of violations of this Section occurring on
school property shall be within the discretion of the school officials.
Ord. #02-009, #19-003)
Section 12-208 Prohibition of Sales by Self- Service. It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale,
give away or display tobacco products for sale at any location where the consumer can acquire those
products through self- service. All tobacco products must be displayed from behind a
sales/ service counter so that no consumer can access tobacco products without assistance from an
employee of the licensee.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
12-9 REVISED 01/03/19
This prohibition shall not apply to those retailers who are primarily engaged in the business of selling
tobacco products. There shall be no persons under the age of 21 permitted in such business unless
they are employees.
Section 12-209 Sales Near Schools. No person shall sell, give away, barter, exchange or otherwise
deal in any cigarettes, cigars or tobacco in any form at any place located within 100 feet of any
building used exclusively for school purposes; provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to
retail tobacco dealers who were licensed to conduct business at their present fixed location prior to
the effective date of this Code.
Ord. #02-009)
Section 12-210 Annual Registration of Cigarette and Cigar Vending Machines. Only non-selfservice
cigarette and cigar vending machines shall be permitted. Before any cigarette vending
machine or cigar vending machine may be installed for use and, thereafter, annually before January
15, it shall be registered as hereinafter provided.
Section 12-211 Application for Registration. Application for a registration sticker for each
cigarette-vending machine shall be filed in the office of the Director of Building by the owner,
stating the owner’ s name and address, the name of the makes of such machine and factory number
thereof, the name of the retail tobacco dealer for whose use it is to be installed, and the street address
of the premises in which it is to be used.
Section 12-212 Approval of Application. The original application shall be referred to the Police
Chief for investigation and verification of the facts stated therein and the business methods of the
owner. The Police Chief may recommend that the application be denied if the investigation reveals
that the owner has been convicted of a criminal offense, or violated any law or ordinance imposing
any cigarette excise tax, or, if the owner is an operator, that he or she has employed coercive or
illegal measures to promote the use of the cigarette-vending machine or to promote the sale of any
brands of cigarettes, or that the place where the cigarette-vending machine is to be used and the
person in control thereof is not qualified under the provisions of this Article. In such circumstance,
the Police Chief shall return the application to the Director of Building with a statement of the
reasons for refusing approval of the application. Otherwise, the Police Chief shall return the
application with approval noted. If the owner is a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the
application shall not be approved if the Police Chief shall find that any member, officer, director or
manager of such firm, corporation, partnership or association, or any stockholder owning more than
5% of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible for a certificate of registration if he or she
were the sole owner.
Section 12-213 Registration Sticker. Upon approval of the application by the Police Chief and
payment of the annual registration fee to the Village, the Director of Building shall issue a
registration sticker. The registration sticker shall be affixed to the cigarette-vending machine so as to
be clearly visible when in use.
Ord. #04-077, #06-078)
Section 12-214 Registration Fee. A fee of $105 for each machine shall be paid for each
registration sticker and no proration of the fee will be permitted regardless of when application is
MERCHANTS
12-10 REVISED 10/05/09
made for the sticker. The sticker shall be valid from the date of issue until December 31 of the
calendar year in which it is issued.
Ord. #09-038)
Article III Solid Fuel and Fuel Oil Dealers
Section 12-301 Definitions. Solid fuel means any anthracite, semi-anthracite, bituminous, semibituminous,
or ignite coal, briquettes, boulets, coke, gas-house coke, petroleum coke, petroleum
carbon, firewood or any other manufactured or patented fuel not sold by liquid or metered measure.
Dealer in solid fuel means any person offering for sale, selling, delivering, or dealing and delivering
any solid fuel.
Fuel oil dealer means any person whose primary business is the storage of fuel oil or petroleum in
bulk for the purpose of sale, or whose primary business is the conveyance of fuel oil or petroleum in
any vehicle for the purpose of sale.
Fuel oil storer means any person who keeps on hand or stores fuel oil for use in any business, but not
for resale.
Section 12-302 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of coal yard owner or
dealer in solid fuel or fuel oil dealer within the Village without first having obtained a license
therefor. No person shall keep on hand or store fuel oil for use in any business in the Village, other
than the business of fuel oil dealer, without first having obtained a license therefor for each location,
place or premise where such person keeps on hand or stores for use any such oil; provided, however,
that no license shall be required of any person who keeps on hand or stores fuel oil at any location,
place or premise in a quantity less than 2000 gallons for use exclusively in the heating of any
building.
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Section, any person engaging or proposing to engage
in one or more of the businesses or activities described in this Article shall obtain a separate license
for each.
Section 12-303 Application. An application for any license under this Article shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. The
application shall also set forth whether the applicant engages in or proposes to engage in the business
or activity of coal yard owner, dealer in solid fuel, fuel oil dealer or fuel oil storer.
The application for a coal yard owner's license or solid fuel dealer’ s license shall also set forth the
number of vehicles, if any, to be used in connection with the business.
An application for a fuel oil dealer's license shall also state whether the applicant uses or proposes to
use storage facilities in connection with the business of fuel oil dealer and, if so, the location, place
or premise where such storage facilities are located or are to be located, their capacity and the
number of vehicles, if any, to be used in connection with the business.
An application for a fuel oil storer's license shall also state the location of the place at which the
applicant desires or intends to store fuel oil for use in the applicant's business, the maximum
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
11 REVISED 10/05/09
aggregate quantity to be so stored or used, a description of the business engaged in, the location and
capacity of all containers or tanks having a capacity of 50 gallons or more for the storage of fuel oil,
and such other information as may be required by the Chief of the Fire Department.
Ord. #04-077)
Section 12-304 Fee. The annual fee for a solid fuel dealer's license shall be $130 for each separate
place of business operated or conducted by the licensee within the Village plus $25 for each vehicle,
if any, owned, hired or rented by the licensee and used in connection with the business. The annual
license fee for a fuel oil or bulk petroleum dealer's license shall be $400. The annual fee for a fuel
oil storer's license shall be based on the total capacity of the containers and tanks for the storage of
fuel oil located in and upon each separate location, place or premise where the licensee stores fuel oil
for use in the business, as follows:
Not to exceed 200 gallons $ 25
Over 200 gallons but not exceeding 1,065 gallons $ 30
Over 1,065 gallons but not exceeding 10,600 gallons $ 50
Over 10,600 gallons but not exceeding 15,600 gallons $ 65
Over 15,600 gallons $ 65 plus $ 7 for each one
thousand gallons or fraction
thereof in excess of 15,600
gallons; provided, however,
that the maximum annual
license fee hereunder shall not
exceed $525
Section 12-305 Fire Limits. It shall be unlawful to store fuel oil as a fuel oil dealer within the fire
limits of the Village, and no license shall be issued for the storage of any such fuel oil.
Section 12-306 Piling Solid Fuel. It shall be unlawful to pile any solid fuel in such a way that it
can fall on adjoining property or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place.
Section 12-307 Zoning. The provisions of this Article shall not be construed to permit the
establishment of any storage facility in any place where a storage facility is prohibited by the zoning
regulations of this Code.
Section 12-308 Regulations Relating to Dealers in Solid Fuel and Storers of Solid Fuel. No
solid fuel shall be stored for sale in the same building with fuel oil, gasoline or other flammable
liquids unless separated therefrom by a fireproof wall. It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver
or attempt to deliver to a purchaser any kind, grade or size of solid fuel other than that advertised by
the seller, ordered by the purchaser or specified on the delivery ticket or weighmaster's certificate.
Every licensee, selling or offering for sale solid fuel by weight from a vehicle upon the public ways
of the Village in quantities less than 500 pounds, shall equip such vehicle with a scale capable of
weighing 100 pounds.
Whenever solid fuel in storage shows indication of spontaneous ignition or gives off gases, it shall be
the duty of the licensee, agent or person in charge or control of the premises to turn over such solid
fuel and remove all portions of the same showing indication of ignition or coking. The floor
MERCHANTS
12 REVISED 10/05/09
or ground surface of all solid fuel storage yards shall at all times be kept free from flammable waste
material and accumulations of combustible waste materials.
Section 12-309 Regulations Relating to Fuel Oil Dealers and Fuel Oil Storers. All places of
business of fuel oil dealers and fuel oil storers shall be kept in a clean condition, free from
accumulations of rags, waste paper and other combustible waste material. Rags, waste paper and
other combustible waste materials shall be kept in metal containers pending removal from the
premises. No person shall smoke on the place of business of a fuel oil dealer or in that part of any
premises where fuel oil is stored.
All containers or tanks used for the storage of fuel oil and all buildings and premises where fuel oil is
stored shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code,
and the licensee's activities shall comply with all applicable regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any fuel oil dealer or fuel oil storer to refill any fuel oil storage container or
tank used in connection with an oil burning heater, boiler or furnace unless such storage container or
tank is equipped with an automatic or return vent pipe, or unless the fill pipe of such storage
container or tank is equipped with a screw or automatic cap. It shall be the duty of every such dealer
and storer, after filling or refilling any fuel oil storage container or tank, to replace the screw cap on
such fill pipe, or if equipped with an automatic cap, to see that the fill cap is properly closed.
Section 12-310 Inspections. The Fire Chief shall cause to be inspected, as often as deemed
necessary, all premises, vehicles, containers and tanks, either above or below ground or within a
building, to determine whether all applicable provisions of this Code are being complied with.
Section 12-311 Fire Prevention Regulations. Any person licensed under this Article shall be
subject to all applicable fire regulations of this Code and to all penalties for violations thereof.
Nothing in any of these sections shall be construed as limiting any of the fire prevention regulations
of this Code.
Ord. #09-038)
Article IV Florists
Section 12-401 Definition. The term "florist" when used in this Article shall mean any person
regularly engaged in the conduct of an established business for selling, at retail or wholesale, cut
flowers, bridal bouquets, funeral floral designs or growing plants from a fixed and permanent
business location.
Section 12-402 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of retail florist or
wholesale florist in the Village without first having obtained a license therefor. A person who is
engaged in more than one such business shall procure a separate license for each. In addition, a
separate license shall be required for each location, place or premise where the person is located to
engage in business.
It is unlawful to engage in the business of an itinerant retail or wholesale florist in the Village, and
such activities are hereby prohibited.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 12-403 Application. An application for any license under this Article shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. The
application shall also indicate whether the applicant desires to engage in the business of retail florist
or wholesale florist.
Section 12-404 Sanitary Regulations. Every location, place or establishment where the business
of a florist is conducted, managed or carried on shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and
free from vermin. No decayed, decaying, unwholesome, contaminated or diseased flowers or plants
shall be allowed to remain in or about such establishment. Adequate and convenient washing and
toilet facilities shall be provided.
No licensee shall sell or offer for sale any flowers or plants the sale of which is restricted by Federal
or State law.
Section 12-405 Inspection. The Director of Building shall inspect, as often as deemed necessary,
all florist establishments to determine whether the provisions of this Code relating to health,
sanitation and safety applicable thereto are being complied with.
Section 12-406 Off Premises Sales Prohibited. No license shall be issued except for a fixed
location. The sale of flowers, plants or floral bouquets or designs on the public way or at places
other than those at which the licensee is licensed is hereby prohibited.
Ord. #09-038)
Article V Ice Dealers
Section 12-501 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of a retail ice dealer
without first having obtained a license therefor. The term " retail ice dealer" for purposes of this
Section shall include the owner or operator of an ice-vending machine, but shall not include the
owner of the premises where the machine is located unless either the owner of the premises is also
the owner or operator of the machine; or the owner of the premises also engages in the retail sale of
ice other than through the machine; or the owner or operator of the machine has not paid the license
fee required.
Section 12-502 Application. An application for a retail ice dealer's license shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. In
addition, the application shall set forth the number of ice-vending machines owned or operated by
the applicant in the Village, the maker of such machine and factory numbers thereof, the name of the
owner of the premises on which they are to be installed, and the street address of such premises.
Article VI Junk Dealers
Section 12-601 Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth below for
purposes of this Chapter.
1. Fence. Any place for the purchase, reception or keeping of stolen goods.
2. Junk. Includes old iron, chain, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals, old rope, old
bags, rags, waste paper, paper clippings, scraps of woolens, clips, bagging, rubber and
MERCHANTS
14
glass, empty bottles of different kinds and sizes when the number of each kind or size is less than
one gross, and all articles and things discarded or no longer used as a manufactured article
composed of, or consisting of, any one or more of the materials or articles herein mentioned.
3. Junk Dealer. Every person that shall engage at a junk store in the business of buying, selling,
bartering or exchanging, or that shall collect, receive, store or hold in possession for sale,
barter or exchange any of the things defined herein as junk, whether dealer at wholesale or at
retail.
4. Junk Store. Any store, shop, warehouse or building in the Village where junk is bought, sold,
bartered or exchanged, or where junk is collected, received, stored or held in possession for
resale, barter or exchange, either at wholesale or retail.
5. Junk Yard. Any yard, place or enclosure other than a junk store as herein defined, where junk
is bought, sold, bartered or exchanged either at wholesale or retail, or where junk is collected,
received, stored or held in possession for resale, barter or exchange, either at wholesale or
retail.
Section 12-602 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of junk dealer without
first having obtained a license.
Section 12-603 Application. An application for a license under this Article shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses.
Section 12-604 Junk Yards. It shall be unlawful to maintain a junkyard anywhere in the Village.
Section 12-605 Stolen Goods. Every junk dealer who shall receive or be in possession of any
goods, articles, things or junk which may have been lost or stolen, or are alleged or supposed to have
been lost or stolen, shall, on demand, exhibit them to any member of the Police Department for
examination.
Section 12-606 Minors. No junk dealer shall purchase any article whatsoever from any person
under 21 years of age without the written consent of a parent or guardian of such person under a
penalty of not less than $1 nor more than $50 for each offense.
Section 12-607 Fences. No person shall keep, maintain or conduct a place for the purchase,
reception or keeping of stolen goods as a " fence".
Section 12-608 Identity of Junk Received. No article, thing or substance included within any junk
purchased, received or collected at retail shall be melted, vulcanized or otherwise changed or its
identity destroyed within two days after the same was purchased, received or collected.
Section 12-609 Restrictions on Sales. No retail junk dealer shall expose for sale, or sell or dispose
of any goods, article, junk or thing whatsoever within two days of the time of purchasing, receiving
or collecting the same, nor until the same have been in the premises wherein the same are offered,
exposed or sold at least two days; provided, that a junk peddler may dispose of junk collected in bulk
sales from day to day to a retail junk dealer whose duty it is to hold such purchases for two days in
conformity with the provisions of this Article.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
15 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 12-610 Prohibited Activities. No junk dealer shall receive any article or thing by way of
pledge or pawn; nor shall such dealer loan or advance any sum of money on the security of any
article or thing. No person licensed as a junk dealer shall receive or hold a license to conduct the
business of a pawnbroker or second-hand dealer.
Section 12-611 Inspection. The places of business and all junk of every junk dealer shall, at all
reasonable times, be open to the inspection of any member of the Police Department. Whenever
there shall be filed with the Police Chief, by the owner or agent of the owner, a sworn written
statement that such owner or such agent has reason to believe that certain stolen goods or things
specifically described in the sworn statement are in the possession of any junk dealer, anymember of
the Police Department shall have the right to inspect the premises of the junk dealer at any
reasonable hour and view all junk which has been purchased, received, collected or stored in the
premises occupied by such business.
Ord. #09-038)
Article VII Lumber and Wood Dealers
Section 12-701 Definitions. The terms "lumber yard" and "lumber storehouse" when used in this
Article shall mean any place used for the storage of lumber, wooden containers or wood (except
firewood) in an amount exceeding five thousand board feet.
Section 12-702 License Required. No person shall conduct, establish or operate a lumberyard or
lumber storehouse in the Village without first having obtained a license therefor.
Section 12-703 Application. An application for a license shall be made in conformity with the
general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses.
Section 12-704 Fire Limits. No lumber yard or lumber storehouse shall be established or licensed
within the fire limits of the Village; but this Section shall not be construed to require the removal of
any lumber yard or lumber storehouse which is already located and established.
Section 12-705 Fire Apparatus. It shall be the duty of every person owning or operating a
lumberyard or lumber storehouse to have the same equipped with sufficient fire apparatus to put out
and prevent from spreading any small fires which may start.
Section 12-706 Fire Prevention Regulations. Any person that shall conduct or operate a
lumberyard or lumber storehouse shall be subject to all applicable fire regulations of this Code and to
all penalties for violations thereof.
Section 12-707 Piling Lumber. It shall be unlawful to pile any lumber in a lumberyard or lumber
storehouse in such a way that the lumber is hanging over or is in danger of falling onto any adjoining
property, street, alley or public way.
Section 12-708 Inspections. The Director of Building and the Fire Chief shall cause to be
inspected as often as deemed necessary, every lumberyard and lumber storehouse in the Village to
determine whether all applicable provisions of this Code are being complied with.
MERCHANTS
16 REVISED 10/05/09
Ord. #09-038)
Article VIII Pawnbrokers
Section 12-801 Definition. Pawnbroker, when used in this Article, means any person engaged in
the business of receiving property in pledge or as security for money or other thing advanced to the
pawner or pledger.
Ord. #09-038)
Section 12-802 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of pawnbroker within
the Village without first having obtained a license therefor. No person shall conduct or operate a
pawnbroker business without first having obtained a license from the State of Illinois, pursuant to the
provisions of the applicable laws.
Ord. #09-038)
Section 12-803 Application. An application for a pawnbroker's license shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. It shall be
accompanied by a copy of a valid license issued by the State of Illinois.
Ord. #04-077, #06-078)
Section 12-804 Fee. The annual fee for a pawnbroker's license shall be $215.
Section 12-805 Records. Every pawnbroker doing business in the Village shall keep a record of
every article pledged or received, purchased, sold or exchanged, setting forth the following: the date
of the transaction, name and address of the pledger, purchaser or seller, and a brief description of the
article pledged, sold, purchased, received or exchanged, including identification number thereon, if
any. Such record and the articles themselves shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection
of any police officer.
Section 12-806 Weapons. No pawnbroker shall receive as a pledge or purchase any revolver,
pistol, blackjack or sawed-off shotgun. No pawnbroker shall display in a window or shop any such
weapons for sale.
Section 12-807 Prohibited Pledges and Purchases. No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any
person who is under 21 years of age, and no pawnbroker shall employ a person who is under 21 years
of age. No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings with any person under 21 years of age,
except upon the written consent of the parent or guardian of such person to each particular
transaction. No pawnbroker shall take any article in pawn or buy from any person appearing to be
intoxicated, nor from any person known to be a thief or to have been convicted of larceny or burglary
and when any person is found to be the owner of stolen property which has been pawned or bought,
such property shall be returned to the owner thereof without the payment of the amount advanced by
the pawnbroker thereon or any costs or charges of any kind which the pawnbroker may have placed
upon the same.
Section 12-808 Stolen Goods. It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any
article pledged, or sought to be pledged, if the pawnbroker has reason to believe that the article was
stolen or lost.
Section 12-809 Interest Charges. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to charge or collect a
greater benefit or percentage upon money advanced and for the use and forbearance thereof than the
rate of 3% per month; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be so construed as to
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
17 REVISED 10/05/09
conflict with the law pertaining to usury; and the person receiving money so advanced shall not be
held to pay any storage insurance or charges other than such interest as herein provided. Every
pawnbroker shall at all times have and keep the above paragraph printed in the English language,
framed and posted in a prominent and conspicuous position in the place of business, so that the
provisions of this Code shall be plainly legible and visible to all persons depositing or pledging
property with such pawnbrokers.
Section 12-810 Second-Hand Dealers. No pawnbroker shall engage in the business of a secondhand
dealer, as licensed by other provisions of this Code, without first having obtained a secondhand
dealer's license in addition to a pawnbroker's license. No pawnbroker shall engage in the
business of a junk dealer.
Article IX Brokers
Section 12-901 Definitions. For the purposes of this Article, general broker means any person,
other than an employee of the principal for whom the business is done, that negotiates, buys, sells,
trades, leases or handles for another, on a commission basis, or on the basis of compensation in
proportion to the amount of the transaction, any stocks, bonds, mortgages, loans, investment
securities, certificates of indebtedness, foreign exchange letters of credit, grain, provisions, produce,
livestock, goods, wares, merchandise or any other commodity, article or property ( except real
property), whether similar or dissimilar to those herein mentioned, or acts through the medium of
another licensed broker in the capacity and for any of the purposes aforesaid. This term does not
include insurance brokers or real estate brokers.
Section 12-902 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of, or act in the capacity
of or hold himself or herself out as a general broker without first having obtained a license.
Section 12-903 Application. An application for any license required by this Article shall be made
in conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses.
Section 12-904 Business at More than One Place. Where a person desires to engage in the
business of a general broker at more than one place within the Village, a separate license shall be
required for each of such places, and the full license fee as herein fixed shall be charged for each
such license issued.
Section 12-905 Employees Acting as Brokers. Any person employed by a person licensed as a
general broker under the provisions of this Article, who shall, on his or her own account and not as
such employee, engage in the business or act in the capacity of a general broker must obtain a
license, notwithstanding the fact of such employment.
Article X Peddlers and Solicitors
Section 12-1001 Definitions. For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
a. Charitable Purpose. Any charitable, benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary
purpose.
MERCHANTS
18 REVISED 06/03/13
b. Charitable Organization. Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, not-for-profit, or
eleemosynary group, association or corporation, or such organization purporting to be such,
which solicits and collects funds for charitable purposes.
c. Contribution. The promise or grant of any money or property of any kind of value, including
payment for literature in excess of the fair market value of the literature.
d. Peddler. Any person who, going from place to place, shall at retail sell, offer for sale, sell
and deliver, barter or exchange any goods, wares, merchandise, wood, oil, fish, fruits,
vegetables, country produce or any other article or thing whatsoever or any service from a
vehicle or otherwise. It shall not include a serviceman who, responding to a prior call, sells
replacement merchandise.
e. Solicitor. Any person who, going from place to place, without prior appointment or prearrangement
with the customer, shall take orders for future delivery at retail of any
merchandise or other article or thing, or any service or any person who solicits and collects
funds for charitable purposes.
Ord. #98-001, #13-028)
Section 12-1002 Permit Required. No person shall engage in the business of a peddler or solicitor
within the Village without first having obtained a permit; provided, however, that the classes of
peddlers engaging in businesses specifically defined and licensed by other provisions of this Code
shall be exempt from the provisions of this Article and must be licensed in accordance with those
applicable provisions of this Code.
Ord. #13-028)
Section 12-1003 Application. No one shall peddle or solicit from persons in the Village by doorto-
door solicitation or the use of public streets and public ways without first obtaining a permit.
Application for a permit shall be made to the Department of Building and Health Services and shall
include the following information:
a. The name of the organization, partnership, corporation or proprietorship for whom the
applicant works, and the name under which it intends to solicit;
b. The name, address and driver’ s license number of the person in charge of solicitation in the
Village and a telephone number of the parent firm or corporation;
c. The names, permanent addresses, birthdates and driver’ s license numbers of all persons who
will solicit in the Village;
d. The specific dates and times of day such solicitations are to be made and the specific location
within the Village where such solicitation shall be conducted at a particular time and day;
e. The number of vehicles, if any, intended to be operated and the kind of merchandise, if any,
to be peddled or offered for order;
f. If applicable, a written statement of recent date by the Attorney General of Illinois that the
organization has complied with the provisions of "An Act to Regulate Solicitation and
Collection of Funds for Charitable Purposes", 225 ILCS 460/1 et seq. as now or hereafter
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
12-19 REVISED 06/03/13
amended, if the organization is subject to the statute. Astatement bythe Attorney General of
exemption under 225 ILCS 460/5 is required for religious organizations.
Ord. #96-053, #13-028)
Section 12-1004 Administrative Procedures for Application for Permit.
a. All applications shall be submitted to the Building and Health Services Department and shall
be verified under oath by a responsible officer of the soliciting organization.
The failure of an applicant to fulfill the requirements of this Article shall be the sole basis for
a denial of the permit. In the event that any permit is denied for failure to comply with the
requirements of this Article, the applicant shall immediately be notified of the reasons for
denial.
b. For door-to-door solicitors and peddlers, no permit shall be valid for more than 90 days
within any 365 days from the first date of solicitation. Each individual shall wear their
Village-issued ID card at all times while going door-to-door.
Ord. #13-028)
Section 12-1005 Solicitation Upon the Public Streets.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to solicit, either in person or byagent,
upon the public streets, sidewalks or any other public place in the Village without having first
secured a permit.
b. Tag days shall be limited to two events of no more than two successive days each, for a total
of no more than four days in a 365 day period.
c. A person, firm, or corporation may be issued a permit to stand upon streets or highways
within the Village for purposes of soliciting from the occupants of vehicles; provided, that
the solicitors shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Solicitation shall occur only at intersections where all traffic is required to come to a
full stop;
2. Solicitation shall occur at highway intersections only during hours of daylight - from
one-half hour before sunrise to one-half hour after sunset;
3. Persons engaged in solicitation upon streets or highways shall be at least 16 years of
age and shall wear a high visibility vest; and
4. The soliciting agency shall provide evidence of a policy of comprehensive general
liability insurance in a form and amount satisfactory to the Village Manager prior to
the solicitation and shall be liable for any injuries to any person or property occurring
during any solicitation activity which is causally related to an act of ordinary
negligence of the soliciting agency.
Section 12-1006 Fraud. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to cheat, deceive or
fraudulently misrepresent, whether through himself or herself or through an employee, while acting
as a peddler or solicitor in the Village, or to barter, sell or peddle any goods, merchandise or wares or
to engage in any form of solicitation other than those specified in the application for a permit.
MERCHANTS
12-20 REVISED 03/07/16
Section 12-1007 Hours of Operation. No soliciting or peddling shall be permitted before the hours
of 9:00 A.M. or after the hour of 9:00 P.M. within the Village, and no peddling or soliciting shall be
conducted on Sundays.
Ord. #14-014)
Section 12-1008 Conducting Business.
a. No peddler or solicitor maypark anywhere in the Village in a given place for longer than one
hour on any single day, and after the expiration of one hour, he or she must move on to a
different location which is at least one thousand feet away from the last location. These
limitations do not apply if a peddler or solicitor is part of a special event in which case the
peddler or solicitor may remain for the duration of the special event.
b. Each solicitor of a contribution for a charitable purpose shall distribute, upon request by the
party solicited, a financial statement of the organization for the preceding 12 months which
shall include a balance sheet and statement of income and expenses clearly setting forth the
following: gross receipts and gross income from all sources broken down into total receipts
and income from each separate solicitation project or source; cost of administration; cost of
solicitation; cost of programs designed to inform or educate the public; funds or properties
transferred out of the State of Illinois, with explanation as to recipient and purpose; total net
income amount for each major purpose, charitable or otherwise. The statement shall be
signed by the President or other authorized officer and shall be accompanied by an opinion
signed by an independent certified public accountant that the financial statement fairly
represents the financial operation of the organization in sufficient detail to permit public
evaluation of its operations.
A copy of the annual report to the Attorney General required by 225 ILCS 460/4 may be
presented in lieu of such financial statements. For the purposes of financial statements, the
definitions and standards applicable to the annual report to the Attorney General may be
utilized. In the event an organization has not been established for a period of 12 months, a
copy of the registration statement filed with the Attorney General may be utilized.
Section 12-1009 Food Peddlers. Peddlers of food shall comply with the application regulations of
Chapter 11 of this Code relating to food dealers as therein defined.
Ord. #16-004)
Section 12-1010 Notice Regulating Soliciting and Peddling. Notice of the determination of the
occupant's refusal of invitation to any solicitors or peddlers shall be given in the following manner:
A weatherproof card, at least three inches by four inches in size, shall be exhibited
upon or near the main entrance door to the residence containing words such as those
set forth below:
NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS
The letters shall be at least one-third inch in height. Cards are available throughout
Village Hall at no cost. A card exhibited at a residence shall constitute sufficient
notice to any solicitor or peddler of the occupant's refusal to allow solicitors or
peddlers.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
21 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 12-1011 Duty of Solicitors or Peddlers. It shall be the duty of every solicitor or peddler,
upon going onto any premises in the Village upon which a residence is located, to look for the notice
provided for in this Article, if any is attached, to obey the statement contained on the notice. If the
notice contains words such as "NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS", then the solicitor or peddler,
whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises. Any solicitor
or peddler who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and
peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant.
Section 12-1012 Convicted Felons as Solicitors. It shall be unlawful for any organization to utilize
as a solicitor any person who has been convicted of a forcible felony within a period of five years
prior to the date of solicitation or who, having been convicted of a forcible felony, has been released
from a penal institution for a period of less than three years prior to the date of proposed solicitation.
For the purposes of this Section, a "forcible felony" means treason, murder, voluntary manslaughter,
aggravated criminal sexual assault, criminal assault, robbery, burglary, arson, kidnapping, aggravated
battery and any other felony which involves the use or threat of physical force or violence against any
individual.
Section 12-1013 Revocation. Any permit may be revoked by the Village Manager because of any
violation of this Article or any other ordinance of the Village, or any State or Federal law, or if any
solicitor is the subject of outstanding arrest warrants, or whenever the registrant shall cease to
possess the qualifications and character required in this Article for the original registration.
Section 12-1014 Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this Article
shall be fined not more than $750 for each such offense.
Ord. #09-038)
Article XI Second-Hand Dealers
Section 12-1101 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of a second-hand
dealer in the Village without having first obtained a license therefor; provided, however, that the
term "second-hand dealer" as used in this Section shall not include pawnbrokers or junk dealers as
defined and licensed by other provisions of this Code, or sales or exchanges of used articles and
materials conducted by charitable or religious organizations.
Section 12-1102 Application. An application for a second-hand dealer's license shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses.
Section 12-1103 Records. Every second-hand dealer doing business in the Village shall keep a
record of every article received, purchased, sold or exchanged, setting forth the following: the date
of the transaction, the name and address of the purchaser or seller, and a brief description of the
article received, purchased, sold or exchanged, including identification numbers thereon, if any.
Such record and the articles themselves shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of any
police officer.
Section 12-1104 Weapons. No second-hand dealer shall purchase or receive any revolver, pistol,
blackjack or sawed-off shotgun. No second-hand dealer shall display in a window or shop any such
weapons for sale.
MERCHANTS
22 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 12-1105 Prohibited Transactions. No second-hand dealer's license shall be issued to any
person who is under 21 years of age, and no second-hand dealer shall employ a person who is under
21 years of age to assist in the business. No second-hand dealer shall have any business dealings as
a second-hand dealer with any person under 21 years of age, except upon the written consent of the
parent or guardian of such person to each particular transaction.
No second-hand dealer shall purchase or receive from any person appearing to be intoxicated, nor
from any person known to be a thief or to have been convicted of larceny or burglary, and when any
person is found to be the owner of stolen property which has been purchased or received, such
property shall be returned to the owner thereof without the payment of the amount advanced by the
second-hand dealer thereon or any costs or charges of any kind which the second-hand dealer may
have placed upon the same.
Section 12-1106 Stolen Goods. It shall be the duty of every second-hand dealer to report to the
police any article received which he or she has reason to believe was lost or stolen.
Section 12-1107 Pawnbrokers. No second-hand dealer shall engage in the business of a
pawnbroker, as licensed by other provisions of this Code, without first having obtained a
pawnbroker's license in addition to a second-hand dealer's license. No second-hand dealer shall
engage in the business of a junk dealer.
Section 12-1108 Use of Unlicensed Premises. No second-hand dealer shall make use of any
property, private or public, not included within the licensed premises, for the storage, handling, or
display of any second-hand article.
Ord. #09-038)
Article XII Feed Dealers
Section 12-1201 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of keeping, offering for
sale or selling at retail any hay, straw, grain or mill feed of any nature or description without first
having obtained a license therefor.
Section 12-1202 Application. An application for a license shall be made in conformity with the
general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses.
Section 12-1203 Sanitary Requirements. Every place wherein any business licensed under this
Article is carried on shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. All necessary measures shall be
taken to safeguard the lives and health of all persons employed in such establishments, and adequate
and convenient washing and toilet facilities shall be provided for employees. No person suffering
from an active contagious or infectious disease shall be employed in such business.
All articles kept for sale in such establishments shall be kept free from vermin or any matter of a
contagious or infectious nature.
All decomposed, fetid or putrescent matter and all refuse, waste and sweepings shall be removed and
disposed of at least once each day, and in such a manner as not to cause a nuisance. All cleaning
shall be done whenever possible after or before working hours, but if done during working hours, it
shall be done in such a manner as to avoid the unnecessary raising of dust or noxious material.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
23 REVISED 10/05/09
Ord. #09-038)
Article XIII Hardware and Paint Store Operators (Retail)
Section 12-1301 Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth below for
purposes of this Chapter.
a. Retail. Sales other than those for the purpose of resale or for use by manufacturers,
contractors, trades, railroads, public service corporations and institutions, or for the supplying
of branch or general establishments from a central depot or store, and shall not include the
sale at retail of second-hand or used goods, wares or commodities.
b. Retail hardware store. Any building, room, enclosure, premises, place, establishment or part
of an establishment in the Village, operated, maintained or conducted for the sale or offering
for sale at retail of any of the following articles: hardware; tinware; aluminumware;
enamelware; cutlery; tools; implements; apparatus; machinery, plumbing; engineers',
janitors', blacksmiths’, contractors', or electrical supplies; gas, plumbing or electrical fixtures;
other articles or wares made largely of metals; kerosene; rifles, shotguns and loaded shot
shells or cartridges where not more than 25,000 are kept on hand at one time; provided,
however, that dealers or establishments or parts of establishments of a similar nature
specifically defined and licensed by other parts of this Code shall be exempt from the
provisions of that part of this Article pertaining to retail hardware stores.
c. Retail paint store. Any building, room, enclosure, premises, place, establishment or part of an
establishment in the Village, operated or conducted for the sale or offering for sale at retail of
any paints, dry colors, wall paper, varnishes, calcimine, white or red lead, raw or boiled
linseed oil, turpentine, dryer, benzine, naphtha, painters' tools, supplies and equipment;
provided, however, that dealers or establishments or parts of establishments of a similar
nature specifically defined and licensed by other provisions of this Code shall be exempt
from the provisions of that part of this Article pertaining to paint stores.
Section 12-1302 License Required. No person shall engage in either the business of a retail
hardware store or a retail paint store without first having obtained a license therefor. Every person
licensed to engage in the business of a retail hardware store shall have the privilege of engaging in
the business of a retail paint store, within the same building, room, enclosure, premises, place,
establishment or part of an establishment without the necessity of obtaining an additional license.
Section 12-1303 Application. An application for a retail hardware store license or a retail paint
store license shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to
applications for licenses.
Section 12-1304 Inspection. The Director of Building shall inspect or cause to be inspected as
often as deemed necessary, every retail hardware store and retail paint store in the Village to
determine whether all applicable provisions of this Code are being complied with. The Director of
Building shall have authority to require that such arrangements be made as may be necessary for the
safety and health of employees, pursuant to the provisions of this Code and such laws as maythen be
in force concerning health and sanitary conditions. The Fire Chief shall have authority to
require that such arrangements be made as may be necessary to comply with the fire regulations of
this Code.
MERCHANTS
24 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 12-1305 Fire Prevention. It shall be the duty of every person licensed under this Article to
do business as a retail hardware store or a retail paint store to comply with the fire regulations of this
Code applicable thereto.
Section 12-1306 Ventilation. No owner, proprietor, manager, or superintendent of any business
licensed under this Article where one or more persons are employed shall cause, permit, or allow the
same, or any portion or apartment of any room within the same, to be overcrowded or inadequate,
faulty or insufficient in respect to light, ventilation, heat and cleanliness. Fresh air shall be supplied
by ventilation in accordance with the building regulations of this Code. No part of such air supply
shall be taken from any cellar or basement.
Section 12-1307 Sanitary Requirements. Every place wherein any business licensed under this
Article is carried on shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. All necessary measures shall be
taken to safeguard the lives and health of all persons employed in such establishments, and adequate
and convenient washing and toilet facilities shall be provided for such employees. No person
suffering from an active contagious or infectious disease shall be employed in such business. All
articles kept for sale in such establishments shall be kept free from vermin or any matter of a
contagious or infectious nature.
All refuse; waste and sweepings shall be removed and disposed of at least once each day, and in such
a manner as not to cause a nuisance. All cleaning shall be done whenever possible after or before
working hours, but if done during working hours, it shall be done in such a manner as to avoid the
unnecessary raising of dust or noxious material.
Ord. #09-038)
Article XIV Filling Station Operators
Section 12-1401 Definition. The term " filling station" when used in this Article shall mean any
building, structure, premises, enclosure or other place within the Village where a container or
containers, tank or tanks, either portable or stationary, and containing ether, carbon bisulphite,
gasoline, naphtha, benzole, hydrocarbon (gas drops), liquefied petroleum, gas, acetone, kerosene,
turpentine or other flammable liquids having a flash point below 165 degrees Fahrenheit, are kept or
located for the purpose of selling, offering for sale, or distributing any such liquids from such
container or tank; provided, however, that the provisions of this Article shall not apply to any place
where such flammable liquids are kept or sold for medicinal purposes only nor to a fuel oil dealer as
defined in Section 12-301 hereof.
Section 12-1402 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of a filling station
without first having obtained a license.
Section 12-1403 Application. An application for a license shall be made in conformity with the
general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. The applicant shall also
specify the number of tanks installed on the licensed premises, whether such tanks are abandoned or
in use.
Ord. #04-077, #06-078)
Section 12-1404 Fee. The annual fee for each filling station shall be $160 per underground tank
used to store gasoline.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
12-25 REVISED 04/04/16
Section 12-1405 Building and Fire Regulations. The construction, operation and maintenance of
filling stations and filling station equipment, including tanks, and the requirements for safety
clearances around same, shall be done in accordance with the provisions of this Code regulating
buildings, flammable liquids and fire prevention.
Section 12-1406 Inspections. The Director of Building and the Fire Chief shall inspect or cause to
be inspected as often as deemed necessary, every filling station in the Village to determine whether
all applicable provisions of this Code are being complied with.
Section 12-1407 Accessory Sales. The sale of milk, salt, ice and other foods and products shall be
permitted at filling stations. Milk must be stored in mechanical refrigerated cabinets that can be
maintained and cleaned inside and out. If milk is sold on the premises of a gasoline filling station,
all applicable provisions of the Village retail food store sanitation section of this Code must be met
and the equipment used in connection with such sales shall be inspected as often as deemed
necessary by the Village. Salt must be stored in an enclosed building or structure. The rental of
trucks, trailers and motorcycles shall be permitted only after the issuance of a special use permit as
provided in the zoning ordinance. The sale of new and used boats, automobiles and mobile homes is
prohibited.
Section 12-1408 Maintenance. All gasoline filling stations shall be maintained in a neat and
orderly manner and the storage or parking of abandoned or disabled vehicles on the premises is
prohibited.
Ord. #09-038, #16-005)
Article XV Pet Shop Operators
Section 12-1501 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of a Pet Shop Operator
without first having obtained a business license. An application for a Pet Shop Operator’ s license
shall be made in conformity with this Article and the applicable general requirements of this Code
relating to applications for business licenses.
Section 12-1502 Definition. Pet Shop Operator, when used in this Article, shall mean any person
who sells, offers to sell, exchange, or offers for adoption with or without charge or donation dogs,
cats, birds, fish, reptiles, or other animals customarily obtained as pets in the Village. This does not
include those individuals who sell only those animals that they have produced and raised nor
veterinary hospitals or clinics operated by veterinarians licensed by the State of Illinois.
Section 12-1503 Application. An application for a Pet Shop Operator’ s license shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. As
part of the application, the applicant shall provide a copy of their current Pet Shop Operator’ s license
issued by the Illinois Department of Agriculture.
Section 12-1504 Fee. The annual fee for Pet Shop Operator’ s license shall be as set forth in the
applicable provision of this Code setting forth business license fees.
Section 12-1505 Operation. Every Pet Shop Operator shall operate the business in full compliance
with this Article, as well as all State and Federal laws relating to animal health, sanitation, disease
prevention, as now or hereafter amended. All licensed premises shall be kept free and clear of
decaying food and filth of any kind and shall be maintained in a sanitary condition at all times.
MERCHANTS
12-26 REVISED 04/04/16
No person may sell, offer for sale, barter or give away as a pet or a novelty, any rabbit or fowl which
has been dyed, colored or otherwise treated to impart an artificial color thereto. Baby chicks or
ducklings shall not be sold, offered for sale, bartered or given away as pets or novelties.
Section 12-1506 Disclosures Required. Every Pet Shop Operator is required to post the information
set forth below on a Disclosure Statement for each dog and cat for sale in a location where they are
easily accessible, without request, by the public. If it will not be detrimental to the dog or cat, the
Disclosure Statement shall be placed on the animal’ s cage. If it is not in the best interests of the
animal to place the Disclosure Statement on an animal’ s cage, there shall be a notice on the cage
telling the customer where in the Pet Shop the Disclosure Statements can be found.
At the time of sale, the Disclosure Statement shall be provided by the Pet Shop Operator to the
customer in writing, with a statement that the information in the Disclosure Statement has been
determined by the Pet Shop Operator, in good faith, to be accurate. Both the Pet Shop Operator and
the customer shall sign the Disclosure Statement at the time of sale.
The Disclosure Statement shall include contact information for the Village’ s Building Department
for Code Enforcement purposes. The Pet Shop Operator shall retain the original signed Disclosure
Statement for a period of not less than two years from the date of sale. The signed Disclosure
Statements shall be made available for inspection by any Village employee authorized to make such
inspections.
The Disclosure Statement shall include, at a minimum, all of the following information:
a. The breed, approximate age, sex and color of the animal;
b. The date and description of any inoculation or medical treatment the animal has received
prior to or while in the care of the Pet Shop Operator;
c. The breeder’ s business name(s), mailing address, breeding location address if different
from the mailing address, as well as any other name and business address used by the
breeder for breeding purposes;
d. If the breeder is licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture, the current
license number, as well as any other license numbers held within the last five years;
e. A copy of the most recent USDA inspection report, updated quarterly and a link to the
USDA website so consumers can conduct their own due diligence on breeders;
f. Whether the breeder is a “ hobby breeder”, meaning the breeder has less than five female
dogs or cats, as applicable;
g. The average animal population for the prior six months by the breeder. This disclosure shall
be updated every six months and may be disclosed by category ranges for each type of
animal, dog or cat, as applicable: 0-25, 26-50, 51-75, and over 75;
h. The average number of female dogs or cats, as applicable, capable of reproduction for the
prior calendar six months by the breeder. This disclosure may be disclosed by category
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
12-27 REVISED 04/04/16
ranges for each type of animal, dog or cat, as applicable: 1-5, 6-25, 26-50, 51-75, and over
75;
i. The lineage (sire and dam) of the dog or cat;
j. The address of the location where the dog or cat was born, as well as the location(s)
where the dog or cat was housed after birth if different from the breeder’ s address as
listed in d. above; and
k. Any transfers of ownership of the dog or cat prior to its sale by a Village Pet Shop
Operator and, if the dog or cat was returned to the Pet Shop Operator by a customer, the
date the dog or cat was returned and the reason for the return.
Ord. #09-038)
Article XVI Kennels and Catteries
Section 12-1601 Definitions.
a. Dog kennel. Any establishment or premises wherein or whereon dogs are kept for the
purpose of breeding, boarding, sale, exchange or sporting.
b. Cattery. Any establishment or premises wherein or whereon cats are kept for the purpose of
breeding, boarding, sale, exchange or sporting.
Section 12-1602 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of operating a dog
kennel or a cattery without first having obtained a license therefor.
In cases where the business of buying, selling or dealing in birds, dogs and other small animals used
as household pets or for domestic purposes is conducted, or carried on in connection with the
business of a dog kennel or a cattery in the same premises, and by the same person, then only one
license need be obtained, and that license shall be that which requires the payment of the highest
license fee under either of the two license provisions of this Code.
Any person licensed to operate a kennel shall be exempt from the payment of the dog registry fee for
each and every dog which is kept in any licensed kennel.
Section 12-1603 Application. An application for a license shall be made in conformity with the
general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. Such application shall also
state the number of animals which it is proposed to keep in the establishment or premises for which
application for license is made.
Section 12-1604 Removal of Dog or Cat. No dog or cat shall be permitted to stray or to be taken
anywhere outside the limits of the kennel or cattery, unless such animal is on leash or is taken out
temporarily for the purpose of hunting, breeding, trial, show or exhibition.
Section 12-1605 Sanitary Provisions. All dog kennels and catteries shall be kept free and clean
from decaying food and filth of any kind. Surfaces shall be non-absorbent and easily cleanable. The
kennels, buildings and pens shall be painted or disinfected from time to time and shall be kept in a
MERCHANTS
12-28 REVISED 04/04/16
sanitary condition satisfactory to the Director of Building and Director of Health Services and to
ensure a safe and sanitary environment for animals and employees.
Section 12-1606 Inspection. The Director of Building shall cause to be inspected the business
premises and operations licensed under this Article as often as deemed necessary to determine
whether all applicable provisions of this Code are being complied with.
Ord. #09-038)
Article XVII Itinerant Dealers and Stands
Ord. #02-018)
Section 12-1701 Definition. "Itinerant dealer," when used in this Article, shall mean any person
engaged in the business of buying or selling tangible objects within the Village who has not
established a permanent place of business within the Village from which such operation has been
carried on for a period of at least 90 days prior to the first sale or purchase of such objects. Any
person who wishes to buy or sell such objects from a permanent place of business shall not be
subject to the provisions of this Ordinance upon a presentation to the Village Manager of a bona fide
lease for a period of at least one year for permanent premises within the Village.
Ord. #02-018)
Section 12-1702 License Required. No person shall engage in the business as an itinerant dealer
within the Village without first having obtained a license therefor.
Section 12-1703 Application. An application for an itinerant dealer's license shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses.
Ord. #03-078, # 06-078)
Section 12-1704 Fee. Afee of $130 per year shall be paid for each year's proposed operation within
the Village.
Ord. #02-018)
Section 12-1705 Records. Every itinerant dealer doing business in the Village shall keep a record
of every article received, purchased, sold or exchanged setting forth the following: the date of the
transaction, name and address of the purchaser or seller, and a brief description of the article sold,
purchased, received or exchanged, including identification number thereon, if any. Such record and
the articles themselves shall, at all reasonable times, be open to the inspection of any police officer.
Section 12-1706 Stolen Goods. It shall be the duty of every person licensed under the provisions of
this Article to report to the police any article received or offered which that person has reason to
believe was stolen or lost.
Ord. #15-003)
Article XVIII Garage Sales
Section 12-1801 Definition. For the purposes of this Article, Garage Sale shall mean all general
sales open to the public conducted from residential premises for the purpose of disposing of personal
property, including but not limited to, all sales entitled garage, moving, yard, basement, house, attic,
rummage, estate, or other similar occasional sales. Bulk sales, the sale of multiple new items of the
same description, the sale of consigned merchandise and merchandise brought to the premises for
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
12-29 REVISED 02/02/15
resale or for reconditioning for resale are not Garage Sales and are prohibited.
Section 12-1802 Limits on Frequency and Hours of Sales. No more than three Garage Sales are
permitted on the same premises within a calendar year. Garage Sales shall only be permitted between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. each day and shall last for no more than three consecutive days.
Article XIXHome Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation and Service Occupation Tax
Ord. #03-077, #09-036)
Section 12-1901 Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation and Service Occupation Tax. A
tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property,
other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered with an agency of this State's
government, at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from sales made in the course of business while
this Section is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this Municipality in
the business of making sales of service, at the rate of1% of the selling price of all tangible personal
property transferred by such service people as an incident to a sale of service. This Home Rule
Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax and HomeRule Municipal Service Occupation Tax shall not be
applicable on the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises
where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food which has been prepared for
immediate consumption) and prescription and non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances
and insulin, urine testing materials and syringes and needles used by diabetics. The imposition of
these home rule taxes is in accordance with the provision of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 and 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5,
as amended.
Article XX Penalties
Section 12-2001 Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
fined not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or in which a violation occurs or continues.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
REVISED 11/21/16
CHAPTER 13 ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
Article I General Provisions
Section 13-101 Definitions
Article II License Requirements
Section 13-201 License Required
Section 13-202 Local Liquor Control Commissioner
Section 13-203 Applications
Section 13-204 Training Requirements for Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers
Education and Training Program (BASSET)
Article III Restrictions on Licenses
Section 13-301 Restriction on Licenses
Section 13-302 Change of Stock Ownership
Section 13-303 Loss of License for Business Closing
Article IV Term
Section 13-401 Term
Article V Fees, Classification, Hours of Operation
Section 13-501 Classification
Section 13-502 Fees and Number of Licenses
Section 13-503 Hours of Operation
Article VI Rules and Regulations
Section 13-601 List
Section 13-602 Transfer of License
Section 13-603 Renewal of License
Section 13-604 Change of Location
Section 13-605 Peddling
Section 13-606 Sanitary Conditions
Section 13-607 Employees
Section 13-608 Location Requirements
Section 13-609 Revocation
Section 13-610 Prohibited Sales and Delivery
Section 13-611 Sales of Single Servings of Alcoholic Beverages
Section 13-612 Purchase or Acceptance of Gifts of Liquor by Persons of
Non-Age - Identification Cards
Section 13-613 Liability for Permitting Minors to Possess or Consume Alcohol
Article VII Sales on Credit
Section 13-701 Sales on Credit
Section 13-702 Reuse of Premises
Article VIII Penalty
Section 13-801 Penalty
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
13-2 REVISED 02/18/19
Article I General Provisions
Ord. #13-049, #18-020, # 16-026, #19-006)
Section 13-101 Definitions. Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in
this Chapter shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
a. Alcohol. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted,
whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol, but not including
denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
b. Alcoholic Liquor. Any alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or
not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of being consumed as a beverage
by a human being. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the
manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and
regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one
percent, or less, of alcohol by volume.
c. Banquet Hall. A business conducted on a premises at which the primary activity is the
catering of private parties where there is service for consumption at tables of a full multiple
course meal or hors d’ oeuvres, buffet or smorgasbord, and at which alcoholic liquor may be
served or sold incident to such food service; provided that each of such private parties is
prearranged under the sponsorship of a particular person or organization, including but not
limited to wedding dinners, school graduation dinners, periodic meetings of service
organizations and similar affairs, as contrasted to restaurants. As an ancillary use, the
business may include events that are open to the public, as long as the banquet hall has food
available for consumption on the premises.
d. Beer. A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of
barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes among other things, beer, ale,
stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
e. Brewery. A place that manufactures beer and is licensed as such by the State of Illinois.
f. Brew pub. Arestaurant that includes a brewery as an accessory use and is licensed as a brew
pub by the State of Illinois.
g. Club. A corporation organized under the laws of this State, not for pecuniary profit, solely
for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic
liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, and
owning, hiring or leasing a building or space in a building, of such extent and character as
may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of
its members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining
room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants and employees
for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and their guests; provided
that such club files with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner at the time of its application
for a license under this Chapter, two copies of a list of names and residences of its members,
and similarly files within ten days of the election of any additional member, his name and
address; and, provided further, that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of
directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual
meeting and that no member or any officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly
or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13-3 REVISED 02/18/19
distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests
introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any
annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other governing body out of
the general revenue of the club.
h. Coffee Shop. Any place of business that is open to the public for business not later than 7:00
a.m. each day and remains open to the public for business continuously for not less than ten
hours and is engaged in the primary business of the sale, over a counter located at the point
of sale where customers place orders, of coffee, tea, coffee-based beverages, and other
beverages prepared on the premises for consumption on or off the premises and the sale of
food items, including baked goods, appetizers, sandwiches, salads, and similar food items
primarily prepared off premises for consumption on or off the premises where served.
i. Cosmetic Facility. Any place of business at which a person receives cosmetic services from a
State licensed professional, such as a barber, cosmetologist, or nail technician; however,
cosmetic facility shall not include places of business which are classified as Massage/Accu-
Pressure establishments, as that term is defined in Section 28-3(74) of this Code.
j. Hotel. Every building or other structure, kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping
accommodations are offered for adequate pay to traveler and guests, whether transient,
permanent or residential, in which 25 or more rooms are used for the sleeping
accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings in
connection therewith and such building or buildings, structure or structures being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity.
k. Microbrewery. A brewery that produces no more than 930,000 gallons of beer per year and
which is licensed as a Class 1 brewer by the State of Illinois.
l. Non-Public Dining Facilities of Senior Housing Developments. Dining facilities (a) which
are not kept, used, maintained or advertised for use by the public in general, (b) which are
located in a central or common area of a housing development which is designed, permitted
and intended for habitation primarily by persons who have attained a normal or customary
retirement age, (c) which are permitted as an accessory use for the benefit and enjoyment of
owners or residents of such senior housing development property as well as any invited
guests of such owners or residents, (d) where meals are actually and regularly served, (e)
which have a seating capacity at tables for a minimum of 75 persons for food service, (f)
where meetings or other functions of such owners or residents and invited guests may be
held, (g) which offer patrons full and complete meals, including after dinner menu, and in
which the serving of alcoholic beverages is incidental and complementary to the service of
such meals or to the conduct of a meeting or other function of such owners, residents or
invitees, and (h) which are provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity and have employed therein a sufficient number and kind of
employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food.
m. Restaurant. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as
a place where meals are served, and where meals actually are served and regularly served,
without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary
kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient
number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
13-4 REVISED 02/18/19
n. Retail Sale. The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
o. Supper Club. Any place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a
place where patrons are served food and concurrently offered live entertainment on a regular
basis of the type permitted by holders of a cabaret and night club license, such entertainment
to be in keeping with the contemporary standards of the community. Such facilities shall be
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and
having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and
serve suitable food and provide suitable entertainment for its guests.
p. Wine. Wine means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by
the addition of alcohol as above defined.
Article II License Requirements
Section 13-201 License Required. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the
Village, any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer’ s license, or in violation of the
terms of such license.
Section 13-202 Local Liquor Control Commissioner. The President of the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Arlington Heights shall be the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and shall be
charged with the administration within the Village of the appropriate provisions of the Liquor
Control Act of the State of Illinois and of this Chapter. The President may appoint a person or
persons to provide assistance in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties of this
Office. The Board of Trustees shall fix and pay compensation to the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner of the Village and compensation to such deputies, assistants or employees as may be
deemed necessary for the proper performance of these duties. The Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses, other
than licenses to manufacturers, import distributors, distributors, non-beverage users, railroads,
airplanes and boats:
a. To grant and/or suspend for not more than 30 days, or revoke for cause, all local licenses
issued to persons for the premises within the jurisdiction; provided, however, that the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner may impose a fine of not more than $750 per day in lieu of a
suspension. In addition to a fine or other penalty assessed, the licensee shall be subject to the
costs incurred by the Village for a hearing on any violation. These costs shall include, but
are not limited to court reporter, legal fees, witness expenses, expert or scientific analysis,
and any other charge attendant to the hearing.
b. To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter at any time upon any premises
licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of this Chapter or any rules or
regulations adopted by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or by the State Commission
have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine the licensee’ s premises in
connection therewith;
c. To receive complaints from any citizen within this jurisdiction that any of the provisions of
this Chapter, or any rules or regulations, have been or are being violated and to act upon
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13-5 REVISED 05/01/07
these complaints in the manner hereinafter provided;
d. To receive local license fees and forward them to the Village Treasurer.
Ord. #96-059, #04-077, # 06-078)
Section 13-203 Applications. Applications for licenses shall be made to the Village President in
writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent, if a club or
corporation, verified by oath or affidavit. All applications shall be accompanied bya non-refundable
application fee of $135 which shall be separate and distinct from the annual license fee. The
application shall contain the following statements and information:
a. The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a copartnership,
the persons entitled to share in the profits; in the case of a limited liability
company, the date of organization, the objects for which it was organized, the names and
addresses of the managers, and if a majority interest of the stock of such company is owned
by one person or nominees, the names and addresses of that person; and in the case of a
corporation, for profit, or a club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was
organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority interest of
the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or nominees, the name and address of
that person;
b. The citizenship of the applicant, the place of birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and
place of naturalization;
c. The character of business of the applicant; and in case of a corporation, the objects for which
it was formed;
d. The length of time the applicant has been in a business of that character, or in the case of a
corporation, the date when its charter was issued;
e. The amount of goods, ware and merchandise on hand at the time the application is made;
f. The location and description of the premises or place of business, which is to be operated
under the license;
g. A statement whether applicant has applied for a similar or other license on premises other
than that described in this application, and the disposition of that application;
h. A statement whether applicant has ever been convicted of a felony and is not qualified to
receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this Chapter, laws of this State
or the ordinances of the Village;
i. Whether a previous license by any State or subdivision thereof, or by the Federal
Government has been revoked, and the reasons thereof;
j. Astatement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the State of Illinois, or of the
United States or any ordinance of the Village in the conduct of the place of business;
k. Evidence of Dram Shop Insurance of an amount and character which shall be of a minimum
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
13-6 REVISED 06/18/18
amount sufficient to satisfy all statutory requirements and applications as determined by the
Local Liquor Commissioner. This insurance shall remain in force during the period for
which the license is issued. The lapse of this insurance shall constitute grounds for
immediate revocation of the license. The evidence of insurance shall also provide that the
insurance company shall give at least ten days notice to the Village prior to any cancellation
and the applicant shall be responsible for determining that the carrier will give such notice to
the Village. For the purpose of this Section, a Certificate of Insurance in the usual form shall
be deemed adequate evidence;
l. Any other information or guarantees that the Local Liquor Commissioner or the Village
authorities shall require.
Ord. #14-001, #15-018, # 16-026 #16-036, #18-020, # 19-006)
Section 13-204 Training Requirements for Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education
and Training Program (BASSET).
a. Managers for establishments holding any class of liquor license shall, upon demand, show a
valid State-certified Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training Program
BASSET) card or its equivalent, meeting the minimum curriculum requirements of the
Illinois Department of Alcoholism and Substance Abuse (DASA), Title 77, ChapterX, Rule
2056.
b. All persons employed by an establishment holding a class “ A”, “AA”, “B”, “ BB”, “ C”,
DD”, “E”, “ G” or “H”, “I”, J”, “ K”, “L”, “M”, “N” or “O” liquor license who serves or sells
alcoholic beverages shall, upon demand, show a valid State-certified BASSET card or its
equivalent, meeting the minimum curriculum requirements of the Illinois Department of
Alcoholism and Substance Abuse (DASA), Title 77, Chapter X, Rule 2056.
c. Each holder of a daily permit shall have on the premises at all times, a person designated to
manage the selling and/or serving of alcoholic beverages. That person shall, upon demand,
show a valid State-certified BASSET card or its equivalent, meeting the minimum
curriculum requirements of the Illinois Department of Alcoholism and Substance Abuse
DASA), Title 77, Chapter X, Rule 2056.
d. New employees or managers of a licensee who are required to complete such training shall,
within 90 days after the beginning of their employment with the licensee, complete the
BASSET program or its equivalent, meeting the minimum curriculum requirements of the
Illinois Department of Alcoholism and Substance Abuse (DASA), Title 77, ChapterX, Rule
2056, and shall, until the completion of the program, work under the supervision of a person
who has completed the program.
e. All managers and employees of a licensee must register with the Police Department
immediately upon becoming employed by the licensee. To register, the individual shall
obtain, at no cost, from the Police Department, a registration card. The employee registration
card will expire within 90 days from the date of issuance, at which time the employee must
have completed a BASSET or equivalent program.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13-7 REVISED 10/07/96
Article III Restrictions on Licenses
Ord. #96-059)
Section 13-301 Restriction on Licenses. No license shall be issued to:
a. A person who is not a resident of the Village;
b. Aperson who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which that person
resides;
c. A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
d. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State law, if the
Commissioner determines, after investigation, that such person has not been sufficiently
rehabilitated to warrant the public trust. After considering matters set forth in the person’ s
application and the Commissioner’ s investigation, the burden of proof of sufficient
rehabilitation shall be on the applicant;
e. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is keeping a house of ill-fame;
f. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to
decency and morality;
g. A person whose license under this Chapter has been revoked for cause;
h. A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would
not be eligible for such license upon a first application;
i. A co-partnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited partnership thereof,
owning more than5% of the aggregate limited partner interest in such co-partnership would
not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than residence within the
Village;
j. Acorporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders
owning in the aggregate more than5% of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible
to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the
Village;
k. Acorporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which
is qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983, as now or hereafter amended, to
transact business in Illinois;
l. Alimited liability company, if any manager or member or members owning in the aggregate
more than5% of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within the Village;
m. A limited liability company unless it is organized in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign limited
liability company which is qualified under the Limited Liability Company Act of 1994, as
now or hereafter amended, to transact business in Illinois;
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
13-8 REVISED 10/07/96
n. Aperson whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or
agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee;
o. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State law concerning the
manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who shall have forfeited bond to
appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;
p. A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a
lease thereon for the full period for which the license is issued;
q. Any law enforcing public official, any Village President, or member of the Board of
Trustees; and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in
the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor;
r. Any person, firm, limited liability company or corporation not eligible for a State retail liquor
dealer’ s license;
s. A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee;
t. Aperson who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any of subsections
a) (3) through (a) (10) of 720 ILCS 5/28-1, or as proscribed by 720 ILCS 5/28-3, as now or
hereafter amended, or as proscribed by a Statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory
provisions;
u. A person to whom a Federal Gaming Device Stamp or a Federal Wagering Stamp has been
issued by the Federal Government for the current tax period.
v. Aco-partnership to which a Federal Gaming Device Stamp or a Federal Wagering Stamp has
been issued by the Federal Government for the current tax period, or if any of the partners
have been issued a Federal Gaming Device Stamp or Federal Wagering Stamp bythe Federal
Government for the current tax period;
w. A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the
aggregate more than 20% of the stock of such corporation has been issued a Federal Gaming
Device Stamp or a Federal Wagering Stamp by the Federal Government for the current tax
period;
x. A limited liability company, if any manager or member owning in the aggregate more than
20% of the stock of such company has been issued a Federal Gaming Device Stamp or a
Federal Wagering Stamp by the Federal Government for the current tax period.
Ord. #96-059)
Section 13-302 Change of Stock Ownership.
a. A corporation or limited liability company holding a liquor license shall advise the Local
Liquor Commissioner 30 days prior to any contemplated change of stock ownership
involving 5% or more of the stock of the corporation.
b. Each individual seeking to acquire 5% or more of the stock of a corporation or limited
liability company holding a liquor license shall comply with the provisions of Section 13-
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13-9 REVISED 06/18/18
203, Applications, as though that person were applying for a license as an individual.
c. The provisions of this paragraph do not apply to corporations or limited liability companies
whose stock is traded publicly and listed on recognized stock exchanges.
Section 13-303 Loss of License for Business Closing. If the premises described in the application
and license remains closed for 30 consecutive days for any reason, the Local Liquor Commissioner
may conduct a hearing after notice for the purpose of determining whether the license should be
revoked.
Article IV Term
Section 13-401 Term. Each license shall terminate on the 30th day of April following its issuance.
Article V Fees, Classification, Hours of Operation
Ord. #96-059, #98-004, # 02-020, #02-054, # 03-034, #04-077, # 05-091, #06-078, # 11-030, #14-001, # 16-004, #16-026, # 16-036, #18-020, # 18-
035, # 19-006)
Section 13-501 Classification. Licenses issued hereunder shall be divided into one of the following
classes:
Ord. #18-020)
a. Class “ A” licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale in restaurants and brew pubs of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. These licenses may be issued and
retained by those establishments which:
1. have a seating capacity at tables for a minimum of 25 persons for food service;
2. are in fact operated as restaurants; and
3. offer their patrons full and complete meals, including dinner menu, and in which the
serving of alcoholic beverages is incidental and complementary to the service of such
meals.
4. A holder of a Class “A” license may apply for a supplemental liquor license, which
shall authorize the retail sale of beer brewed on the premises only, for consumption
off of the licensed premises. The following limitations shall apply:
a) the licensed premises must also have a valid brew pub license from the State
of Illinois, and
b) the licensee shall not sell more than 155,000 gallons per year.
No such license shall be granted to or retained by any establishment in which the facilities for
food preparation and service are not primarily those of a restaurant. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, limited food service, such as provided by luncheonettes, diners,
coffee shops, drive-ins, etc., does not satisfy the requirements for this license classification.
Holders of Class “A” liquor licenses may modify the menu served after 11:00 PM, provided
such modified menu includes a variety of sandwiches or similar foods and hot and cold nonalcoholic
beverages.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
13-10 REVISED 06/18/18
Ord. #18-020)
b. Class “AA” licenses which shall authorize the retail sale, in restaurants and brew pubs only,
of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold. These licenses may be
issued and retained by those establishments which:
1. have a seating capacity at tables for a minimum of 75 persons for food service;
2. are in fact operated as restaurants; and
3. offer their patrons full and complete meals, including dinner menu, and in which the
serving of alcoholic beverages is incidental and complementary to the service of such
meals. No such license shall be granted to or retained by any establishment in which
the facilities for food preparation and service are not primarily those of a restaurant.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, limited food service, such as
provided by luncheonettes, diners, coffee shops, drive-ins, etc., does not satisfy the
requirements for this license classification. Holders of Class “AA” liquor licenses
may modify the menu served after 11:00 PM, provided such modified menu includes
a variety of sandwiches or similar foods and hot and cold non-alcoholic beverages.
4. Class “AA” adjunct licenses may be utilized in connection with the premises holding
a Class “ AA” license. Such adjunct license shall permit the serving of alcoholic
liquor from 8AM to 2 AM on Monday through Thursday, 8 AM to 3 AM on Friday
and Saturday and 10:00AMSunday to 2AMMonday; provided, however, that food
service shall be required in the same manner as is required for the “AA” license, such
food service to be available at all times when liquor is served.
The annual fee for the adjunct license shall be in addition to the fee for a “ AA”
license. The Local Liquor Commissioner may grant adjunct licenses as deemed
appropriate and nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the Local
Liquor Commissioner to issue any adjunct license.
The purpose of this adjunct license is to permit the operation of restaurants which
sustain a demand for service of meals or for Supper Club facilities which require
more than one performance nightly of the type of live entertainment referred to in the
definition of a “ Supper Club”.
No new Class “AA” adjunct licenses shall be issued to any individual, corporation or
partnership other than those holding such licenses as of May20, 1991, and such may
be renewed only for the business currently using that license. At such time as any
current holder of such license surrenders it or fails to renew it, or it is revoked or
renewal denied, the number of Class “ AA” adjunct licenses permitted shall be
reduced accordingly.
5. Aholder of a Class “AA” license may apply for a supplemental liquor license, which
shall authorize the retail sale of beer brewed on the premises only for consumption
off of the licensed premises. The following limitations shall apply:
a) the licensed premises must also have a valid brew pub license from the State
of Illnois; and
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13-11 REVISED 10/01/18
b) the licensee shall not manufacture more than 155,000 gallons per year.
Ord. #03-034, #14-001, # 18-035)
c. Class “ B” licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor but not for
consumption on the premises where sold.
Ord. #08-011, #11-030, # 14-001, #18-035)
d. Class “BB” licenses which shall authorize the retail sale of wine and beer only, but not for
consumption on the premises sold.
Ord. #11-030)
e. Class “T” licenses which shall permit the bona fide tasting of alcoholic liquor in connection
with the sale of alcoholic liquor in its original package to holders of Class “ B” or “BB”
licenses as follows:
1. Wine tasting shall be confined to samples of not more than one ounce;
2. Beer tasting shall be confined to samples of not more than two ounces;
3. All other alcoholic liquor tastings shall be confined to samples of not more than onequarter
ounce.
Tasting shall mean a supervised presentation of alcoholic products to the public at a licensed
liquor retailer for the purpose of disseminating product information and education with
consumption of alcoholic products being an incidental part of the presentation. Sampling
shall be under the supervision of the license holder or duly authorized agent and be
conducted in a manner which will confine the consumption on the premises solely for the
purpose of providing samples in connection with the anticipated sales. There shall be no fee
for a Class “T” license and the hours of operation shall be same as the hours of operation for
the Class “B” or “BB” license, whichever is applicable.
Ord. #11-030)
f. A holder of a Class “B” or Class “BB” license may apply for a Class “T” license, for use in
conjunction with, and on the same premises as the Class “ B” or Class “ BB” license. If
granted, such license will be without additional annual fee. The non-refundable application
fee prescribed elsewhere in this Section must be paid with the initial application. To qualify
for an additional Class “ T” license, the holder of a Class “ B”or Class “ BB” license must
present evidence that:
1. the location and physical arrangements for tasting are adequate;
2. supervision of tasting will be continuous during the times when tasting is allowed by
an individual who is not involved in other transactions within the establishment;
3. all servers at tastings must be BASSET certified (or its equivalent).
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
13-12 REVISED 06/18/18
g. Class “C” licenses which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption
only on the premises where sold, and which shall be issued only to regularly organized
veterans or service person’ s clubs, or not-for-profit fraternal or benevolent organizations
maintaining permanent club quarters irrespective of the size of their membership and having
a National or State charter.
h. Class “ DD” licenses which shall authorize the retail sale on the premises specified of
alcoholic liquor only for consumption on the premises where sold. Such license may be
issued and retained only by establishments which:
1. have 24 or more lanes available for bowling;
2. are in fact operated principally as bowling alleys; and
3. offer the patrons full bowling facilities with liquor service incidental to bowling.
Ord. #18-020)
i. Class “ E” licenses shall authorize the retail sale in restaurants and brew pubs of beer and
wine only, for consumption on the premises where sold. Such licenses may be issued to and
retained by those establishments which:
1. have a seating capacity at tables for a minimum of 25 persons for food service; and
2. are in fact operated as restaurants.
3. a holder of a Class “ E” license may apply for a supplemental liquor license, which
shall authorize the retail sale of beer brewed on the premises only for consumption
off of the licensed premises. The following limitations shall apply:
a) the licensed premises must also have a valid brew pub license from the State
of Illinois, and
b) the licensee shall not manufacture more than 155,000 gallons per year.
j. Class “G” licenses which shall authorize the retail sale, in banquet halls only, of alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises where sold. Such licenses may be issued and
retained by bona fide banquet hall establishments as defined elsewhere in this Chapter.
k. Class “ H” licenses which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises where sold. Such licenses may be issued and retained only by
a bona fide non-public common dining facility of a senior housing development as defined
earlier in this Chapter.
Ord. #02-054)
l. Class “ I” license which shall authorize the operation of “Wine Café” and shall permit the
retail sale of wine for consumption off premises and the retail sale of wine for consumption
on the premises. The licensee shall, with its application, submit a limited menu to be
approved by the Local Liquor Commissioner. Said menu shall be offered to each consumer
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13-13 REVISED 06/18/18
in conjunction with the consumption of wine on the premises.
Ord. #05-091)
m. Class “J” license which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption
on the premises where sold. Such licenses maybe issued and retained only byan indoor notfor-
profit live theater and shall permit said sales only one-half hour prior to and during
intermission of any live theatrical performance.
Ord. #16-026)
n. Class “K” license which shall permit the retail sale of beer and wine for consumption on the
premises only at establishments that are not Restaurants as that term is defined in this
Chapter but meet the definition of Coffee Shop in this Chapter. The retail sale of wine and
beer is permitted only under the following conditions:
1. The sale of beer and wine is prohibited before 2:00 p.m. and after 10:00 p.m.
each day.
2. Each and every patron who desires to consume beer or wine must be
physically present at the counter during each point of sale transaction at
which beer or wine is purchased and present a valid government issued photo
id.
3. The sale of beer and wine is incidental and secondary to the sale of coffee and
similar products.
4. The sale of beer or wine through a drive-through window is prohibited.
5. The sale of beer or wine for off-premises consumption is prohibited.
Ord. #16-036)
o. Class “L” license which shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises where sold only at establishments located on the second floor or higher within the
Downtown District (B-5). While a kitchen is not required, full and complete meals must be
made available for purchase, either from food prepared on site or from food prepared
elsewhere and delivered to the customers, subject to the approval of the Local Liquor
Commissioner.
Ord. #18-020)
p. Class “M” license which shall permit the onsite consumption of the beer or ale brewed onsite
at a microbrewery or brewery. Class “M” licenses are subject to the following conditions:
1. On-premises consumption shall be limited to the retail portion of the microbrewery
or brewery, except during supervised tours and private events.
2. Beer and ale for onsite consumption shall be dispensed only in containers provided
by the licensee.
3. No more than a total of 48 ounces of beer or ale shall be served for the purpose of
onsite consumption to any customer in one day.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
13-14 REVISED 05/01/07
4. The retail sale of beer or ale produced off premises shall be permitted.
Ord. #19-006)
q. Class “N” license which shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises where sold at hotels only to guests of the hotel. Aholder of a Class “N” license
may sell alcoholic liquor at a retail location within the hotel as well as in a hotel room.
If the sale is at a retail location, prior to any sale, the purchaser must provide proof that s/he
is a guest at the hotel where the purchase is being made. The retail location must either be
accessible only to the front desk staff of the hotel or in a locked display cabinet or cooler.
In each hotel room, the hotel may install cabinets for the storage of liquor for the use of
guests in each room, provided, however, that each cabinet must be locked and access may
only be given to a guest who is 21 or older at the time of checking in to the hotel.
This classification of license is exempt from the restrictions in Section 13-611 regarding
sales of single servings of alcoholic liquor.
Ord. #19-006)
r. Class “ O” license which shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises where sold at cosmetic facilities. Liquor may be sold only to customers of the
cosmetic facility during the time they are in the facility to receive services. The retail sale of
liquor shall be limited to beer and wine only and no customer shall be served no more than
two alcoholic beverages during any one calendar day.
Ord. #04-077, #05-091, # 06-078)
s. Daily Permit - Not-for-Profit Organizations. The Local Liquor Commissioner mayalso grant
a daily permit which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption only
on the premises where sold, to any local organization or group such as a civic, fraternal or
other not-for-profit organization, authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at any picnic,
carnival or similar function given by said organization. The fee for such daily permit shall be
25.
Ord. #04-077, #05-091, # 06-078)
t. Daily Permit - Special. The Local Liquor Commissioner may grant a special permit which
shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises where
sold, to any organization or group at any function given by the organization. Special permits
shall not be issued for more than 30 days in any calendar year for any one organization, not
more than three special permits to any one organization shall be issued, not more than three
special permits shall be granted at any one location per year. The fee for such special permit
shall be $65 per day per location.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13-15 REVISED 08/19/19
Section 13-502 Fees and Number of Licenses.
Class of
License
Annual
License Fee
Number of Licenses Authorized
A $ 3,800
Ord. # 03-078, # 06-078)
36
Ord. #95-090, #96-033, #97-029, #97-061, #98-016, #99-006, #01-002, #01-027, #02-007, #02-016, #02-039, #03-017,
03-027, #03-053, #03-062, #04-004, #04-008, #04-024, #04-039, #04-052. #05-086, #06-019, #07-024, #08-013, #08-
033, #09-016, #09-028, #09-039, #09-045, #10-002, #10-040, #10-051, #11-023, #11-047, 11-059, #12-030, #12-031,
12-033, #13-002, #13-004, #13-041, #13-057, #13-067, #14-008, #14-013, #14-026, #14-041, #15-015, #15-027, #16-
037, # 16-042, #16-048, # 16-052, #17-003, # 17-021, #18-030, # 19-020)
A
Supplemental
Ord. #98-004)
650
Ord. # 04-077, # 06-078)
0
Ord. #98-034, #01-027)
AA $ 4,600
Ord. #06-078)
22
Ord. #96-015, #96-028, #96-033, #96-043, #96-070. #97-029, #97-042, #98-028, #00-013, #00-015, #00-048, #01-027,
02-067, #03-004, #03-053, #04-036, #04-039, #04-043, #05-034, #05-068, #06-019, #06-034, #06-041, #08-008, #08-
013, #09-008, #09-028, #09-050, #10-002, #11-007, #11-023, #12-026, #12-031, #12-033, #12-040, #12-047, #12-048,
13-007, #13-012, #13-026, #13-029, #13-045, #14-013, #14-026, #14-044, #14-057, #15-029, #16-042, #16-046, #18-
013, #19-020)
AA Adjunct $ 2,600
Ord #03-078, # 06-078)
2
Ord. #01-044)
AA
Supplemental
800
Ord. # 03-078, # 06-078,
18-020)
0
Ord. #11-023)
B $ 3,700
Ord. # 03-078, # 06-078)
28
Ord. #96-070, #96-082, #97-029, #98-022, #98-034, #99-049, #99-068, #00-018, #01-013, #01-027, #01-048, #02-055,
02-092, #03-004, #03-062, #03-071, #03-076, #04-062, #03-071, #03-076, #05-023, #05-034, #05-043, #05-092, #06-
016. #06-060, #07-042, #08-013, #08-038, #09-039, #10-040, #11-002, #11-023, #11-033, #11-043, #11-047, #11-059,
12-019, #13-002, #13-004, #13-024, #13-041, #13-060, #14-003, #14-013, #14-018, #14-032, #14-055, #15-008, #15-
029, # 15-032, #15-056, # 17-025, #17-034, # 18-005, #18-013, # 19-013, #19-020, # 19-029)
BB $ 2,700
Ord. # 03-078, # 06-078,
08-011)
2
Ord. #96-070, #96-082, #97-029, #98-022, #99-069, #00-018, #00-050, #01-013, #01-027, #01-046, #02-092, #03-004,
03-062, #03-071, #03-076, #04-036, #05-016, #05-024, #05-034, #06-016, #06-060, #07-042, #10-040, #10-051, #11-
015, #11-023, #11-033, #11-059, #12-019, #12-030, #15-032)
C $ 650
Ord. # 03-078, # 06-078)
2
Ord. #01-027, #02-011, # 05-034)
DD $ 4,600
Ord #06-078)
2
E $ 2,700
Ord. # 03-078, # 06-078)
17
Ord. #96-015, #96-036, #96-057, #97-017, #97-052, #97-070, #97-083, #98-028, #98-043, #00-015, #01-015, #01-027,
02-034, #02-046, #03-004, #03-035, #03-053, #04-036, #04-006, #05-001, #05-034, #05-043, #06-019, #06-056. #07-
046, #07-051, #07-074, #08-001, #08-013, #09-028, #09-045, #09-046, #10-004, #10-005 #11-016, #11-043, #12-008,
12-040, #13-007, #13-012, #14-026, #14-029, #15-014, #16-007, #16-022, #16-042, #17-034, #17-043, #19-020, #19-
029)
E
Supplemental
Ord. #18-020)
650 0
G $ 4,600
Ord. #06-078)
3
Ord. #04-043, #05-016, # 05-034, #05-092, # 12-26, #13-002)
H $ 650
Ord, # 03-078, # 06-078)
1
I
Ord. #02-054)
3,000 0
J
Ord. #05-091) $
200 1
Ord. #05-092)
K
Ord. #16-026) $
1,400 0
L
Ord. #16-036) $
4,600 1
Ord. #16-050)
M
Ord. #18-020) $
3,000 0
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
13-16 REVISED 08/19/19
Class of
License
Annual License
Fee
Number of Licenses Authorized
N
Ord. #19-006)
1,000 ( retail
only or in-room
only)
1,400 ( retail
and in-room)
2
19-013)
O
Ord. #19-006) $
1,400 1
19-020)
T
Ord. #11-030)
N/A
25
Ord. #11-043, #11-047, #11-059, #12-030, #13-002, #13-004, #13-024, #13-041, #13-060, #14-003, #14-032, #14-
055, #15-008, #15-029, #15-056, #17-025, #17-034, #18-005, #18-013, #19-020, #19-029)
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13-17 REVISED 02/18/19
Ord. #00-075, #02-054, # 03-061, #09-039, # 10-019, #15-018, # 16-001, #16-004, # 16-026 #16-036, #18-020, # 19-006)
Section 13-503 Hours of Operation.
Class of
License
Monday
through
Thursday
Friday Saturday Sunday
A 8:00 AM -
12 Midnight
8:00 AM -
1:00 AM Sat.
8:00 AM -
1:00 AM Sun.
11:00 AM -
12:00 Midnight
AA 8:00 AM -
1:00 AM
following
8:00 AM -
2:00 AM Sat.
8:00 AM -
2:00 AM Sun.
10:00 AM -
1:00 AM Mon.
AAAdjunct
8:00 AM -
2:00 AM
8:00 AM -
3:00 AM Sat
8:00 AM -
3:00 AM Sun.
10:00 AM -
2:00 AM Mon.
B 8:00 AM -
12 Midnight
8:00 AM -
1:00 AM Sat.
8:00 AM -
1:00 AM Sun.
8:00 AM -
12:00 Midnight
BB 8:00 AM -
12 Midnight
8:00 AM -
1:00 AM Sat.
8:00 AM -
1:00 AM Sun.
8:00 AM -
12:00 Midnight
C 8:00 AM -
12:00 Midnight
8:00 AM -
2:00 AM Sat.
8:00 AM -
2:00 AM Sun.
10:00 AM -
12:00 Midnight
DD 8:00 AM -
1:00 AM
following
8:00 AM -
2:00 AM Sat.
8:00 AM -
2:00 AM Sun.
10:00 AM -
1:00 AM Mon.
E 8:00 AM -
12:00 Midnight
8:00 AM -
1:00 AM Sat.
8:00 AM-
1:00 AM Sun.
11:00 AM -
12:00 Midnight
G 8:00 AM -
1:00 AM
following
8:00 AM -
2:00 AM Sat.
8:00 AM -
2:00 AM Sun.
8:00 AM -
1:00 AM Mon.
H 8:00 AM -
12:00 Midnight
8:00 AM -
1:00 AM Sat.
8:00 AM -
1:00 AM Sun.
11:00 AM -
12:00 Midnight
I 8:00 AM –
12 Midnight
8:00 AM –
1:00 AM Sat.
8:00 AM –
1:00 AM Sun.
12:00 Noon –
12:00 Midnight
K 2:00 PM –
10:00 PM
2:00 PM –
10:00 PM
2:00 PM –
10:00 PM
2:00 PM –
10:00 PM
L 8:00 AM – 1:00
AM following
8:00 AM – 2:00
AM Sat.
8:00 AM – 2:00
AM Sun.
10:00 AM – 1:00
AM Mon
M 3:00 PM–10:00
PM
11:00 AM-
11:00 PM
11:00 AM –
11:00 PM
11:00 AM-
7:00 PM
N
Retail
sales only)
8:00 AM –
Midnight
8:00 AM –
1:00 AM Sat.
8:00 AM –
1:00 AM Sun
8:00 AM -
Midnight
O 8:00 AM –
Midnight
8:00 AM –
1:00 AM Sat.
8:00 AM –
1:00 AM Sun
10:00 AM -
Midnight
Daily From Opening to 30 Minutes Before Closing of Event Each Day
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
13-18 REVISED 02/18/19
On the mornings of July 4, Memorial Day, Labor Day and Thanksgiving, the sale of alcoholic
beverages is permitted as follows:
Class A - 1 AM Class E - 1 AM
Class AA - 2 AM Class G - 2 AM
Class AA Adjunct - 3 AM Class I – 1 AM
Class B - 2 AM Class L – 2 AM
Class BB - 2 AM Class N (retail stores only) – 2 AM
Class C – 2 AM Daily - Not for Profit – 30 Minutes Before Closing
Class DD - 2 AM Daily – Special – 30 Minutes Before Closing
On the morning of January 1, the sale of alcoholic beverages is permitted as follows:
Class A - 2 AM Class E – 2 AM
Class AA - 2 AM Class G - 2 AM
Class AA Adjunct - 3 AM Class I – 2 AM
Class B - 2 AM Class L – 2 AM
Class BB - 2 AM Class N (retail sales only) – 2 AM
Class C - 2 AM Daily – Not-for-Profit – 30 Minutes Before Closing
Class DD - 2 AM Daily – Special – 30 Minutes Before Closing
All patrons and customers shall leave the premises no later than ten minutes following the closing
hours stipulated above, excepting in establishments which are full service restaurants in which the
service of alcoholic beverages is incidental and complimentary to the service of meals; in such
establishments, all alcoholic beverages must be removed from all service areas, tables, counters,
bars, etc., within ten minutes following the closing hours stipulated.
Article VI Rules and Regulations
Section 13-601 List. The Village President shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all
such licenses issued.
Section 13-602 Transfer of License. Alicense shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to
exceed one year after issuance, unless revoked sooner as provided in this Article and shall not
constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be
alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. This license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and shall not descend by the
laws of testate or intestate devolution, provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any
deceased licensee, and the trustees of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in
part of alcoholic liquor may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor
under the order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent
bankrupt license after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the
expiration of such license but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency
of such licensee.
Section 13-603 Renewal of License. Any licensee may renew the license at the expiration
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13-19 REVISED 02/18/19
thereof, provided that the licensee is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which
the renewal license is sought are suitable for this purpose; provided further, that the renewal privilege
shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the President and Board of
Trustees from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within their jurisdiction.
Section 13-604 Change of Location. A retail liquor dealer’ s license shall permit the sale of
alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and license. The location may be
changed only upon receipt of written permission to make such change issued by the Village
President. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one
for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of this State and this Code.
Section 13-605 Peddling. It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the Village.
Section 13-606 Sanitary Conditions. All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for
the storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinances regulating the
condition of premises for the storage and sale of food for human consumption.
Ord. #14-001, #15-018, # 16-026, #16-036, # 19-006)
Section 13-607 Employees. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee to engage, or employ, or permit any person under
the age of 19 years to handle, sell, serve or deliver alcoholic liquor or to entertain, or to act as host or
hostess in or upon the licensed premises where the principal business is the sale of alcoholic liquor,
while such premises are open for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor. Any person under the age of
19 years, engaged or employed or permitted to work in or upon the general premises where the sale
of alcoholic liquor is not the main or principal business may not work as entertainer, host or hostess
or in connection with the handling, selling, serving or delivering of alcoholic liquor.
It shall be unlawful to permit any person in a Class “ A”, “AA”, “B”, “BB”, “C”, “ DD”, “E”, “ G” or
H”, “ I”,“J”, “ K”, “L”, “N”, or “O” licensed establishment to serve or sell alcoholic beverages
unless that person has completed the BASSET training program or its equivalent, as required by
Section 13-204 of this Code.
Ord. #19-006)
Section 13-608 Location Requirements. No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, hospital, home for the aged or indigent
persons or for veterans, their wives or children or any military or naval stations; provided, that this
prohibition shall not apply to hotels, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other
places where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on, if such place of
business exempted has been established for such purposes prior to the taking effect of this Article.
The prohibition of this Section shall not extend to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of
alcoholic liquor on premises within 100 feet of any church where the church has been established
within 100 feet since the issuance of the original license.
Section 13-609 Revocation. The Village President may revoke any retail liquor dealer’s license for
any violation of any provision of this Chapter or of any State law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic
liquor.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
13-20 REVISED 11/21/16
Ord. #16-054)
Section 13-610 Prohibited Sales and Delivery.
a. No licensee or officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of a licensee
shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated person or to any person under the
age of 21 years. Every licensee shall be responsible for determining proof of the lawful age of
persons seeking to purchase or obtain alcoholic liquor from the licensee.
b. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give or deliver
such alcoholic liquor to a person under the age of 21 years except in the performance of a
religious ceremony or service. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any
place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold.
c. In every place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold, there shall be displayed at all
times in a prominent place a printed card which shall read substantially as follows:
WARNING: YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE UP TO $ 750 UNDER THE
ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF ARLINGTON HEIGHTS IF YOU
PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR ORMISREPRESENT YOUR AGEFOR THE
PURPOSE OF PURCHASING OR OBTAINING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
d. Any parent or guardian who shall knowingly permit any person under the age of 21 years of
which he or she may be the parent or guardian to violate any provision of this Chapter shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $750 for each such offense.
e. For the purpose of preventing a violation of this Section, any licensee, or his or her agent or
employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to
produce adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of
21 years.
Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a document issued by a
federal, state, county, or municipal government, or subdivision or agency thereof, including,
but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator’ s license, a registration certificate issued under
the Federal Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the Armed
Forces. Proof that the defendant-licensee, or his or her employee or agent, demanded, was
shown and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any transaction forbidden bythis
Section is competent evidence and maybe considered in any proceedings for the suspension
or revocation of any license based thereon.
f. Any person under the age of 21 years who attempts to purchase or receive any alcoholic
liquor from a licensee shall be guilty of a violation of this Chapter.
g. Any person who sells, gives, or furnishes to any person under the age of 21 years any false or
fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person or
who sells, gives or furnishes to any person under the age of 21 years evidence of age and
identification of any other person is guilty of a violation of this Chapter.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13-21 REVISED 02/18/19
h. Any person under the age of 21 years who presents or offers to any licensee or his or her
agent or employee, any written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity which is
false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing,
attempting to purchase, or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any
alcoholic beverage or who has in his or her possession, any false or fraudulent written,
printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity is guilty of a violation of this Chapter.
i. Any person under the age of 21 years who has any alcoholic beverage in his or her possession
on any street or highway or in any public place or in any place open to the public is guilty of
a violation of this Chapter.
j. In addition to all other fines and penalties, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may
revoke the retail liquor dealer’ s license for any violation of the above paragraphs.
Ord. #09-042, #19-006)
Section 13-611 Sales of Single Servings of Alcoholic Beverages. It shall be unlawful for a holder of
any classification of liquor license for retail sale not for consumption on the premises, to offer for sale
or sell any of the following:
a. A single can of beer or malt liquor unless the volume of the container is greater than 24 fluid
ounces ( or approximately 710 ml) but any such can of beer or malt liquor cannot be sold
refrigerated or chilled;
b. A single bottle of beer or malt liquor unless the volume of the container is greater than 12 fluid
ounces ( or approximately 355 ml) but any such bottle of beer or malt liquor cannot be sold
refrigerated or chilled;
c. A single bottle of beer or malt liquor if the volume is 40 fluid ounces (or approximately 1190
ml) or greater;
d. A single container of wine, other than sparkling wine and/ or champagne, unless the container is
greater than 10 fluid ounces ( or approximately 300 ml); (Effective 03/01/10 per Ord. #09-042)
e. Asingle container of alcoholic liquor other than beer, malt liquor or wine, unless the container
is greater than 6.4 ounces (or approximately 190 ml). (Effective 03/01/10 per Ord. #09-042)
It shall further be unlawful for any holder of any classification of liquor license for retail sale to sell any
of the above prohibited items attached together in any method other than that done by the distributor or
manufacturer. This limitation shall not apply to products permitted to be sold pursuant to subsection b.
above.
The prohibitions contained in this Section shall not apply to a holder of a Class “N” license.
Section 13-612 Purchase or Acceptance of Gifts of Liquor by Persons of Non-Age -
Identification Cards. Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited
because of age, shall not purchase or accept a gift of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his
or her possession.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
13-22 REVISED 10/07/96
If a licensee or his or her agents or employees believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery
of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the non-age of the prospective recipient, he or she shall,
before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification,
containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties. No
person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card; use the identification card of
another; carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card bymeans of
false information.
Whoever violates any provision of this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $750 for each such offense.
Section 13-613 Liability for Permitting Minors to Possess or Consume Alcohol. It shall be
unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises in the Village to knowingly permit or allow any
person under the age of 21 to possess or consume alcoholic liquor on the premises. The provisions
of this Section shall not prohibit persons under the age of 21 from participating in a religious
ceremony, consuming alcoholic beverages in the presence and with the approval of their parent or
legal guardian, or from having possession for purposes of making a delivery of an alcoholic beverage
in pursuance of the order of their parent or guardian, or in pursuance of their employment. Any
person who shall violate the provisions of this Section shall be fined not more than $750 for each
offense.
Article VII Sales on Credit
Section 13-701 Sales on Credit. No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any
person on credit or on a pass book, or order on a store, or in exchange for any goods, wares or
merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered; and if any person shall extend credit for such
purposes, the debt thereby attempted to be created shall not be recoverable at law; provided that
nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent any club from permitting checks or statements
for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona fide guests of members and charged to the
account of such members or guests in accordance with the bylaws of the club; and provided further
that nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent any hotel from permitting checks or
statements for liquor to be signed by regular guests residing at the hotel and charged to the accounts
of the guests.
Section 13-702 Reuse of Premises. When any local license has been revoked for any cause, no
license shall be granted to any person for a period of one year thereafter for the conduct of the
business of selling alcoholic liquor in the premises described in such revoked license.
Article VIII Penalty
Ord. #96-059)
Section 13-801 Penalty. Except as otherwise provided herein, any person, firm, company or
corporation violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $750
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. In addition to other penalties imposed by this Chapter, a person
violating any regulation of this Chapter may be required to again complete a BASSET training
program or its equivalent, meeting the minimum curriculum requirements of the Illinois Department
of Alcoholism and Substance Abuse (DASA), Title 77, Chapter X, Rule 2056, as required in Section
13-204, Training Requirements for Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training
Program (BASSET).
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 05/07/18
CHAPTER 14 OTHER BUSINESSES
Article I Fees for Businesses
Section 14-101 Licensing of Businesses
Section 14-102 Licensed Businesses and Fees
Article II Hotels and Motels
Section 14-201 Definition
Section 14-202 License Required
Section 14-203 Application
Section 14-204 Regulations
Section 14-205 Inspections
Section 14-206 Register
Article III Barber Shops
Section 14-301 Definition
Section 14-302 License Required
Section 14-303 Application
Section 14-304 Sanitary Requirements
Section 14-305 Inspection
Article IV Building Contractors
Section 14-401 Definition
Section 14-402 License Required
Section 14-403 Application
Section 14-404 Duties of Licensee
Section 14-405 Inspection
Article V Electrical Contractors
Section 14-501 Definition
Section 14-502 Registration Required
Section 14-503 Application
Section 14-504 Expiration of Certificate
Section 14-505 Sublet Contracts
Section 14-506 Duties of Registered Electrical Contractor
Section 14-507 Failure to Correct Defects
Section 14-508 Unlawful to Secure Permit for Person Not Entitled Thereto
Section 14-509 Appointment of Supervising Electrician
Section 14-510 Application for Certification as a Supervising Electrician
Section 14-511 Qualifications
Section 14-512 Certification
Section 14-513 Duties
Section 14-514 Notice of Discharge or Resignation
Section 14-515 Revocation
Section 14-516 Inspection
Section 14-517 Condemnation
Article VI Laundries, Laundromats, Dry Cleaning Establishments and Automatic
Dry Cleaners
Section 14-601 Definitions
OTHER BUSINESSES
14-2 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 14-602 License Required
Section 14-603 Application
Section 14-604 General Regulations Relating to Dry Cleaning Establishments
Section 14-605 Sanitation
Section 14-606 Installation of Automatic Dry Cleaning Machines
Section 14-607 Ventilation Requirements
Section 14-608 Plumbing and Drainage Facilities
Section 14-609 Lavatory Facilities
Section 14-610 Emission of Vapors
Section 14-611 Excessive Heat
Section 14-612 Separation of Laundered and Unlaundered Articles
Section 14-613 Sterilization of Articles
Section 14-614 Sprinkling Restrictions
Section 14-615 Exemption
Section 14-616 Inspection
Article VII Day Care Centers
Section 14-701 State Standards Adopted
Section 14-702 Definitions
Section 14-703 License Required
Section 14-704 Application
Section 14-705 Fee Exemption
Section 14-706 Display of License - Transfer
Section 14-707 Denial of License - Revocation of License
Section 14-708 Rules and Regulations
Section 14-709 Inspection
Article VIII Day Care Homes
Section 14-801 Definition
Section 14-802 License Required
Section 14-803 Application
Section 14-804 Notification of Surrounding Property Owners
Section 14-805 Issuance of License and Notice
Section 14-806 Renewal
Section 14-807 Revocation of License
Article IX Machine Shops
Section 14-901 Definition
Section 14-902 License Required
Section 14-903 Application
Section 14-904 Location
Section 14-905 Operation at Night
Section 14-906 Sanitary and Health Requirements
Section 14-907 Noise
Article X Nursing Homes
Section 14-1001 Definition
Section 14-1002 License Required
Section 14-1003 Application
Section 14-1004 General Regulations
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
14-3 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 14-1005 Inspections
Section 14-1006 Penalty
Article XI Bill Posting and Sign Painting
Section 14-1101 Definition
Section 14-1102 License Required
Section 14-1103 Application
Section 14-1104 Obscene Pictures
Section 14-1105 Use of Poster Panels
Section 14-1106 Consent of Owner
Section 14-1107 Refuse
Section 14-1108 Weeds and Materials at Base of Billboards
Section 14-1109 Disfiguring Signs
Section 14-1110 Identification
Section 14-1111 Inspection
Section 14-1112 Construction of Article
Article XII Solid Waste Contractors
Section 14-1201 Definitions
Section 14-1202 License Required
Section 14-1203 Application
Section 14-1204 General Regulations
Section 14-1205 Other Requirements
Section 14-1206 Inspection
Section 14-1207 Provision of Recycling Services Required
Section 14-1208 Industrial or Commercial Recycling
Section 14-1209 Penalty
Article XIII Public Passenger Vehicles
Section 14-1301 Intent and Purpose
Section 14-1302 Definitions
Section 14-1303 Business License
Section 14-1304 Operation of Business
Section 14-1305 Public Passenger Vehicle License
Section 14-1306 Inspection
Section 14-1307 Inspection Stations
Section 14-1308 Miscellaneous Vehicle Regulations
Section 14-1309 Chauffeur License
Section 14-1310 Public Passenger Vehicle Operation
Section 14-1311 Operation of Livery Vehicles
Section 14-1312 Taxicab Rates
Section 14-1313 Posting Established Rates
Section 14-1314 Taximeters
Section 14-1315 Fixing of Rates Prohibited
Section 14-1316 Enforcement
Section 14-1317 Penalty
Article XIV Motor Vehicle Repair, Washing and Storage
Section 14-1401 Definitions
Section 14-1402 License Required
OTHER BUSINESSES
14-4 REVISED 06/03/13
Section 14-1403 Application
Section 14-1404 Maintenance of Place of Business
Section 14-1405 Location
Section 14-1406 Smoking Prohibited
Section 14-1407 Building and Fire Regulations
Section 14-1408 Changing Identification Marks
Section 14-1409 Rate of Speed
Section 14-1410 Parking Vehicles
Section 14-1411 Inspections
Article XV Sale of Christmas Trees
Section 14-1501 License Required
Section 14-1502 Safety
Section 14-1503 Location
Section 14-1504 Sanitary Regulations
Section 14-1505 Bond
Article XVI Coin or Card Operated Machines
Section 14-1601 Intent and Purpose
Section 14-1602 Definitions
Section 14-1603 Vending Business License Required
Section 14-1604 Application
Section 14-1605 Coin Operated Food Vending Machine, Permit Required
Section 14-1606 Coin Operated Amusement Devices, Permit Required
Section 14-1607 Exemption
Section 14-1608 Permit Variation
Section 14-1609 Report Required
Section 14-1610 Penalty
Article XVII Multiple Dwellings
Section 14-1701 Definitions
Section 14-1702 License Required
Section 14-1703 Investigations and Inspections
Section 14-1704 Designation of Agent
Section 14-1705 Renewal
Section 14-1706 Notice of Change
Section 14-1707 Records Required
Section 14-1708 Violations and Suspensions
Article XVIII Gun Dealers
Section 14-1801 Definition
Section 14-1802 Gun Dealers - License Required
Section 14-1803 Requirements of Applicants
Section 14-1804 Maintenance and Display of Firearms
Article XIX Foreign Fire Insurance Companies
Section 14-1901 Compliance Required
Section 14-1902 Payment to Village
Section 14-1903 Time of Payment
Section 14-1904 Reports
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
14-5 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 14-1905 Placement of Insurance Restricted
Article XX Bus Transport Service
Section 14-2001 License Required
Section 14-2002 Application
Section 14-2003 Regulations
Section 14-2004 Mechanical Tests
Section 14-2005 Physical Inspections by the Police Chief
Section 14-2006 Duty of Owner
Section 14-2007 Condition of Vehicles
Section 14-2008 Application for Bus Driver’ s License
Section 14-2009 Examination of Applicant
Section 14-2010 Insurance Required
Section 14-2011 Revocation of License
Article XXI Banks and Currency Exchanges
Section 14-2101 License Required
Section 14-2102 Application
Article XXII Cable/Video Service Provider Fee and PEG Access Support Fee and
Consumer Protection Law
Section 14-2201 Definitions
Section 14-2202 Cable/ Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
Section 14-2203 PEG Access Support Fee Imposed
Section 14-2204 Applicable Principles
Section 14-2205 No Impact on Other Taxes Due from Holder
Section 14-2206 Audits of Cable/ Video Service Provider
Section 14-2207 Late Fees/Payments
Section 14-2208 Customer Service and Privacy Protection Law
Section 14-2209 Enforcement
Section 14-2210 Customer Credits
Section 14-2211 Severability
Article XXIII Adult Businesses
Section 14-2301 Definitions
Section 14-2302 License Required
Section 14-2303 Standards for Issuance or Denial of License
Section 14-2304 Regulations Applicable to All Adult Businesses
Section 14-2305 Location of Adult Businesses
Section 14-2306 Special Regulations for Adult Booths
Section 14-2307 Special Regulations for Adult Live Entertainment Establishment
Section 14-2308 Special Regulations for Adult Stores
Section 14-2309 Special Regulations for Adult Theaters
Section 14-2310 Licensees’ Responsibility for Adult Business Personnel
Section 14-2311 License Revocation or Suspension
Section 14-2312 Penalty
Section 14-2313 Nuisance Declared
Section 14-2314 Severability
OTHER BUSINESSES
14-6 REVISED 10/05/09
Article XXIV Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax
Section 14-2401 Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Rate
Article XXV Newsracks
Section 14-2501 Findings and Purposes
Section 14-2502 Definitions
Section 14-2503 Provision of Modular Newsracks
Section 14-2504 Allocation of Modular Newsrack Compartments
Article XXVI Valet Parking
Section 14-2601 Definition
Section 14-2602 License Required
Section 14-2603 Application
Section 14-2604 Duties of Licensee
Section 14-2605 Penalty
Article XXVII General Business Licenses
Section 14-2701 General Business License
Article XXVIII Penalties
Section 14-2801 Penalties
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
14-7 REVISED 10/05/09
Article I Fees for Businesses
Section 14-101 Licensing of Businesses. The places of business listed in Section 14-102,
Licensed Businesses and Fees, shall be licensed in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
The license fee for each business shall be that set forth in Section 14-102. All businesses so
licensed shall comply with the general licensing provisions of Chapter 9, General Licensing
Procedures, of this Code, and shall comply with all ordinances of the Village relating to the use
and occupancy of the premises in which the businesses are located. The Village Manager may
direct appropriate Village personnel to make inspections of the places of business of the licensees
as deemed necessary from time to time for the purpose of enforcing all the applicable ordinances
of the Village. These inspections shall be in addition to those required under other provisions of
the ordinances of the Village and other sections of this Code.
Section 14-102 Licensed Businesses and Fees.
Ord. #03-078, # 06-078)
a. The license fees for all businesses in the Village, except those listed in paragraph b. below,
shall be determined based on the size of the business operation in accordance with the
following standardized calculation fee schedule ( square feet = the total building square
footage including retail areas and indoor storage areas):
under 1,001 square feet $ 130
1,001 - 5,000 square feet $ 190
5,001 - 12,000 square feet $ 380
over 12,000 square feet $ 760
Ord. #96-072, # 02-018, #04-077, # 05-020, # 06-008, #06-078, #08-002)
b. The following businesses shall pay an annual fee as set forth below:
1. Beauty Care $ 22 per chair used for
cutting/styling of hair
2. Hotels and Motels $ 3.50 per room available for rent
3. Building Contractor $ 130
4. Electrical Contractor $ 30
5. Day Care Home $ 30 initial license
20 renewal
6. Solid Waste Contractor $ 200 for each vehicle used in the business
7. Public Passenger Vehicle Company $ 130
8. Public Passenger Vehicle License $ 80
OTHER BUSINESSES
14-8 REVISED 05/07/18
9. Public Passenger Vehicle
Chauffeur's License $ 40
10. Sale of Christmas Trees $ 30 per
month for each location at which the trees or
parts are stored or offered for sale
11. Coin Operated Food $ 50 for each permit
Vending Machine
12. Coin Operated Amusement Device $ 55 for
each device on which no annual tax is
required
13. Multiple Dwellings The annual license will be $ 13 per unit
building, but not less than $ 60 per building.
14. Ambulance Company $ 130
Ord. #06-008, # 06-078)
c. A 20% late fee shall be charged for all existing businesses that have not purchased a
business license within 30 days of the due date. Said late fee shall be added to the business
license fee.
Ord. #13-028)
d. A $10 fee shall be charged for all replacement Public Passenger Vehicle Licenses.
Ord. #09-038, # 18-012)
Article II Hotels and Motels
Section 14-201 Definition. " Hotel" and " motel," when used in this Article, include every
building or structure, kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place
where lodging, or lodging and food, or apartments, or suites, or other accommodations are offered
for a consideration to guests, in which ten or more rooms, apartments or suites, or other
accommodations are used for the lodging, or lodging and food, for such guests.
Section 14-202 License Required. No person shall conduct, keep, manage or operate, or cause
to be conducted, kept, managed or operated, a hotel or a motel without having obtained a license.
Section 14-203 Application. An application for a hotel or motel license shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. The
application shall also state the proposed premises where such hotel or motel is located, the number
of rooms in such building, which of such rooms in the building are to be occupied as sleeping
rooms, and the number of persons proposed to be accommodated or allowed in each room.
Section 14-204 Regulations. No house, building or accessory structure hereafter constructed or
erected in the Village shall be used as a hotel or motel, and no house, building or accessory
structure hereafter erected and not now used for such purpose, or any building, house, structure or
portion thereof which is now used or intended to be used or occupied for hotel or motel purposes
shall be converted into, used as, or leased for a hotel or motel, unless such building and every part
thereof shall conform to the requirements of this Article and to such other applicable requirements
of the building, zoning, housing, fire prevention, health and sanitation regulations of this Code.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
14-9 REVISED 05/07/18
Section 14-205 Inspections. The Director of Building shall inspect or cause to be inspected as
often as deemed necessary, in accordance with the housing regulat ions of this Code, every hotel
and motel in the Village to determine whether all applicable provisions of this Code are being
complied with.
Section 14-206 Register. The landlord, proprietor, manager, keeper or clerk of every hotel or
motel shall keep a register in which shall be entered the name, and if a transient, the permanent
address and license plate number, if any, of every person who becomes a roomer, boarder, lodger
or paying guest therein. The register shall also show the number and location of the room or bed
occupied by that person, the date of arrival and the period for which the guest engaged board or
lodging. The register shall be accessible, without charge, to the Police Chief or any police officer
and to the Director of Building, the Director of Health Services, the Fire Chief, or to any of their
duly authorized representatives.
OTHER BUSINESSES
14-10 REVISED 04/16/18
PAGE INTENTIONALLY BLANK
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
11 REVISED 10/05/09
Ord. #09-038)
Article III Barber Shops
Section 14-301 Definition. Barber shop, when used in this Article, shall mean any building,
room, place or establishment where the occupation is carried on of shaving or trimming the beard
or cutting and dressing the hair of patrons for a consideration. The term shall also include a
tonsorial parlor and barber school.
Section 14-302 License Required. No person shall conduct or operate a barbershop in the Village
without first having obtained a license therefor.
Section 14-303 Application. An application to conduct or operate a barbershop shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. Such
application shall also state the number of chairs to be used in the barbershop.
Section 14-304 Sanitary Requirements. It shall be the duty of every person licensed to conduct
a barbershop to keep the licensed premises in a clean and proper sanitary condition at all times.
All necessary measures shall be taken to safeguard the life and health of patrons and all persons
engaged therein against communicable and contagious diseases. All persons employed or working
in the licensed premises as barbers shall keep themselves and their clothing clean, and shall be
required to wash their hands immediately before serving a customer. All towels and washcloths
shall be washed with soap and water and sanitized before being used. It shall be unlawful to use
any towel or washcloth on more than one customer without first having sterilized and cleaned such
towel and washcloth prior to each usage. All receptacles, finger bowls, utensils, vessels,
appliances, tools and other implements shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.
It shall be unlawful to use any implements or tools upon any person after they have been used upon
a person afflicted with any skin or scalp disease without first having sterilized and cleaned such
implement or tool. There shall be separate receptacles provided for soiled towels and for discarded
shaving and other paper.
Section 14-305 Inspection. The Director of Building shall inspect or cause to be inspected as
often as deemed necessary, every barber shop in the Village, to determine whether all applicable
provisions of this Code and State Statutes are being complied with.
Article IV Building Contractors
Section 14-401 Definition. Building contractor, when used in this Article, shall mean any person
engaged in the business of constructing, altering or repairing buildings or other structures or
sidewalk or street pavements, including, but not limited to, cement, concrete or paving contractors,
masonry contractors, carpentry contractors, lathing contractors, roofing contractors, heating
contractors, air-conditioning or refrigeration contractors, steam fitting contractors, house moving,
house raising or shoring contractors, sheet metal contractors, glazing contractors, dry wall
contractors, painting contractors, razing, shearing or moving contractors, landscaping contractors,
tuck pointing contractors, resulting contractors, and drain layers; provided that this Article shall
not be construed as requiring a license for the operation of the business of plumbing contractor,
the business of general contractor, or the business of electrical contractor by a person who has
registered as such, pursuant to the provisions of this Code relating to electrical contractors.
OTHER BUSINESSES
12
Any person who engages in the construction, repair or alteration of any building, structure, or street
or sidewalk pavement within the Village, for which a building permit is required, is presumed to
be a building contractor and must be licensed hereunder unless such presumption is rebutted.
Section 14-402 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of a building
contractor without first having obtained a license therefor.
Section 14-403 Application. An application for a building contractor's license shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. The
application shall also set forth the number of individual employees of the applicant who will be
operating under such license, the type of contracting activity for which a license is requested, and
a statement that the applicant agrees to comply with this Article and all other applicable provisions
of this Code.
Section 14-404 Duties of Licensee. It shall be the absolute and irrevocable responsibility of all
building contractors licensed hereunder to secure the appropriate and necessary building permits
required by this Code before undertaking to construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve,
move, wreck or demolish the whole or any part of any building, structure or sidewalk or street
pavements. It shall also be the duty of all building contractors licensed hereunder to comply with
all the provisions of this Code relating to or regulating their activities as building contractors and,
in addition thereto, to remove or cause to be removed at least once each week from the site of the
building contractor's activities all trash, refuse and waste materials. Building contractors shall at
all times keep the site of activities in an orderly condition, free from standing water, unguarded
dangerous implements, and health and safety hazards. Building contractors shall not obstruct
traffic, streets or sidewalks nor permit dirt or waste materials from falling or being carried onto
public ways.
Section 14-405 Inspection. The provisions of this Article are declared to be of a regulatory
nature, and it shall be the duty of the Director of Building, as deemed necessary, to inspect, or
cause to be inspected, the site of building contractor's activities and to investigate whether persons
engaged as building contractors are properly licensed and that their activities are being conducted
and operated in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code.
Article V Electrical Contractors
Section 14-501 Definition. Electrical contractor, when used in this Article, shall mean any person
engaged in the business of installing or altering by contract, electrical equipment for the utilization
of electricity supplied for light, heat or power, not including radio apparatus or equipment for
wireless reception of sounds and signals, conductors or other equipment installed for or by public
utilities, including common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce
Commission, for use in their operation as public utilities; however, the term " electrical contractor"
shall not include employees employed by such contractor to do or supervise such work.
Section 14-502 Registration Required. No person shall engage in the business of electrical
contractor without first having registered as an electrical contractor in the manner hereinafter set
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13
forth; provided, however, that if such person is already registered for the current year in another
city or village within the State of Illinois, in conformity with the State Statutes, such electrical
contractor shall not be required to pay a registration fee in this Village.
Section 14-503 Application. Any person desiring to engage in the business of electrical
contractor shall apply for registration to the Village Electrical Inspector. Upon the filing of such
application in proper form, and the payment of the registration fee, if required, as herein provided,
the Electrical Inspector shall register the applicant as an electrical contractor and shall issue to the
applicant a certificate of registration which will authorize the applicant to engage in such business
for the remainder of the calendar year in which it is issued; provided, however, that before any
permits shall be issued to such electrical contractor, the electrical contractor shall have complied
with Section 14-509, Appointment of Supervising Electrician, of this Article.
Section 14-504 Expiration of Certificate. The certificate of registration shall expire on
December 31 of the year in which it is issued and is not transferable.
Section 14-505 Sublet Contracts. When contracts to install electrical work have been obtained
by persons who are not registered as electrical contractors, as provided for in this Article, and the
contract is assigned or sublet to a registered electrician on a subcontract basis, the name of such
registered electrical contractor shall immediately be disclosed by the unregistered electrical
contractor to the other party to the contract in writing.
Section 14-506 Duties of Registered Electrical Contractor. It shall be the absolute and
irrevocable responsibility of all electrical contractors registered hereunder to secure the appropriate
and necessary permits required by this Code before undertaking to install any electrical conduits,
electrical wires, equipment or apparatus in any building or structure. It shall also be the duty of
all electrical contractors registered hereunder to comply with all the provisions of this Code
relating to or regulating their activities as electrical contractors.
Section 14-507 Failure to Correct Defects. If any registered electrical contractor fails to correct
any defect, error or deficiency in any work installed under the aut hority of a permit issued to him
or her by the Electrical Inspector within ten calendar days after written notification thereof by the
Inspector, or within such further reasonable time as may, upon request, be prescribed, the Electrical
Inspector shall stop, without further notice, the issuance of permits to such registered electrical
contractor until such corrections have been made, inspected and approved. In addition, the penalty
provided in this Article may be enforced.
Section 14-508 Unlawful to Secure Permit for Person Not Entitled Thereto. It shall be
unlawful for any registered electrical contractor to secure or furnish a permit for the installation,
alteration and repair of electrical wires and apparatus to any person not entitled to such permit
under the electrical regulations of this Code.
Section 14-509 Appointment of Supervising Electrician. Before any permit to install or alter
electrical work shall be issued to any person entitled to secure permits under the electrical
regulations of this Code, such person shall appoint either himself or herself or another employee
who, for the purpose of the electrical regulations of this Code, shall be known as a supervising
electrician. The person so appointed or employed to act as a supervising electrician shall, before
OTHER BUSINESSES
14
starting as supervising electrician, be required to comply with Section 14-511, Qualifications, of
this Article.
Section 14-510 Application for Certification as a Supervising Electrician. Any person who
has been appointed or employed to act as a supervising electrician for a registered electrical
contractor shall apply to the Village Electrical Inspector on a form to be furnished by the Village.
Section 14-511 Qualifications. Applicants for a supervising electrician's certificate shall be at
least 21 years of age and shall have had at least two years experience in the installation, alteration,
repair and maintenance of electrical wires, equipment and apparatus, or equivalent experience.
Applicants shall furnish the names and addresses of former employers, periods of time employed
and in what capacity in a manner satisfactory to the Village Electrical Inspector.
Section 14-512 Certification. When an applicant for a supervising electrician's certificate has
complied with the requirements of Section 14-511, Qualifications, the Electrical Inspector shall
certify the applicant as a supervising electrician to a registered electrical contractor by placing the
name on both the registration certificate and identification card issued to the registered electrical
contractor.
Section 14-513 Duties. The supervising electrician shall perform the work or supervise and direct
the installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of electrical wires and apparatus authorized by
permits issued under this Code.
Section 14-514 Notice of Discharge or Resignation. Whenever a supervising electrician shall
leave or be discharged from the employ of any person who is required by this Article to appoint
or employ a supervising electrician, both the employer and the supervising electrician shall give
written notice to the Village Electrical Inspector within five days, and the permit privileges of the
employer shall be suspended until the employment or appointment by such person of a new
supervising electrician as provided for in Section 14-509, Appointment of Supervising Electrician,
of this Article.
Section 14-515 Revocation. The Village President, upon recommendation of the Electrical
Inspector, shall revoke any permit, certificate of registration or any other printed form or document
issued to any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Article. Notice of
revocation shall be in writing and mailed to the person having committed such violation.
Section 14-516 Inspection. The provisions of this Article are declared to be of a regulatory
nature, and it shall at all times be the duty of the Electrical Inspector regularly to inspect the sites
of electrical contractors' activities and to investigate whether persons engaged as electrical
contractors are properly licensed and that their activities are being conducted and operated in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code.
Section 14-517 Condemnation. Any portion of an electrical installation erected, altered or
maintained in violation of this Article shall be condemned and the Electrical Inspector is hereby
empowered to cut off and discontinue current to such electrical installation.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
15 REVISED 10/05/09
Ord. #09-038)
Article VI Laundries, Laundromats, Dry Cleaning
Establishments and Automatic Dry Cleaners
Section 14-601 Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this Article, shall have
the meanings indicated:
a. Automatic dry cleaner. Any place, building, structure, room, establishment or portion
thereof having within such premises one or more automatic dry cleaning machines.
b. Automatic dry cleaning machine. Any device or apparatus for the cleaning of clothes or
fabrics and designed to be used or operated by any person but the owner thereof, or an
employee of the owner thereof, which machine or device makes use of or contains
Perchlorethylene or any other chemical solvent or substance which may cause harm to
human beings by reason of inhalation or contact.
c. Dry cleaning establishment. Any place, building, structure, room, establishment or portion
thereof used for the purpose of cleaning clothes or fabrics through the use of automatic dry
cleaning machines or any machines or devices using Perchlorethylene or any other
chemical solvent or substance which may cause harm to human beings by reason of
inhalation or contact.
d. Laundromat. Any place, building, structure, room, establishment or portion thereof having
one or more self service coin- operated washing machines which are rented, leased or hired
out to the general public for a consideration and for use upon the premises.
e. Laundry. Any place, building, structure, room, establishment or portion thereof which is
used for the purpose of washing, drying, starching or ironing shirts, dresses, collars, cuffs
or other wearing apparel, table, bed or other household linens towels, curtains, draperies,
bedding or other washable fabrics, for the general public.
Section 14-602 License Required. No person shall conduct, operate or maintain a laundry,
laundromat, dry cleaning establishment or automatic dry cleaner in the Village without first having
obtained a license therefor.
Section 14-603 Application. An application for a license to conduct, operate or maintain a
laundry, laundromat, dry cleaning establishment or automatic dry cleaner shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. The
application for a license to conduct, operate or maintain a laundromat or automatic dry cleaner
shall also state the number of self- service coin- operated machines proposed to be used in said
business for the washing, drying, dry cleaning or other laundry or dry cleaning processes.
Section 14-604 General Regulations Relating to Dry Cleaning Establishments. Every person
licensed to conduct, operate or maintain a dry cleaning establishment shall comply with all
applicable provisions of this Code.
Section 14-605 Sanitation. The premises used for laundries, laundromats, dry cleaning
establishments or automatic dry cleaners must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No refuse
OTHER BUSINESSES
16 REVISED 10/05/09
of any kind shall be permitted to accumulate on such premises and the premises must be kept free
from rats, mice and vermin.
Section 14-606 Installation of Automatic Dry Cleaning Machines. The installation of
automatic dry cleaning machines shall conform with the following regulations:
a. Each machine shall be completely enclosed by a cabinet and shall be vented with intake at
the top and the outlet at or near the bottom of each machine. Groups of machines may be
entirely enclosed or supported on all open sides by an enclosure topped with a hood vented
as provided for each individual machine.
b. The exhaust system must maintain a minimum flow of 100 cubic feet per minute face
velocity through the loading door whenever the door is open.
c. The discharge stack for the machines and for the room in which the machines are located
shall extend at least two feet above the level of any window which can be opened located
within 50 feet of the outlet of the stack, and be at least 50 feet away from any fresh intake
leading to any premises.
d. The machines must be constructed so as to prevent the loading door from being opened
during the normal cycle of operation. Each machine shall be equipped with a transparent
door or port to allow visual examination of the status of the cleaning cycle.
e. Any connection of a machine with the water supply system must be equipped with an air
gap or vacuum breaker in the line upstream from the condenser, with no control valves
downstream from the gap or breaker. Wastewater shall be discharged through an air gap.
f. The room in which the machine is installed shall be ventilated so that there shall be a
minimum flow of air per machine from the area to which the public is admitted of at least
500 cubic feet per minute in a room where there are no more than three machines installed;
400 cubic feet per minute where there are no more than eight machines installed; 375 cubic
feet per minute where there are no more than 16 machines installed; and 360 cubic feet per
minute where there are no more than 17 machines installed. For this purpose, each cleaning
cell shall be considered as one machine.
g. Each machine must be designated and constructed so as to prevent the leakage of liquids,
gas or vapors.
Section 14-607 Ventilation Requirements. No laundry or laundromat shall be conducted or
operated in any room or place in which the clear height between the ceiling and the finished floor
is less than ten feet, or which is not ventilated in accordance with the building provisions of this
Code.
Every room in any laundry or laundromat in which the temperature and humidity might endanger
the health of the persons employed there shall be provided with a mechanical ventilating system
approved by the Director of Health Services and Director of Building.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
17 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 14-608 Plumbing and Drainage Facilities. Every laundry shall be provided with
adequate sanitary plumbing and drainage facilities, and the installation of all drains and plumbing
fixtures shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Code at the time they are installed.
Every watercloset, sink, coin-operated washing machine, or other plumbing fixture installed
therein shall be impermeable, thoroughly sanitary and of an approved type as specified in the
plumbing regulations of this Code.
Section 14-609 Lavatory Facilities. Every laundry shall be provided with sufficient and suitable
lavatory facilities, including approved wash bowls, wash basins or sinks, supplied with hot and
cold running water, soap, clean individual towels and other equipment deemed necessary for the
health and comfort of patrons and the persons employed there.
Section 14-610 Emission of Vapors. Vapors, smoke or odors emanating from any laundry shall
not be permitted at any time to become a nuisance to any portion of the premises in which such
laundry is located, nor to any adjoining or nearby premises.
Section 14-611 Excessive Heat. Every machine or mechanical device in any laundry which is
operated by an employee and which emits excessive heat shall be equipped with proper heat
deflectors, hood and exhaust, or other apparatus that will carry the heat from the room or place in
which it is located.
Section 14-612 Separation of Laundered and Unlaundered Articles. Every person conducting
or operating any laundry shall be required to provide proper facilities and equipment for the
separate handling of clean and soiled articles. No clean or laundered articles shall be allowed to
come in contact with any unlaundered or soiled articles of any kind at any time.
Section 14-613 Sterilization of Articles. No person conducting or operating any laundry in
which wearing apparel, household linens, towels, bedding or any other fabrics are received and
treated through the process of washing, shall remove, or cause to be removed, from such premises,
any laundered article until the same has been thoroughly sterilized either by keeping it in the
washing machine, vat or other vessel provided for that purpose in which the water therein has been
brought to a boiling temperature or maintained at a temperature of 175 degrees Fahrenheit for at
least 20 minutes; or by subjecting it to live steam under pressure; or by keeping it in a drying
house, or drying tumbler, in which the temperature is not less than 215 degrees Fahrenheit for a
period of not less than 15 minutes; or by passing it through any ironing machine where the ironing
surface is at a temperature of not less than 225 degrees Fahrenheit; except in the case of silks,
woolens or other fabrics which would be injured by the foregoing processes, in which event the
same shall be treated with soap, bleach or such other standard disinfectant solutions as shall be
approved by the Director of Health Services.
Section 14-614 Sprinkling Restrictions. No owner, proprietor or manager of any laundry, or
any person employed there, shall be permitted to sprinkle any fabric with any liquid substance
ejected from the mouth, or blown out of any other device coming in contact with the mouth of that
person.
Section 14-615 Exemption. The provisions of this Article relating to laundries and laundromats
shall not apply to any person engaged in doing custom laundry work at his or her home for a
OTHER BUSINESSES
18 REVISED 10/05/09
regular trade, nor to any room or portion thereof, located in a tenement house or other dwelling
in which domestic laundry work is done by or for the occupants of such building exclusively.
Section 14-616 Inspection. The Director of Building shall inspect or cause to be inspected as
often as deemed necessary every laundry, laundromat, dry cleaning establishment and automatic
dry cleaner to determine whether all applicable provisions of this Code are being complied with.
Ord. #09-038)
Article VII Day Care Centers
Section 14-701 State Standards Adopted. The " State of Illinois, Licensing Standards for Day
Care Centers," are adopted as regulations for day care centers located in the Village.
Section 14-702 Definitions. For purposes of this Article, the following words or terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
a. Applicant or Licensee. The corporate body or individual who files an application for a day
care center and who is responsible for the operation and maintenance of the day care center
in accordance with the provisions provided in this Article.
b. Day Care Center. Any institution or place in which are received three or more children,
not of common parentage, apart from their parents or guardian, under the age of six years,
for care during part or all of a day or night, as well as similar units operating under any
other name whatsoever with or without stated educational purposes.
This definition does not include " Group Care Home", " Group Day Care Home", " Foster
Family Home", "Centers for Mentally Retarded" licensed by the State of Illinois, bona fide
kindergartens or " Day Nursery Schools", established in connection with grade schools
supervised or operated by a private or public Board of Education or approved by the State
Department of Public Instruction. The definition includes baby- sitting services in
conjunction with bowling alleys, exercise establishments and such places of business.
c. Director. The person or persons under whose management or supervision the day care
center shall be conducted.
d. Owner. In the case of an individual licensee, it means licensee; in the case of a partnership,
it means each member thereof; and in the case of a corporation, firm or association, it
means the officers thereof.
Section 14-703 License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the regularly
constituted authorities of the United States, the State, the county, or the Village, to conduct or
operate any day care center within the Village without having first obtained a license therefor.
Ord. #09-038)
Section 14-704 Application. An application for a license to conduct and operate a day care
center shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to
applications for licenses. A copy of a valid license issued by the State of Illinois shall be provided
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
19 REVISED 10/05/09
to the Village upon its receipt by the day care center operator. The application shall also contain
the following information:
a. The name, date of birth and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case
of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; and in the case of a
corporation, for profit, or a club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was
organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority interest
of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his or her nominee, the name
and address of such person.
b. The applicant' s current occupation/ employment, business address and telephone number.
c. Any previous arrests or convictions of the applicant for violation( s) of any State Statutes
or local ordinances.
d. The applicant's previous residences for the past five years.
Ord. #09-038)
e. Other identification material for its principal officers and agents to facilitate investigation
by the Police Chief.
f. The location of the day care center for which a license is sought.
g. The number of children to be cared for.
h. The name of the person or persons under whose management or supervision the day care
center will be conducted. The applicant shall notify the Village in writing of a change in
management.
Section 14-705 Fee Exemption. Day care centers which are operated without a charge being
made for the care of children shall be exempt from payment of the license fee. Application for a
license for such a day care center shall be accompanied by an affidavit stating that no charge is
made for the care of the children. After appropriate investigation, any day care center that is not
operated for gain, but where a charge is made for the care of children, shall be exempt from
payment of the license fee for the duration of the license period. All day care centers claiming to
qualify for an exemption pursuant to this provision must provide proof of not- for-profit status from
the State of Illinois.
Section 14-706 Display of License - Transfer. The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous
place near the main entrance inside the day care center. A license shall be valid only in the hands
of the person to whom it is issued and it shall not be subject to sale, assignment or transfer, whether
voluntary or involuntary, nor shall a license be valid for any premises other than those for which
originally issued.
Section 14-707 Denial of License - Revocation of License. A license may be denied or revoked
for any of the following reasons:
a. Violation of any provisions of this Article;
OTHER BUSINESSES
20 REVISED 10/05/09
b. Personnel insufficient in number or unqualified by training or experience to provide proper
and adequate supervision for the number of children to be cared for;
c. Cruelty or indifference to the welfare of a child;
Ord. #09-038)
d. Conviction of the licensee, or if the applicant is a firm, partnership or association of any of
its members, or if a corporation, any of its officers or directors or of the person designated
as director of the day care center, of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude
as shown by a record of conviction;
e. In the case of a conviction of a misdemeanor by a court not of record, as shown by other
evidence; or other satisfactory evidence that the moral character of the applicant or director
of the day care center is not reputable;
f. Misappropriation of the property of a child;
g. Denial or revocation of State day care center license;
h. Any ground upon which an application for a license may be denied.
Section 14-708 Rules and Regulations. The premises and facilities used as a day care center
shall comply with the building, zoning, fire, health, and sanitation regulations of this Code.
Section 14-709 Inspection.
a. The Director of Building shall inspect or cause to be inspected as often as deemed
necessary, every day care center to determine whether all applicable provisions of this
Code are being complied with. Whenever an inspection of a day care center discloses that
the continued operation of the day care center would be an immediate and serious menace
to public health and safety, the Village Manager is hereby authorized to close such day
care center.
b. When the Village has reasonable cause to suspect the possibility of disease transmission
from any day care center employee, it shall secure a morbidity history of the suspected
employee or make any other investigation as may be indicated, and take appropriate action.
Any or all of the following may be required:
1. Immediate exclusion of the employee from any activities;
2. Immediate closure of the day care center until, in the opinion of the Village, no
other danger of disease outbreak exists;
3. Restriction of the employee' s services to some area of the establishment where there
will be no danger of transmitting disease.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
14-21 REVISED 09/03/19
Article VIII Day Care Homes
Ord. #19-030)
Section 14-801 Definition. A Day Care Home means a family home which receives more than
three up to a maximum of 12 children for less than 24 hours per day. The number counted includes
the family's natural or adopted children and all other persons under the age of 12. The term does
not include facilities which receive only children from a single household.
Section 14-802 License Required. No person shall conduct or operate a day care home without
having first obtained a license from the State of Illinois, pursuant to the provisions of the Child
Care Act of 1969 and a license from the Village.
Section 14-803 Application.
a. Any person desiring to conduct or operate a day care home shall apply for a license to the
Director of Building. The application shall be in writing, with the full name and address
of the applicant and the place where the day care home is to be operated. It shall be
accompanied by a copy of a valid license issued by the State of Illinois.
b. The applicant shall certify on the application that the applicant has established and will
maintain at all times the standards provided for in the Illinois Child Care Act of 1969, as
amended; that the Village may inspect the child day care home at any reasonable time; and
that the applicant will install smoke detectors within the home at all locations designated
by the Arlington Heights Fire Department.
Section 14-804 Notification of Surrounding Property Owners. Upon receipt of an application
for a license for a day care home, the applicant shall be required to notify the owners of the property
contiguous to the applicant' s home, which shall include property to the front, both sides and rear,
and the property abutting those properties if any point is contiguous to the property of the applicant.
The neighbor fronting on the streets directly across from the subject property shall also be notified.
Notification may be by one of two methods at the election of the applicant: a form letter furnished
by the Village and completed by the applicant may be sent by certified mail, advising surrounding
owners that a license will be issued 15 days after the date of notice if no written objection is
received by that date; or the applicant may present a form letter furnished by the Village, with the
signature of each surrounding owner acknowledging receipt of such notice by a personal visit from
the applicant.
In the event a written objection is received, the Village Manager shall conduct an administrative
hearing with written notice of the time and place of the hearing no less than ten days nor more than
30 days after receipt of the written objection. Notice of the administrative hearing will be sent by
certified mail to the applicant and all surrounding owners. At the hearing the complainant shall
show cause why the proposed operation of a day care home should not be permitted and why the
license should not be issued. The license shall be denied only upon showing by the objector that
the operation would violate a Village Ordinance or State Statute, would constitute a nuisance or
would substantially change the character of the neighborhood. Any party who received notice of
the hearing will be afforded an opportunity to be heard. A written record of the hearing will be
made and the decision of the Village Manager forwarded with the written record to the Board of
OTHER BUSINESSES
14-22 REVISED 10/05/09
Trustees and all the parties within ten days after the hearing. Any party who received notice of
the hearing may appeal the decision of the Village Manager to the Board of Trustees within 30
days of the date of the decision; otherwise the decision of the Village Manager will be final. All
decisions by the Board of Trustees on appeals will be final.
Section 14-805 Issuance of License and Notice. The Village Manager shall issue a license for
a day care home upon compliance with the following:
a. Verification of the validity of the applicant' s State of Illinois license;
b. Inspection by the Fire Department for verification that the required smoke detectors have
been installed and for compliance with all fire regulations;
c. Notification of surrounding property owners and favorable completion of the hearing
procedure, if required;
d. Payment of the appropriate license fee.
Section 14-806 Renewal. Each day care home license shall be renewed annually as of January
1. The requirements for renewal are:
a. Verification of the validity of the applicant's State of Illinois license;
b. Inspection by the Fire Department and compliance with all fire regulations;
c. Payment of the appropriate license fee.
Section 14-807 Revocation of License. If, at any time after the granting of the license required
by this Article, the licensee fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Code, or a complaint
is received that the conduct of the day care home constitutes a nuisance, a public hearing shall be
scheduled after written notice as provided in Section 14-804, Notification of Surrounding Property
Owners, above, at which the complainant shall show cause why the license should be revoked.
Written notice and a record of the hearing and the appeal procedure shall be the same as provided
for in Section 14-804 above.
Ord. #09-038)
Article IX Machine Shops
Section 14-901 Definition. Machine shop, when used in this Article, shall mean a workshop in
which a machine shop business is conducted and in which machines are made or metal parts thereof
are repaired for the public, or in which parts of machines, or tools, implements, gears, dies, screws
or other metal articles are cut, filed, shaped, punched, stamped or repaired by means of a lathe or
other machinery for the public.
Section 14-902 License Required. No person shall conduct or operate a machine shop within
the Village without first having obtained a license therefor, unless the machine shop is specifically
licensed under other provisions of this Code.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
23 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 14-903 Application. An application for a license shall be made in conformance with the
general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. The application shall also
state the number of employees or other persons engaged or to be engaged in the machine shop.
Section 14-904 Location. No machine shop shall be conducted or operated on any lot or plot of
ground any portion of which is within 200 feet of any lot occupied by a public or parochial school,
hospital or church.
Section 14-905 Operation at Night. No machine shop shall be operated in the night time between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in any block in which a majority of the buildings on both
sides of the street are used exclusively for residential purposes, or within 100 feet of such block,
and it shall be within the power of the Director of Health Services, after reasonable notice, to treat
such night operation as a public nuisance and to abate the same.
Section 14-906 Sanitary and Health Requirements. No building, structure or part thereof used
for or in connection with any machine shop shall be used so as to endanger the health or property
of the employees or of the public. Machine shops shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
a. The owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or manager of any such machine shop shall cause all
floors and other surfaces around or beneath any machine or work bench to be kept in good
order and repair and shall have suitable and convenient sanitary receptacles for receiving
waste and cloths used in and about the machine shop for the purpose of cleaning machines
or parts thereof or which are intended for any other necessary use. The owner, lessee,
tenant, occupant, or manager shall not permit any steel cuttings or machine parts to
accumulate on or about any machine or work bench so as to become detrimental to the
health or safety of any person therein engaged.
b. The Director of Health Services shall visit or cause to be visited all such machine shops
within the Village as often as deemed necessary to ascertain whether the regulations
governing machine shops are complied with, and to analyze any cutting compound used in
connection with the machine shop work where any cutting compound is to be re-used. If,
upon such analysis, the Director of Health Services finds that the cutting fluid is in any
way contaminated, and as a result of such contamination may infect any employee of the
machine shop, the Director of Health Services shall immediately take the necessary steps
to prevent the further use of such cutting compound or fluid or order a proper treatment to
eliminate from such cutting fluid or compound any further danger of contamination to
employees.
c. In every machine shop where the employees are permitted to eat on the premises, a suitable
place shall be provided for that purpose, and every place provided shall be kept thoroughly
clean and proper receptacles shall be furnished for the collection of refuse.
d. It shall be the duty of the Director of Health Services to cause an inspection to be made of
the premises used for machine shop purposes and all buildings used in connection
therewith as often as may be necessary to abate or cause to be removed any violation.
OTHER BUSINESSES
24 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 14-907 Noise. It shall be unlawful to operate a machine shop where pneumatic hammers
or other apparatus are used which cause loud or unusual noises, within 200 feet of any residence.
Ord. #09-038)
Article X Nursing Homes
Section 14-1001 Definition. Nursing home, when used in this Article, shall mean any institution,
place or residence used for the reception or care, for a longer period than 24 hours of three or more
children or infants apart from their parents; or any institution used for the reception or care of
persons who are dependent or not capable of properly caring for themselves, and shall include
homes for the aged or infirm, orphan asylums, refuges and shelters, and boarding homes caring for
three or more women and their children when the children are less than 14 years of age.
Section 14-1002 License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the regularly
constituted authorities of the United States, the county, the Village or the State of Illinois, or any
association or institution for the care of children which has been accredited, certified or licensed
by the State of Illinois pursuant to an act of the legislature, to regulate the treatment and control of
dependent, neglected and delinquent children, to open, conduct, manage or maintain any nursing
home, as defined in this Article, within the Village, without first having obtained a license therefor.
Section 14-1003 Application. An application for a license to conduct and operate a nursing home
shall be made in conformance with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications
for licenses. The application shall state the location or proposed location of the nursing home, the
purpose for which it is to be opened, conducted or maintained, the accommodations for the
residents, the nature and kind of care, instruction or benefits given or proposed to be given therein,
the name and address of the officials and/ or board of officials conducting, managing or maintaining
the nursing home, the name of the superintendent or person in charge of the nursing home, the
name and address of the chief physician, surgeon or attending physician or surgeon, or the names
and addresses of the board of physicians or surgeons attending therein if there is such a board.
Section 14-1004 General Regulations. In addition to the regulations herein set forth, each
nursing home shall comply with at least the minimum requirements established by the Department
of Public Health pursuant to the Nursing Home Care Act, as the minimum requirements may be
amended from time to time and in effect.
Section 14-1005 Inspections. The Director of Building shall inspect or cause to be inspected as
often as deemed necessary every nursing home in the Village to determine if it is in compliance
with all applicable provisions of this Code.
Section 14-1006 Penalty. In the event of a conviction of any person for a violation of any of the
provisions of this Article relating to the safety and accommodations of residents, the Village
Manager is hereby authorized and empowered to close such nursing home and to cause the
vacation pending the repairs, alterations or additions necessary to make it safe and proper for the
occupancy of its residents and to make it comply with the terms of this Article.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
25
Article XI Bill Posting and Sign Painting
Section 14-1101 Definition. Bill poster and sign painter, when used in this Article, shall mean
any person engaged in the business or occupation of posting by tacking, pasting, painting,
demonstrating or otherwise distributing upon the public ways any advertising matter, bills, posters,
pictures or any other matter or device whatever which advertises the business of any person,
whether that of merchant, manufacturer, publisher or person engaged in any business or industrial
pursuit, or any operas, theaters, shows, circuses or other exhibitions, excepting those intended for
charitable purposes; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be considered to apply
to the painting of a store or office sign by sign painters, or to posting of legal notices by public
officers or attorneys in the manner and in the places prescribed by law, or to persons who are in
the business of distributing circulars, handbills or business cards by placing them inside of the
doors of dwellings or buildings within the Village.
Section 14-1102 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of billposting or sign
painting in the Village without first having obtained a license therefor. No license issued under
this Article shall, however, be construed as permitting the use for advertising purposes of any
structures, natural or artificial, which are located in any public street, alley or other public place.
Section 14-1103 Application. An application for a license shall be made in conformity with the
general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. The application shall also
state the place or places, including billboards or natural structures, on which the applicant intends
to place advertisements.
Section 14-1104 Obscene Pictures. No person engaging in the business of bill posting or sign
painting shall post or cause to be posted any advertisement containing pictures or illustrations of
an obscene character.
Section 14-1105 Use of Poster Panels. No person shall post or maintain any advertisement or
sign on any poster panel, billboard or signboard which does not fully comply with the applicable
provisions of this Code.
Section 14-1106 Consent of Owner. It shall be unlawful to post any advertisements on any
premises in the Village without the consent of the owner of such premises. Such consent must be
in writing.
Section 14-1107 Refuse. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in bill posting or sign
painting to permit any refuse resulting from this work to accumulate anywhere in the Village, and
it shall be the duty of such person to cart away and properly dispose of any such refuse. It shall
be unlawful to permit any loose, flapping or combustible materials to hang from or be attached to
any automobile, billboard, or signboard or other place used for advertising purposes. All refuse
resulting from the operation of this business must be carefully gathered up and disposed of
properly.
Section 14-1108 Weeds and Materials at Base of Billboards. It shall be the duty of every bill
poster or sign painter to keep all grass, weeds and other growths, except trees and ornamental
shrubbery, cut down so that the same shall not grow to a height greater than 12 inches within six
OTHER BUSINESSES
26 REVISED 10/05/09
feet of any billboard or signboard used by him; provided that this obligation shall extend only to
property controlled by the bill poster or sign painter.
Section 14-1109 Disfiguring Signs. It shall be unlawful to mutilate or disfigure in any way any
lawful sign or advertisements in the Village.
Section 14-1110 Identification. It shall be unlawful for any bill poster or sign painter to engage
in that business unless his or her name is attached, displayed or printed on all billboards, signboards
or advertisement he or she uses, in lettering so as to be visible from a distance of at least five feet
from the billboard, sign board or advertisement.
Section 14-1111 Inspection. The Director of Building shall inspect or cause to be inspected as
often as deemed necessary the activities of every bill poster or sign painter in the Village to
determine whether all applicable provisions of this Code are being complied with.
Section 14-1112 Construction of Article. Nothing in this Article shall be considered as limiting
any provision of Chapter 30, Sign Regulations, of this Code.
Ord. #09-038)
Article XII Solid Waste Contractors
Section 14-1201 Definitions. The following words and terms shall have the meanings indicated:
a. Solid waste contractor. Any person engaged in the removal and disposal of garbage,
refuse, recyclable material, landscape waste and white goods. It shall also include any
person engaged in the above- described business and activities, whether such service is
provided for homeowners or commercial, business and industrial establishments.
b. Sewer and catch-basin cleaner. Any person engaging in the business of cleaning, collecting
or transporting the contents of catch basins or sewers or kindred refuse by vehicle or
otherwise, or in any manner engaging in the business of cleaning catch basins and sewers;
provided, however, that licensed plumbers or licensed sewer builders who may clean catch
basins or sewers as an incident to the repair of such catch basins or sewers shall not be
required to obtain a license hereunder.
Section 14-1202 License Required.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of removal of solid waste
without first having obtained a license thereto.
b. Only one residential solid waste contractor license shall be issued for the purpose of
performing solid waste collection from single- family residential property; that to the
person awarded the contract with the Village.
c. There is no limitation on the number of licenses issued for servicing commercial facilities
and multiple- family residences of four or more units. A license for this purpose will be
issued to each qualified applicant who presents evidence that he or she has adequate and
proper equipment and approved disposal facilities.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
27 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 14-1203 Application. An application for a license hereunder shall be made in
conformance with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. The
application shall also state the number of vehicles used in the applicant's business.
Section 14-1204 General Regulations.
a. Any person licensed under this Article shall comply strictly with the regulations of Chapter
19. Article II, Health and Sanitation – Nuisances, of this Code, relating to solid waste, as
well as all other applicable provisions of this Code relating to health and sanitation.
b. Persons holding a commercial solid waste contractor license shall complete a written
service agreement with each customer or premises serviced to include, at a minimum, the
name of the customer, address, frequency of service and size of container provided.
Section 14-1205 Other Requirements. It shall be the duty of every licensee hereunder who has
undertaken to remove any solid waste, to do the same with dispatch and in every particular in a
manner as cleanly and free from offense and with as little damage and prejudice to life and health
as possible.
Section 14-1206 Inspection. The Director of Building shall inspect or cause to be inspected as
often as deemed necessary, the vehicles and methods of doing business utilized by each licensee
hereunder to determine whether there is compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code.
Section 14-1207 Provision of Recycling Services Required.
a. As a condition of receiving, maintaining, and renewing a solid waste contractor' s license
within the Village, each licensee serving a multi-family property shall establish and
maintain the capability of providing recycling collection services to multi- family
properties in the Village, either directly or pursuant to a subcontract with a licensed solid
waste contractor as required by applicable provisions of the Code. Solid waste contractors
not serving multi-family properties shall be exempt from this requirement.
b. A license certification form shall be submitted to the Village in conjunction with an
application for the issuance or renewal of a solid waste contractor' s license. The format of
the form shall be as prescribed by the Village for the purpose of obtaining information
reasonably necessary to determine the applicant' s capabilities to perform the required
recycling collection services. The Village shall review the information, and may inspect
the applicant' s processing facilities to determine such capabilities. Approval of the form
shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of the license.
c. Each licensee serving a multi-family property and providing recycling collection services,
shall sign an annual affidavit form provided by the Village. The affidavit shall indicate
that the recyclable materials are not being land filled, incinerated or otherwise destroyed
by the licensee or by any other entity purchasing or receiving the recyclable materials
collected at multi-family properties located within the Village. Furthermore, the affidavit
shall indicate that the recyclable materials have been taken to a recycler of that commodity.
OTHER BUSINESSES
28 REVISED 10/05/09
2
Section 14-1208 Industrial or Commercial Recycling. All scavengers licensed by the Village
to service industrial or commercial properties in the Village shall, as part of their licensing
requirements, offer a recycling program to their customers on an annual basis. At a minimum, the
recycling program offered shall include the following: office paper, cardboard and glass and
aluminum containers. The scavenger shall process, store and market all of the recyclable materials
collected to an end-user, and shall not landfill or incinerate any of the recyclable materials.
The scavenger shall also be required to deliver to each customer, information on the type of
program they offer and the items they include for recycling. All promotional materials must be
approved by the Village Health Services Department. Customers shall be kept informed, on an
annual basis, of any additional recyclable items offered.
The licensed scavenger shall furnish annual totals to the Village, for the purpose of monitoring
compliance with this Section, indicating the number of customers participating in the recycling
program and the amount of materials recycled, estimated in weight or volume.
The scavenger may, as an option, contract with a secondary scavenger licensed with the Village to
administer the industrial or commercial recycling program. The licensed scavenger shall be
responsible for furnishing, maintaining and replacing all recycling containers and vehicles deemed
necessary in the recycling program.
Section 14-1209 Penalty. Any scavenger business violating any of the provisions of Section 14-
1208, Industrial or Commercial Recycling, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $ 50 nor more
than $750 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
which a violation occurs or continues to exist. In addition to any fines, the Village may enjoin the
operation of any scavenger business being conducted in violation of Section 14-1208 or proceed
to revoke the license.
Article XIII Public Passenger Vehicles
Section 14-1301 Intent and Purpose.
a. To encourage the best possible public passenger vehicle service under a competitive
system with regulation only to the extent necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the
citizens.
b. To assure that any and all legitimate, locally based public passenger vehicles businesses
are allowed to operate as many vehicles as are economically feasible by placing no limit
on the number of vehicles operated by each business.
c. To assure that public passenger vehicles licensed by the Village are clean, comfortable and
safe.
d. To assure that public passenger vehicle operations are reputable, capable and safe.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
29
e. To assure that only bona fide public passenger vehicles licensed by the Village are
permitted to offer their services on the streets, at taxicab stands, at residences and at places
of business in the Village.
In order to accomplish the purposes listed above, the Village requires a business license, a local
Village license for each public passenger vehicle and a local Village operator's license for each
driver. The intent of these regulations is to protect each driver and consumer interests by providing
for periodic inspections of vehicles to maintain mechanical dependability and setting minimum
requirements for competent operators.
Section 14-1302 Definitions. For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings set forth below:
a. Dispatch Office. A central place of business for the purpose of receiving calls and
dispatching vehicles.
b. Inspection Station. A facility designated by the Police Chief to conduct inspections
required by this Article.
c. Licensee. Licensee shall mean any person who is the owner of one or more licenses issued
pursuant to this Article.
d. Livery Vehicle. Any public passenger vehicle transporting passengers for hire, as a result
of individual contract, on a trip or hourly basis fixed in advance.
e. Person. Any natural person, corporation, partnership, unincorporated association or other
legal entity.
f. Public Passenger Vehicles. Taxicabs and livery vehicles used for transportation of
passengers for hire.
g. Public Passenger Vehicle Chauffeur. Any person who drives a public passenger vehicle
in use for the transportation of persons for compensation.
h. Public Passenger Vehicle Company. Any person engaged in business as proprietor of one
or more public passenger vehicles for transportation of passengers for hire.
i. Public Passenger Vehicle Owner. Any person owning or leasing from another, a public
passenger vehicle for hire.
j. Taxicab. Any motor-propelled vehicle equipped with a taximeter and operated for
transportation of passengers for hire, available indiscriminately to all persons as may offer
themselves for transportation.
k. Taxicab Stand. Any place, public or private, where taxicabs are placed on display and
presented for hire to prospective customers, accepting such persons as may offer
OTHER BUSINESSES
30
themselves for transportation. Examples of taxicab stands are: railroad stations, hotels,
motels, bowling alleys, theaters, race tracks and any prominent gathering place.
l. Taximeter. Any mechanical or electronic device attached to a taxicab which records and
indicates a charge or fare in dollars and cents measured by distance and waiting time.
m. Waiting time. The time when the taxicab is not in motion, beginning with the arrival at
the place to which it has been called, or the time consumed while standing at the direction
of the passenger, but no charge shall be made for the time lost on account of inefficiency
of the taxicab, or its operator, or time consumed by a premature response to a call.
Section 14-1303 Business License
a. No public passenger vehicle company shall maintain a place of business, including a
dispatch office, in the Village without first having obtained a business license.
Ord. #04-077, # 06-078)
b. Application. The business license application, accompanied by a non- returnable fee of
40, will contain the same information required by the Village for all businesses, and be
accompanied by a letter providing all of the following additional information, as
applicable, if not on the standard application form:
1. The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case
of a partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; and in the case
of a corporation, for profit, or a club, the state and date of incorporation, the objects
for which it was organized, names and addresses of the officers and directors, and
shareholders, and the percentage of ownership of each. Corporations whose stock
is traded publicly and listed on recognized stock exchanges shall be required to
identify only a holder of a majority of the outstanding shares of the corporation;
2. The citizenship of the applicant, if a natural person; the place of applicant's birth;
and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of naturalization;
3. Current occupation/ employment, business address and telephone number;
4. Educational background.
5. Previous employment history;
6. Previous military history ( if any) and type of discharge;
7. Current financial status, including any unpaid judgments and pertinent information
relative to any such judgments;
8. Any previous convictions of felony and/or traffic violations;
9. Previous residences for past five years;
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
31
10. The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant and the
location of proposed depots and terminals;
11. The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the
applicant, which color scheme and insignia, shall be readily distinguishable from
that of emergency vehicles and vehicles of previously licensed public passenger
vehicle companies;
12. Such further information as may be required by the Village Manager.
c. Insurance. Applicants for a license or renewal of a license to operate a public passenger
vehicle company in the municipality shall produce:
1. a certificate from the Secretary of State showing compliance by the owner for each
public passenger vehicle with the provisions of the Statutes of the State relating to
the bonding or insurance of motor vehicles used for carriage of passengers for hire;
and
2. a policy of insurance or certificate of insurance showing that there is in full force
and effect a policy of insurance including coverage for personal injuries in the
amount of not less than $ 100, 000 per person/$ 300,000 one accident and not less
than $50,000 for property damage, which shall provide that the coverage may not
be canceled or materially changed without 30 days written notice to the Village
Clerk. If any insurance is canceled or permitted to lapse for any reason, the Village
Manager shall suspend the licenses for the vehicles affected for a period of not to
exceed 30 days, to permit other insurance to be supplied in compliance with the
provisions of this Section. If such other insurance is not supplied with the period
of suspension of the license, the Village Manager shall revoke the license for such
vehicles.
d. Issuance. If the Village Manager finds that the applicant conforms to the provisions of this
Article, and that the application and background investigation reveal nothing of a nature
that might endanger the health, safety and welfare of the general public as a result of the
applicant's possession of a license, then the Village Manager shall issue a business license
upon receipt of the first year' s license fee.
e. Non- transferable. No business license may be sold, assigned, mortgaged, pledged or
otherwise transferred.
f. Suspension or Revocation. The business license may be suspended or revoked by the
Village Manager if the licensee has:
1. Failed to keep in force the insurance required by this Section;
2. Discontinued operations in the Village for more than 30 days; or
OTHER BUSINESSES
32
3. Violated any ordinances of the Village or the laws of the United States of America
or the State of Illinois, related to the fitness of the licensee to offer public
transportation.
At least 30 days prior to suspension or revocation, the licensee shall be given written notice
of the proposed action, and shall have an opportunity to be heard by the Village Manager
during such period.
g. Appeal. Any applicant who has been denied a license or any licensee whose license is
suspended or revoked by the Village Manager shall have an opportunity for hearing in the
manner provided by Sections 9-107, Approval; Disapproval and 9-403, Revocation of
Licenses, Suspension of Licenses, Notice and Hearings, of this Code.
h. Change in Stock Ownership.
1. A corporation holding a public passenger business license shall advise the Village
Manager 30 days prior to any contemplated change of stock ownership involving
5% or more of the stock of the corporation.
2. Each individual seeking to acquire5% or more of the stock of a corporation holding
a public passenger vehicle license shall comply with the provisions of this Section
as though he or she were applying for a license as an individual.
3. The provisions of this paragraph do not apply to corporations whose stock is traded
publicly and listed on recognized stock exchanges.
Section 14-1304 Operation of Business.
a. Regular Telephone Service Required. Every public passenger vehicle business licensee
shall keep in service at all times while the license is in effect, regular telephone service
within the Village by means of which a person desiring to hire a public passenger vehicle
may call the licensee. The licensee shall cause the telephone number to be listed in the
local and regional telephone directories which are published for the Municipality by the
telephone company which furnishes local telephone service in the Municipality.
b. Public Passenger Service. Each public passenger vehicle business licensee shall operate
every public passenger vehicle regularly in the Village to the extent reasonably necessary
to meet the public demands for passenger service. They shall maintain in the Village a
central place of business for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching vehicles. They
shall answer all calls received by them for service inside the corporate limits of the
Municipality as soon as they can do so and if service cannot be rendered within a
reasonable time, they shall notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the
call can be answered and give the reason therefor. Any licensee who shall refuse to accept
a call anywhere within the corporate limits of the Municipality at any time when such
licensee has available vehicles, or who shall fail to refuse to give over- all service, shall be
deemed in violation of this Article.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
33 REVISED 10/07/96
Section 14-1305 Public Passenger Vehicle License.
a. Required. It shall be unlawful to operate a public passenger vehicle for hire within the
corporate limits of the Village unless the vehicle is licensed by the Village or another
municipality which cooperates with the Village and is operated, in accordance with the
provisions of this Article.
b. Application. Applications for public passenger vehicle licenses shall be made by the owner
upon forms furnished by the Village. Such applications shall contain the full name and
address of the owner of the vehicle, and in the case of a corporation or partnership, the
names and addresses of the officers or partners; a complete description of the vehicle,
including make and model, vehicle identification number, manufacturer's identification
number, seating capacity ( excluding driver' s seat or any part thereof), a State license
number, color of vehicle, vehicle engine horsepower and such other data as the Village
may require to assure compliance with the requirements of this Article.
c. Insurance. The application for a public passenger vehicle license shall be accompanied by
evidence of the liability insurance required in Section 14-1303(c), Business License -
Insurance.
d. Inspection. The vehicle for which a license application is made shall be inspected as
provided in Section 14-1307, Inspection Stations.
e. Issuance. The Village Clerk shall issue a public passenger vehicle license after the vehicle
has passed the inspection and the license fee has been paid.
Ord. #96-058)
f. Display Required. The number vehicle license decal shall be affixed to the certified
inspection plate, which shall be visibly displayed in the lower left hand corner of the rear
window of the public passenger vehicle.
g. Non- transferable. It shall be unlawful to transfer any public passenger vehicle license from
one vehicle to another. Transferring any public passenger vehicle license shall be grounds
for revocation of all licenses issued pursuant to this Article ( business license, vehicle
licenses and chauffeur licenses) to both the owner of the license and the vehicle to which
the license is transferred.
Section 14-1306 Inspection. The Police Chief will cause inspection of all licensed public
passenger vehicles to be done three times a year, except those second division vehicles or
limousines displaying a certificate of safety issued pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Code of the State
of Illinois.
a. After receiving a notice from the Police Chief or designee, a public passenger vehicle
company will be allowed seven days to take their licensed public passenger vehicles to an
inspection station for inspection. The license of all public passenger vehicles not inspected
within that period will be suspended by the direction of the Village Manager.
b. Such inspection will include, but need not be limited to, the following:
OTHER BUSINESSES
34 REVISED 10/05/09
1. Vehicle, make, year and vehicle identification number,
2. State license number and year,
3. Village vehicle license number and year,
4. Vehicle color,
5. Vehicle number,
6. Company name,
7. Service brakes,
8. Emergency brakes,
9. Horn,
10. Rear view mirror,
11. Windshield wipers and washers,
12. Headlights,
13. Tail lights,
14. Stop lights,
15. Turn signals,
16. Speedometer,
17. Taximeter,
18. Rates displayed,
19. Steering,
20. Interior condition,
21. Exterior condition,
22. Windows,
23. Tires,
24. Current bond sticker.
c. Any public passenger vehicle failing to pass the inspection will be given a period of five
working days to allow for repairs. The vehicle cannot be used as a public passenger vehicle
for hire until repairs have been completed and it passes reinspection. If the public
passenger vehicle does not pass reinspection within the five working day period, the public
passenger vehicle license will be suspended by direction of the Village Manager.
d. The Police Chief shall prescribe reasonable standards which public passenger vehicles
must satisfy to pass the inspections required prior to licensing and periodically thereafter,
which standards shall be designed to assure that public passenger vehicles licensed by the
Village are mechanically dependable, safe, clean and satisfy the requirements of this
Article.
Ord. #09-038)
Section 14-1307 Inspection Stations.
a. The Police Chief shall designate those facilities which may serve as inspection stations to
conduct the vehicle inspections required by this Article, which stations may be within or
without the Village. The Chief shall establish procedures for conducting the inspections
and minimum standards for a vehicle to be approved. The Chief shall supply inspection
stations with certified inspection forms, numbered certified vehicle inspection stickers and
such other supplies as may be required to perform the duties required by this Article and
the regulations established hereunder. The inspection station shall notify the Police Chief
of any failure to pass the inspection or reinspection.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
35 REVISED 10/05/09
b. A list of authorized inspection stations shall be kept by the Police Chief and shall be given
to each public passenger vehicle owner together with the notice that the vehicles must be
inspected. An owner may use the authorized inspection station of his or her choice.
c. Inspection stations shall charge the inspection fee authorized by the Police Chief for all
public passenger vehicle inspections. There shall be no charge for a reinspection within
the five working days allowed for repairs to a vehicle that fails the inspection. The
authorized inspection fee shall be charged for a reinspection made after the five working
day grace period.
d. The Police Chief shall cause unannounced spot checks of authorized inspection stations to
ensure compliance with the inspection procedures, standards and fees, and shall investigate
all complaints of misconduct by inspection stations or their employees. Noncompliance
with the requirements of this Article or the regulations established by the Chief shall be
cause for suspension or revocation of the designation as an authorized inspection station
in the manner provided by Section 9-403, Revocation of Licenses, Suspension of Licenses,
Notice and Hearings, of this Code.
e. If the Police Chief shall be satisfied that the applicant satisfies the requirements set forth
in subsection ( d) above, and is a fit person to be licensed, such application shall be
approved and the license issued.
f. It shall be unlawful to transfer any public passenger vehicle chauffeur' s license from one
person to another. Transference of such license shall be grounds for revocation.
g. The Village Manager, in his or her discretion, may suspend a public passenger vehicle
chauffeur' s license for a period not to exceed 30 days, for any failure or refusal to comply
with the provisions of this Article; for any violation of Federal, State or municipal law;
upon a determination that a license was obtained fraudulently, that the licensee has become
physically, mentally or emotionally unfit to serve as a public passenger vehicle operator or
that there has been any fraudulent use of the public passenger vehicle chauffeur' s license
by or with the consent of the licensee, in the manner provided by Sections 9-403,
Revocation of Licenses, Suspension of Licenses, Notice and Hearings, of this Code.
Section 14-1308 Miscellaneous Vehicle Regulations.
a. Every licensed taxicab shall bear on both sides of the vehicle, in lettering contrasting with
the color of the vehicle and not less than two inches in height, the name of the cab company
and its telephone number.
b. The identification number assigned to such vehicle by the taxicab company shall appear
on both exterior sides of the vehicle in Arabic numerals a minimum of three inches in
height and in a conspicuous location within the passenger compartment, in numerals four
inches in height.
c. No taxicab shall be painted or labeled so as to be so similar to the vehicles of any other
person licensed and engaged in the business of operating taxicabs in the Village so as to be
OTHER BUSINESSES
36
an imitation thereof and calculated to deceive the patrons of taxicabs into believing that
such vehicles are in reality the taxicabs of such other person. No taxicab shall be painted
so as to be similar to law enforcement vehicles or the vehicles of any other person.
d. If after the inspection and approval of any public passenger vehicle, as provided for in this
Article, such public passenger vehicle shall from any cause become unsafe for the
transportation of passengers or shall become unclean or unsightly in appearance, the
license of such public passenger vehicle shall be suspended by Village Manager until the
public passenger vehicle and all its accessories shall be put in fit condition for public use
and have been approved and inspected as provided in this Article.
Section 14-1309 Chauffeur License.
a. Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any public passenger vehicle for
hire within the Village without first having obtained a valid public passenger vehicle
chauffeur's license.
b. Owner Responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any public
passenger vehicle to employ or permit any person to operate such vehicle for hire within
the Village unless such driver has a valid public passenger vehicle chauffeur's license
issued by the Village.
c. Application. The application for a license as a public passenger vehicle chauffeur shall
contain the name of the applicant; residence and employment history; number and current
status of the applicant’ s Illinois driver' s license; whether the applicant' s State driver' s
license has ever been suspended or revoked and, if so, when and for what cause; a list of
all convictions, if any, for violation of Federal, State or municipal laws; two personal
references, unrelated to the applicant.
d. Qualifications.
1. Every applicant for a public passenger vehicle chauffeur's license shall be at least
18 years of age.
2. The applicant must pass a physical examination by a licensed medical doctor, at his
or her own expense, subject to the examination conditions on the form provided by
the Village. Such certificate sets forth the opinion of the examining physician that
the applicant is physically able to engage in the driving of public passenger vehicles
without risk to the public.
3. The applicant must be the holder of a valid State of Illinois driver' s license.
4. The applicant must not have been convicted of any felony or Class A misdemeanor
within the past five years.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
37 REVISED 12/20/04
5. The applicant must not have had his or her driver's license suspended or revoked in
any state within the past three years as a consequence of violations of law
concerning the operation of a motor vehicle.
Ord. #04-077)
e. Investigation. Upon filing of the application and payment of the $35 fee, the Police Chief
shall make or cause to be made a careful and diligent investigation, including fingerprinting
of applicant. The report of the investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of
the applicant, if any, shall be considered in evaluating the application.
f. Issuance. If the Police Chief shall be satisfied that the applicant satisfies the requirements
set forth in this Section, and is a fit person to be licensed, such application shall be approved
and the license issued.
g. Display. The chauffeur' s license shall be displayed at all times in the public passenger
vehicle in plain view of the passenger.
h. Non- transferable. It shall be unlawful to transfer any public passenger vehicle chauffeur' s
license from one person to another. Transferring a license shall be grounds for revocation.
i. Suspension or Revocation. The Village Manager, in his or her discretion, may suspend a
public passenger vehicle chauffeur' s license for a period not to exceed 30 days, for any
failure or refusal to comply with the provisions of this Article; for any violation of Federal,
State or municipal law; upon a determination that the license was obtained fraudulently,
that the licensee has become physically, mentally or emotionally unfit to perform his duties
as a public passenger vehicle operator, or that there has been any fraudulent use of the
public passenger vehicle chauffeur's license by or with the consent of the licensee, in the
manner provided by Sections 9-403, Revocation of Licenses, Suspension of Licenses,
Notice and Hearings, of this Code.
Section 14-1310 Public Passenger Vehicle Operation.
a. No operator of a public passenger vehicle shall carry more than the rated passenger load
per vehicle.
b. After a public passenger vehicle has been hired by one or more persons traveling together,
the operator shall not pick up other persons without the express permission of the person
or persons first engaging the public passenger vehicle. An appropriate sign shall be posted
indicating the restrictions on shared rides.
c. No driver of a public passenger vehicle shall seek employment by repeatedly or
persistently driving his or her vehicle to and fro in a short space before any theater, hotel,
railway station or other public place or by otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly
access to or egress from any such place.
d. The operator or person in charge or control of any taxicab may demand, in advance, the
payment of the fare of the person desiring to be carried by such taxicab, and may refuse to
convey any person who shall not comply with the demand; but no driver or operator of a
OTHER BUSINESSES
38 REVISED 06/16/08
taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person, upon request,
anywhere in the Village, unless previously engaged or unable to do so.
e. Advertising is restricted to that which may be displayed on a light mounted on top of the
vehicle.
Section 14-1311 Operation of Livery Vehicles.
a. Livery vehicles shall not pick up or solicit passengers for hire from the streets.
b. Livery vehicles shall not park in taxicab stands.
c. Livery vehicles shall not indiscriminately accept passengers, but shall be limited in scope
of operation to carrying passengers for hire on a contract basis at a price agreed upon prior
to employment and by arrangement of the parties at the time of initial telephone contact by
customer to the livery company.
Ord. #98-053, # 08-018)
Section 14-1312 Taxicab Rates. It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a taxicab to
charge, demand or collect rates of compensation in excess of the following:
a. Flag pull $ 2.00
b. For the first mile, or fraction thereof $ 4.00
c. For each additional one- tenth mile, or fraction thereof . 20
For each additional mile $ 2.00
d. For each additional passenger - within Village $ 1.00
e. Waiting time $ 24.00/hr.
f. For a destination beyond the municipalities of Elk Grove Village, Mt. Prospect, Wheeling,
Buffalo Grove, Palatine, Rolling Meadows, Prospect Heights or beyond those portions of
Schaumburg north of Schaumburg Road, the maximum charge is the amount showing on
the meter plus an additional 20%.
50% surcharge beyond the following:
Route 59 on the west
Route 60 on the north
Route 19 on the south
Route 43 on the east
Section 14-1313 Posting Established Rates. There shall be affixed inside each taxicab in a place
conspicuous to any person riding in such taxicab, in a frame covered by glass or other transparent
material, a rate card issued by the Village, upon which card shall be printed in plain, legible type ,
the rates of fare as prescribed by Section 14-1312, Taxicab Rates.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
39 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 14-1314 Taximeters.
a. No taxicab shall operate with passengers for hire unless the taximeter shall be accurately
recording the fare to be charged.
b. A taximeter shall be located so that its face can be seen by a passenger from the rear
compartment of the vehicle.
c. Adequate lighting facilities shall be provided for illuminating the face of the taximeter so
that it may be conveniently read by the passenger whenever the taximeter is in operation.
d. Taximeters shall be equipped with a flag at least three inches by two inches in size, either
painted red or bearing letters at least one- inch in height, the word " Vacant" or the words
For Hire". The flag post of such flag shall be kept towards a vertical position when the
taxicab is for hire and such flag post shall be immediately pulled down and kept in a
horizontal position when such taxicab is engaged.
e. No person controlling or operating any taxicab shall transfer any taximeter to any other
taxicab unless a new inspection and certification of such taximeter is made.
f. No person shall tamper with, break or mutilate any taximeter, cable or seal.
Section 14-1315 Fixing of Rates Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation licensed under the provisions of this Article to conspire among themselves or with
other persons to fix or control rates for taxicab hire within the Village. It is the purpose of this
Article to provide for free and uncontrolled rates, except as to maximum rates set by the Village,
and any scheme, device or other subterfuge employed by any licensee to evade this purpose shall
be deemed to be in violation of this Article and grounds for revocation or suspension.
Section 14-1316 Enforcement. The Building Department shall enforce all provisions of this
Article pertaining to business licenses. The Police Department shall enforce all other provisions
of this Article.
Section 14-1317 Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not to exceed $ 500 or
imprisoned in the Village or County jail not to exceed ten days, or by both fine and imprisonment.
Ord. #09-038)
Article XIV Motor Vehicle Repair, Washing and Storage
Section 14-1401 Definitions. For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings set forth below:
a. Motor Vehicle. All types of self- propelled vehicles operated by gasoline or any kind of
oil, steam, electricity, alcohol or other substance or method that are operated on the public
ways of the Village, otherwise than on rails.
OTHER BUSINESSES
40 REVISED 10/05/09
b. Motor Vehicle Repair Shop. Any building, structure, premises, enclosure or other place in
the Village where the business of repairing motor vehicles or any component part thereof;
or the business of replacing parts or adding parts to motor vehicles; or the business of
polishing, washing by hand, greasing, painting or refinishing motor vehicles, is conducted
or operated.
c. Motor Vehicle Washing Shop. Any building, structure or enclosure in the Village
containing an automatic motor vehicle washing rack where the business of washing motor
vehicles is conducted.
d. Public Garage. Any building, structure, indoor premises, indoor enclosure or other indoor
place in the Village where two or more motor vehicles are stored, housed or parked for
hire, in a condition ready for use, or where rent or compensation is paid to the owner,
manager or lessee of the premises for housing, storing, sheltering, keeping or maintaining
such motor vehicles.
e. Outdoor Parking Lot. Any outdoor premises, enclosure or other place, except a public
way, in the Village where two or more motor vehicles are stored, kept or parked for hire in
a condition ready for use, or where rent or compensation is paid to the owner, manager or
lessee of the premises for the parking, storing, keeping or maintaining of such motor
vehicles. The term " outdoor parking lot", however, shall not include any premises,
enclosure or other place where vehicles are parked for hire in a condition ready for use,
where such premises, enclosure or other place is not used for such purpose in excess of 90
days in any calendar year and where supervision of the parked vehicles and their ingress
and egress to and from such premises is furnished; nor shall this term apply to any building,
structure, premises, enclosure or other place where motor vehicles owned or operated for
the private use of the owner or lessee of all or part of the premises upon which such
building, structure or enclosure is located, are stored or parked in a condition ready for use;
nor shall it include any premises, structure, enclosure or other place in the Village where
two or more vehicles are stored or parked where no rent or compensation is paid for the
storing, keeping or parking of such motor vehicles.
Section 14-1402 License Required. No person shall operate or maintain either a motor vehicle
repair shop, a motor vehicle washing shop, a public garage or an outdoor parking lot in the Village
without first having obtained a license.
Section 14-1403 Application. An application for a license shall be made in conformity with the
general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses.
Section 14-1404 Maintenance of Place of Business. No person who is the owner, proprietor,
lessee, manager or superintendent of any salesroom, shop, garage or other place where workers
are employed for wages in and about motor vehicles, shall cause, permit or allow the same or any
portion of such salesroom, shop, garage or other place to be overcrowded or to have inadequate,
faulty or insufficient light, ventilation or heat. Fresh air shall be supplied by ventilation in
accordance with the building regulations of this Code.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
41 REVISED 10/05/09
All such places of employment or service shall be kept in a clean condition, free from the effluvia
of a sewer, drain, privy, stable or other nuisance; also, free as far as practicable from all gases,
vapors, dust or other impurities generated by manufacturing processes or the operation of motors
or other machinery, or otherwise, which are injurious to health.
Sufficient and separate water closets shall be provided for male and female employees, and such
water closet compartments shall be properly ventilated.
Lockers for workers' clothing shall be of metal.
Section 14-1405 Location. No motor vehicle repair shop, motor vehicle washing shop, or public
garage shall be conducted or operated within 200 feet of any building used as a hospital, church
or school or within 200 feet of the grounds thereof.
Section 14-1406 Smoking Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or permit
smoking in any motor vehicle repair shop or public garage.
Section 14-1407 Building and Fire Regulations. The construction of motor vehicle repair shops
and public garages shall be made and maintained in accordance with the building regulations of
this Code; the premises shall be kept clean and free from flammable wastes; and business shall be
conducted and operated in accordance with the fire regulations of this Code.
Section 14-1408 Changing Identification Marks. It shall be unlawful for any person to change
the identification marks on the engine of any car or automobile in any motor vehicle repair shop
or public garage. It shall also be unlawful to change the license tags on such cars except in
accordance with the registrar of motor vehicles kept by the Secretary of the State of Illinois.
Section 14-1409 Rate of Speed. No motor vehicle going into or coming out of or being located
or parked in any outdoor parking lot shall be driven at a rate in excess of ten miles per hour.
Section 14-1410 Parking Vehicles. Motor vehicles parked in any outdoor parking lot shall be
parked in lines not more than two deep with a lane adequate for entering or coming out of the line
so that the owner or driver may have access to any such motor vehicle and so that it may be
removed from the parking lot at any time. No such lane or space between lines shall be at any
time blocked by a motor vehicle whose operator or occupant is not located therein. Lanes leading
to and from such outdoor parking lots shall be left open so that motor vehicles parked therein may
be removed at any time.
Section 14-1411 Inspections. The Director of Building shall inspect or cause to be inspected as
often as deemed necessary, every motor vehicle repair shop, public garage and outdoor parking lot
in the Village, to determine whether there is compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code.
Article XV Sale of Christmas Trees
Section 14-1501 License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
store, sell or offer for sale in any building or structure, or on any open or vacant lot or parcel,
OTHER BUSINESSES
42 REVISED 06/03/13
within the Village any pine, balsam, fir or any other trees, or any branches or parts, which have
been cut for use as Christmas trees or for ornamental or decorative purposes, without first having
obtained a license.
Section 14-1502 Safety. No person, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain any business
for which a license is required by this Article unless the location has been inspected and approved
by fire inspectors to determine that the conduct of such business at such location will not constitute
a fire hazard or endanger the safety of the public.
Section 14-1503 Location. No license shall be issued for any business required to be licensed by
this Article unless the Zoning Ordinance of the Village permits the conduct of that business at that
location.
Section 14-1504 Sanitary Regulations. Premises used for the sale of Christmas trees, or
branches or part thereof, shall be cleared and all trees, branches and parts thereof removed from
the premises on or before December 31 of the year for which the license is issued.
Section 14-1505 Bond. No license shall be issued for any business for which a license is required
by this Article unless the licensee deposits with the Director of Building a cash bond in the amount
of $50.00 for each location for which a license is sought. The bond shall be held by the Director
of Building for the purpose of securing the prompt and orderly removal of Christmas trees,
branches and parts thereof, from the premises on or before December 31 of each year. This bond
shall be refunded to the licensee when the licensee returns the receipt for the bond within five days
after the discontinuance or termination of the business, together with satisfactory evidence that all
trees, branches and parts thereof, have been removed from the premises and that the premises have
been left in a clean and orderly condition.
Ord. #13-028)
Article XVI Coin or Card Operated Machines
Section 14-1601 Intent and Purpose. This Article is adopted to establish a procedure for
licensing businesses that place coin or card operated machines in the Village, to establish a
procedure for issuing permits for each coin or card operated machine and to ensure that all
businesses operating coin or card operated machines are regulated to the extent necessary for the
health and welfare of the citizens.
Section 14-1602 Definitions. For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings set forth below:
a. Accessory and subordinate use. When the premises where the coin or card operated
amusement devices are located have a distinct and primary business purpose, the coin or
card operated amusement devices occupy no more than 30% of the retail area of the
establishment and a minimum of 35 square feet of floor space is provided for each coin or
card operated amusement device.
b. Amusement device arcade. An establishment exclusively devoted to the use of more than
ten coin or card operated amusement devices. A special use permit is required in
accordance with the zoning regulations of this Code.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
43 REVISED 06/03/13
c. Authorized licensed business. A business which qualifies for a business license whether
or not such business license has been issued at the time of application for a permit for a
coin or card operated amusement device.
d. Automatic food vending machine. Any mechanical container or device used for the sale of
any beverage or article of food, the operation of which is governed or controlled by the
deposit of a coin, card or token.
e. Coin or card operated amusement device. Any and all instruments, games, machines,
equipment and other devices, including those capable of reproducing musical sounds, the
operation of which is governed or controlled by the insertion of or deposit of a coin , card
or token.
f. Mercantile Establishment. Engaging in the operation of a business for profit in which the
primary character and responsibility is trading, selling or buying merchandise, including
but not limited to, hotels, exhibition center, racetracks, restaurants and taverns.
g. Permit. The authority for which a licensed vending machine company places and operates
a specified coin or card operated vending machine in a properly licensed business
establishment in the Village.
h. Restaurant-amusement device arcade. An establishment primarily devoted to the sale of
food and beverage and partially devoted to the use of more than ten coin or card operated
amusement devices. A special use permit is required in accordance with the Zoning
Regulations of this Code.
i. Vending Company. Vending Company, when used in this Article, shall mean: the owner
of a mechanical container or device used or intended to be used for dispensing food or
amusement; or one who consigns such machine( s) for use and undertakes to maintain these
machines in proper operating condition; or one who keeps them supplied with food items
as ordered by the person( s) having the machines on consignment.
Section 14-1603 Vending Business License Required. No person, firm or corporation shall
operate or permit operation of a machine or device owned or controlled by that person or entity to
be operated in the Village without first having obtained a business license.
Ord. #98-003, # 09-038)
Section 14-1604 Application.
a. The business license application, accompanied by a non- returnable fee of $10, shall contain
the same information as is required by the Village for all businesses, including all of the
following additional information, as applicable:
1. The name, date of birth and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in
the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits; and in the
case of a corporation for profit, or a club, the date of incorporation, the objects for
which it was organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and
if a majority interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or
nominee, the name and address of such person;
OTHER BUSINESSES
44 REVISED 06/03/13
2. Current occupation/employment, business address and telephone number;
3. Any previous arrests or convictions for violation( s) of any State Statutes or local
ordinances;
4. Previous residences for past five years.
b. No business license may be sold, assigned, mortgaged, pledged or otherwise transferred.
A corporation holding a business license shall advise the Village Manager 30 days prior to
any contemplated change of stock ownership involving five percent or more of the stock
of the corporation. Each individual seeking to acquire five percent or more of the stock of
a corporation holding a business license shall comply with the provisions of this Section
as though he or she were applying for a license as an individual. The provisions of this
paragraph do not apply to corporations whose stock is traded publicly and listed on
recognized stock exchanges.
c. If the Village Manager finds that the applicant conforms to the provisions of this Article,
and that the application and background reveal nothing of a nature that might endanger the
health, safety and welfare of the general public as a result of the possession of a license,
then the Village Manager shall issue a business license upon payment of the fee.
Section 14-1605 Coin or Card Operated Food Vending Machine, Permit Required. No
vending company shall install, maintain or use an automatic food vending machine in the Village,
or permit the installation of a food vending machine in a mercantile establishment or any other
premises without first having obtained a permit. An additional vending company business license
will not be required if the owner of a food vending machine operates the machine on his or her
own premises only and holds a valid business license for those premises.
a. Investigation. The Director of Building shall make or cause to be made such investigation
as deemed necessary to determine whether the applicant's automatic food vending machine
and automatic food vending operations comply with all the provisions of this Code relating
to health, sanitation and food service, and with all other applicable provisions of this Code.
No permit shall be issued to any applicant whose automatic food vending machine and
automatic food vending machine operations do not comply with the applicable provisions
of this Code. Village officials shall indicate on the application for a permit the results of
the investigation and approval or disapproval of the application.
b. General Regulations. All persons licensed to install, keep, maintain or use an automatic
food vending machine, shall comply strictly with all the regulations of Chapter 11, Article
I, Food and Food Establishments-General Provisions, except that lavatory or toilet
facilities or clothing storage areas are not required where employees in food contact
activities are present for less than one hour a day.
c. Premises. No automatic food vending machine shall be located in any premises where
food is exposed to danger from improper handling, dust, dirt, flies, vermin or other
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
45 REVISED 06/03/13
contamination. No automatic food vending machine shall be installed or kept in any toilet
or washroom.
d. Inspections. The Director of Building shall inspect or cause to be inspected as often as
deemed necessary, every automatic food vending machine and automatic food vending
machine operation located and conducted in the Village to determine whether there is
compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code. This investigation shall be made
in accordance with Chapter 11, Article I, Food and Food Establishments-Genera1
Provisions.
Section 14-1606 Coin or Card Operated Amusement Devices, Permit Required. No person,
firm or corporation shall place, keep, install, maintain, operate or permit any coin or card operated
amusement device in any building or place within the Village for use by the public without first
having obtained a permit for each device. The operation of such devices shall be subject to the
following conditions:
a. No permit for a coin or card operated amusement device shall be issued except as an
accessory and subordinate use to an authorized licensed business, except that permits also
may be issued to operators of amusement device arcades under the terms of each special
use permit authorizing each amusement device arcade.
b. Permits for coin or card operated amusement devices shall be issued only to the licensee
of the premises where the devices will be operated or to the licensee of a vending company
with authority to place the devices at the premises designated. Responsibility for
compliance with the regulations pertaining to coin or card operated amusement devices
shall rest with the licensee of the premises where located. Each application must be
accompanied by an accurate scale drawing showing the floor plan of the mercantile
establishment, including the placement of coin or card operated amusement devices. An
application for a special use shall specify the maximum number of coin or card operated
devices to be operated.
c. No coin or card operated amusement device shall be permitted where the reward for skill
in the operation is not plainly posted upon such machine or where the opportunity for a
reward for skill in the operation is not the same for each individual player.
d. No gambling or individual wager on any coin-operated amusement device shall be
permitted.
e. Each coin or card operated amusement device shall be authorized by permit by the Village
as provided below:
1. One to five devices shall be authorized as an accessory and subordinate use in an
authorized license business.
2. Six to ten devices shall be authorized as an accessory and subordinate use in an
authorized licensed business provided authorization has been received from the
Village Administration.
OTHER BUSINESSES
46 REVISED 06/03/13
4
3. More than ten coin or card operated amusement devices shall be permitted in
restaurants that have been granted a special use for a restaurant-amusement device
arcade under the Zoning Ordinance of the Village, which special use permits
additional coin or card operated amusement devices.
4. More than ten coin or card operated amusement devices shall be permitted in
amusement device arcades that have been granted a special use as an amusement
device arcade under the Zoning Ordinance of the Village, when the special use
permits additional coin or card operated amusement devices.
f. The permittee shall provide adequate and orderly parking for all bicycles and shall keep
the premises unobstructed so that sidewalks are clear and open to pedestrian traffic.
Bicycle racks shall not be placed in a required parking stall, unless authorized in writing
by the Village Manager where coin-operated amusement devices are an accessory and
subordinate use, or where authorized by ordinance in all other cases.
g. No coin or card operated amusement device shall be placed in any required exit path of
travel.
h. No person shall operate any amusement device arcade or restaurant-amusement device
arcade on any premises within 200 lineal feet of any church, hospital, bui lding operated
exclusively as a grammar or secondary school, or residential zoning district as measured
from the public entrance of the arcade to the lot line of the church, hospital, building
operated exclusively as a grammar or secondary school or residential zoning district, unless
such premises were licensed as an amusement device arcade or restaurant- amusement
device arcade before the establishment of the church, hospital, educational institution or
zoning district.
i. The sale and consumption of food and beverage and smoking shall be prohibited in an
amusement device arcade.
j. An adult manager shall be required on the premises of an amusement device arcade and
restaurant- amusement device arcade at all times the arcade is open for business.
k. No coin or card operated amusement device on the premises of a retail alcoholic liquor
establishment shall be played by anyone under 21 years of age, unless accompanied by a
parent or guardian, except in a specially designated area removed from the liquor service
area.
Ord. #03-078, #06-078)
l. There is hereby levied a tax in the amounts listed below upon each coin or card operated
amusement device. The tax shall not be applicable to music machines, kiddie rides, nonelectrical
machines or to any coin or card operated amusement device which requires no
further manipulation by the player after the deposit of the necessary coins. This tax does
not apply to pinball machines.
Per coin or card operated amusement device for the first ten devices
located at the same establishment, $ 170
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
47 REVISED 06/03/13
Per coin or card operated amusement devide for the 11th and each additional
device, $ 230
The tax may be in one or two equal installments payable on the first day of January and
the first day of July.
m. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this Section shall be fined not
more than $ 750 for each such offense. If a licensee shall be convicted of violating a
provision of this Section, his or her licenses for all coin -operated devices shall be
suspended for one year.
Section 14-1607 Exemption. Coin or card operated newspaper vending machines are exempt
from the licensing and permit provisions of this Article.
Section 14-1608 Permit Variation. In the event that more than one machine, but not more than
six machines are located at a specific location and physically connected and placed on a rack or
similar device, and the overall size is not more than three feet wide and five feet high, only one
permit fee in the amount of $35 shall be required.
Section 14-1609 Report Required. Any person, firm or corporation making application for
machine(s) or device(s) as defined in this Article shall, in addition to applications, renewals and
any other reports, also submit to the Finance Director, a semi- annual report ( January 1st and July
1st) containing the total number of machine(s) and/or device(s), the name and address of the
business establishment where each is located, the permit number of each machine and the owner' s
name, address and phone number.
Section 14-1610 Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this Chapter, where no other
penalty is specifically provided, shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $ 750 for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues.
Article XVII Multiple Dwellings
Section 14-1701 Definitions. For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings set forth below:
a. Condominium. Any dwelling unit under individual ownership in a multi-unit structure as
provided in the Condominium Property Act of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
b. Condominium association. Any organization or association which governs the operation
of common areas or services for two or more condominiums.
c. Dwelling unit. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single
habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking and eating.
OTHER BUSINESSES
48 REVISED 04/05/99
d. Multiple dwelling. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units under common
ownership.
e. Townhouse. Any dwelling joined to another dwelling or dwellings at one or two sides by
a party wall or walls and designed exclusively for use or occupancy by one family of the
internal space from lowest basement or floor level to roof.
f. Townhouse association. Any organization or association which governs the operation of
common areas of two or more townhouses.
g. Village Manager. The Village Manager of Arlington Heights or designated
representatives. Designated representatives for the administration and enforcement of this
Ordinance include the Finance Director, Director of Building, Director of Health Services,
the Fire Chief and their representatives.
Section 14-1702 License Required.
a. No person or association shall operate a multiple dwelling without holding a current,
unrevoked operating license issued by the Village in his or her name for the specific named
multiple dwelling.
b. Every operating license shall be issued for a period of one year from its date of issuance
unless sooner revoked, and may be renewed for successive periods of not to exceed one
year.
Ord. #99-018)
c. The Village Manager is hereby authorized to issue new operating licenses and renewals,
in the names of applicant owners or operators of multiple dwellings. No licenses shall be
issued unless the multiple dwelling is found to meet all requirements of Chapter 23,
Building Regulations, of this Code and all applicable rules and regulations.
d. No operating license shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant, owner or operator has
first made application on a form provided by the Village.
e. Condominium and townhouse associations shall register with the Village annually with the
specific information, listed below, including the number of rental units per
building/complex and are subject to the licensing provisions of this Article if they meet the
minimum required provisions of this Article:
1. Legal Name and location of the condominium/ townhouse complex,
2. Names, Titles of Officers of the Association,
3. Name, address and phone number of registered management agent,
4. Name and phone number of emergency contact (24 hour),
5. Number of rental units per building; percentage of rental units per complex.
Ord. #99-018)
Section 14-1703 Investigations and Inspections. No operating license shall be issued or
renewed until an inspection is made pursuant to Chapter 23, Building Regulations, as the Village
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
49 REVISED 04/05/99
Manager may require to determine whether the multiple dwelling is in compliance with the
provisions of Chapter 23 and with applicable rules and regulations.
Section 14-1704 Designation of Agent.
Ord. #99-018)
a. No operating license shall be issued or renewed for a nonresident applicant, unless the
applicant designates in writing to the Village Manager the name of an agent for receipt of
service of notice of violations and for service of process, pursuant to Chapter 23, Building
Regulations, of this Code.
b. No operating license shall be issued or renewed for a resident applicant, unless such
applicant has first designated an agent for the receipt of service of violations of the
provisions of this Code and for service of process pursuant to this Code when the applicant
is absent from Arlington Heights for 30 or more days. This designation shall be made in
writing and shall accompany each application form.
Section 14-1705 Renewal. No operating license shall be renewed unless an application has been
made within 60 days prior to the expiration of the present operating license.
Section 14-1706 Notice of Change. Each license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within
the common ways of the multiple dwelling. Every person holding an operating license shall give
notice in writing to the Village Manager within 24 hours after having transferred or otherwise
disposed of the legal control of any licensed multiple dwelling. This notice shall include the name
and address of the person or persons succeeding in the ownership or control of the multiple
dwelling.
Ord. #99-018)
Section 14-1707 Records Required. Every owner or operator of a licensed multiple dwelling
shall keep, or cause to be kept, records of all requests for repair and complaints by tenants or
members of the association which relate to the applicable provisions of Chapter 23, Building
Regulations, of this Code, and of all corrections made in response to such requests and complaints.
These records shall be made available by the owner or operator to the Village Manager for
inspection and copying upon request.
Section 14-1708 Violations and Suspensions.
Ord. #99-018)
a. Whenever, upon inspection of the licensed multiple dwelling or of the records required to
be kept by Section 14-1707, Records Required, the Village Manager finds that conditions
or practices exist which are in violation of the provisions of this Code or of any applicable
rules and regulations, the owner or operator shall be served with notice of such violation
as provided in Chapter 23, Building Regulations. The notice shall state that unless the
violations cited are corrected within a reasonable time, the operating license may be
suspended.
b. At the end of the time allowed for correction, the Village Manager shall reinspect the
multiple dwelling, and if conditions have not been corrected, he or she may issue an order
suspending the operating license.
OTHER BUSINESSES
50 REVISED 10/05/09
c. Any person whose license to operate a multiple dwelling has been suspended may make a
written request for reconsideration. Upon receipt of a request for reconsideration, the
Village Manager shall have the premises reinspected to determine if they are in
compliance. If no request for reconsideration or petition for hearing reaches the Village
Manager within 21 days following the issuance of the order of suspension, a noti ce of
license revocation shall issue. The licensee shall then have 30 days to either bring the
premises into compliance and request a reinspection or request a hearing. If the licensee
fails to take either action, the license shall be revoked.
Ord. #99-018)
d. If, upon reinspection, the Village Manager finds that the multiple dwelling is in compliance
with this Article and with applicable rules and regulations, he or she shall reinstate the
license. A request for reinspection shall not extend the suspension period, unless the
Village Manager grants such requests.
Ord. #09-038)
Article XVIII Gun Dealers
Section 14-1801 Definition. For the purpose of this Article, "firearm" shall not mean an antique
firearm ( other than a machine- gun) which, although designed as a weapon, is by reason of the date
of its manufacture, value, design and other characteristics primarily a collector's item and is not
likely to be used as a weapon, or which is designated as a collector' s item or antique firearm by
State or Federal law.
Section 14-1802 Gun Dealers - License Required. No person shall engage in the business of
selling firearms, ammunition, black powder, smokeless powder, or any other propellant, without
first having obtained a business license therefor from the Village pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 9, General Licensing Procedures, of this Code.
Ord. #09-038)
Section 14-1803 Application. An application for a gun dealer license shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses.
Section 14-1804 Maintenance and Display of Firearms. Any person or firm licensed pursuant
to the provisions of this Article:
a. Shall not be permitted to display firearms or ammunition in exterior display windows;
b. Shall maintain all handguns in a securely locked place (i.e., cabinet, showcase, etc.) at all
times during normal business hours, except when they are actually viewed for purchase by
a customer or when in the process of repair;
c. Shall equip premises in which firearms, ammunition and components thereof, are stored,
with a device capable of transmitting a signal to the duly authorized and/ or accepted alarm
board approved by the Police Chief. Refusal of the Police Chief to approve a specific
alarm device may be appealed to the Village Board. The alarm device shall be activated
at all times during non-business hours.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
51 REVISED 10/05/09
Article XIX Foreign Fire Insurance Companies
Section 14-1901 Compliance Required. No corporation, company or association which is not
incorporated under the laws of the State of Illinois shall engage in effecting fire insurance in the
Village, or to transact any business of fire insurance in the Village, without fully complying with
the provisions of this Article.
Section 14-1902 Payment to Village. Any such corporation, company or association shall
annually pay to the Finance Director for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Village Fire
Department pension fund a sum of money equal in amount to two per cent per annum of the gross
receipts received for premiums by any and all agents of any such corporation, company or
association during the calendar year ending on the 31st day of December, for any insurance
effected or agreed to be effected in the Village by or with any such corporation, company or
association during such year.
Section 14-1903 Time of Payment. All payments required by this Article shall be made on or
before the 15th day of January following the termination of the year for which such payments are
due.
Section 14-1904 Reports. Every person acting as representative for or on behalf of any such
corporation, company or association shall, on or before the fifteenth day of January of each year,
render to the Finance Director a full, true and just account, verified by oath, of all premiums which
have been recovered by him or her on behalf of such corporation, company or association on such
fire insurance policies during the year ending the preceding December 31.
Such agent, corporation, company or association shall have available original books of entry,
records, papers, or documents adequate for verification of the correctness of such report which
shall be open for examination by the Finance Director, or appointed representatives during office
hours.
Section 14-1905 Placement of Insurance Restricted. No insurance broker in the Village shall
place any insurance with any corporation, company or association not incorporated under the laws
of the State of Illinois which shall be in default for not reporting or making payment as
hereinbefore provided, until such corporation, company or association shall have complied with
all the requirements of this Article.
Ord. #09-038)
Article XX Bus Transport Service
Section 14-2001 License Required. No person shall engage in the bus transport service without
first having obtained a license.
Section 14-2002 Application. An application for a license shall be made in conformance with
the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses. The applicatio n shall
also state the number of vehicles owned or operated by the applicant and which vehicles are to be
used for the transportation of children to and from school.
OTHER BUSINESSES
52 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 14-2003 Regulations. No bus transport service license shall be granted until all vehicles
used by the applicant have been thoroughly and carefully inspected and approved by the Police
Chief or designee and found to be in a thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of
passengers, clean, fit, of good appearance and well painted and varnished and in compliance with
this Article.
Section 14-2004 Mechanical Tests. Mechanical tests of each vehicle used by an applicant for a
bus transport service license shall be made by any testing garage or station approved by the Police
Chief. The test shall include the following:
brakes; steering mechanism;
wheel alignment; headlights;
horn; taillights;
windshield wiper; stop light.
rear view mirror
Section 14-2005 Physical Inspection by the Police Chief. Physical inspection shall be made
by the Police Chief or designee. The inspection shall include the following:
condition of tires, including spare tire;
cleanliness;
general appearance.
Section 14-2006 Duty of Owner. It is the duty of the owner of each vehicle to be used in a bus
transport service to submit to the Police Chief each vehicle for inspection, prior to the issuance of
the license and at least once every six months thereafter or at any time upon complaint.
Additionally, the Police Chief may inspect these vehicles at such other times as deemed necessary.
It is unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any such vehicle to use or permit its use if it has
been condemned by the Police Chief until it has been repaired or replaced to the satisfaction of the
Police Chief.
Section 14-2007 Condition of Vehicles. All vehicles used in a bus transport service licensed
under this Article must be kept in a safe, clean and sanitary condition, and must be equipped with
properly working brakes, lights and warning signals, in accordance with the motor vehicle laws of
the State of Illinois and this Code. No bus transport service license shall be issued until it is shown
that all vehicles to be used in the service are in good mechanical condition.
Section 14-2008 Application for Bus Driver’s License. Any person desiring to be a driver or
operator of any vehicle used in a bus transport service licensed under this Article must be at least
21 years of age and shall have a Village bus driver’s license. Any person desiring to secure such
a license shall apply in writing to the Director of Building, upon the form provided, together with
the required fees. The Director of Building shall then refer the application to the Police Chief.
The application shall set forth:
a. the name of the applicant,
b. residence,
c. occupation,
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
53 REVISED 10/05/09
d. the names and addresses of four residents of the Village who have known the applicant for
a period of at least two years and who will vouch for the honesty and general good character
of the applicant,
e. the experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers,
f. educational background,
g. a concise history of employment,
h. whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony or of driving while intoxicated,
i. the applicant’ s state chauffeur’ s license, and
j. two recent 1 x 1½ photos of the applicant, together with a set of fingerprints to be obtained
by the Police Department.
No person shall be licensed as a driver or operator of a bus unless he is in good health and has had
a driver’ s license issued by any state for a period of at least five years prior to the date of
application. No person shall be issued a bus driver’s license if his state operator’ s license has been
suspended or revoked at any time during the five year period prior to application.
Section 14-2009 Examination of Applicant. The Police Chief or designee shall verify:
a. the truth of the statements made in the application for the bus driver’ s license,
b. the applicant’ s knowledge of the provision of this Article, the traffic regulations of the
Village and the geography of the Village,
c. the ability of the applicant to comply with the applicable provisions of this Code.
No license shall be issued to any applicant if the results of the foregoing examination are
unsatisfactory in any respect, nor to an applicant who makes false statements in the application.
After all required investigations are complete, the Police Chief shall state on the application
approval or disapproval and forward the application to the Director of Building.
Section 14-2010 Insurance Required. Each application for a bus transport service license shall
be accompanied by a certificate from the Secretary of State showing compliance by the owner of
each vehicle used in the service with provisions of the State statutes relating to the bonding or
insurance of motor vehicles used for the carriage of passengers for hire and a policy or certificate
of insurance showing limits of not less than $ 250, 000 one person/$ 500, 000 one accident and
100,000 property damage.
Section 14-2011 Revocation of License. The Village President and Board of Trustees may
revoke any license issued for failure to obtain insurance.
Article XXI Banks and Currency Exchanges
Section 14-2101 License Required. No person shall conduct, operate or exchange in a general
banking business, a savings and loan business, a currency exchange business or a safe deposit vault
business without first having obtained a license.
OTHER BUSINESSES
54 REVISED 01/01/08
Section 14-2102 Application. An application for a license shall be made in conformance with
the general requirements of this Code relating to applications for licenses.
Ord. #07-067)
Article XXII Cable/ Video Service Provider Fee and
PEG Access Support Fee and Consumer Protection Law
Section 14-2201 Definitions. As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
a. Cable service. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. §522( 6).
b. Commission. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
c. Gross revenues. All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation,
cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation
of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder’ s
cable service or video service area within the Village.
1. Gross revenues shall include the following:
a) Recurring charges for cable or video service;
b) Event- based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not
limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges;
c) Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment;
d) Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, activation, installation and repair charges;
e) Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, service order and service termination
charges;
f) Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges and other
charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments;
g) A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates
pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or
exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the
holder’ s network to provide cable service or video service within the
Village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
Village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement;
h) Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of
holder’ s network to provide cable service or video service with respect to
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
55 REVISED 01/01/08
commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion
or exhibition of any products or services on the holder’ s network, such as a
home shopping” or similar channel subject to subsection ( i);
i) In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated
functionally with other services, capabilities or applications, the portion of
the holder’ s revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities or
applications, shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can
reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books
and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
j) The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
2. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
a) Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 ILCS 5/21- 801( c)( 1)(vi);
b) Refunds, discounts or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of
gross revenues received by the holder of the State-issued authorization to
the extent the refund, rebate, credit or discount is attributable to cable
service or video service;
c) Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged or functionally
integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received from
services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without
limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services, information
services or the provision of directory or Internet advertising, including
yellow pages, whitepages, banner advertisement and electronic publishing
or any other revenues attributed by the holder to non-cable service or nonvideo
service, in accordance with the holder’ s books and records and
records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules,
regulations, standards or orders;
d) The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser
is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser’ s
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell
the service within the Village and pay the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-
801( b) with respect to the service;
e) Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the
transaction by a city, state, federal or any other governmental entity and
collected by the holder of the State- issued authorization and required to be
remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes;
f) Security deposits collected from subscribers.
OTHER BUSINESSES
56 REVISED 01/01/08
g) Amounts paid by subscribers to “ home shopping” or similar vendors for
merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
3. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross
revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather
than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220
ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video
service.
d. Holder. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video
service from the Commission, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
e. PEG. Public, Education and Governmental.
f. PEG Access Support Fee. The amount paid under this Article and 220 ILCS 5/21 -801(d)
by holder to the Village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
g. Service. The provision of “ cable service” or “ video service” to subscribers and the
interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer
or provide cable or video service from the Commission, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
h. Service Provider Fee. The amount paid under this Article and 220 ILCS 5/21-801 by the
holder to a Village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
i. Video service. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for
the selection or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through
wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right-of-way without regard to
delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition does not
include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined
in 47 U.S.C. §332( d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service
that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail or other services offered
over the public Internet.
Section 14-2202 Cable/ Video Service Provider Fee Imposed.
a. Fee Imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video
service in the Village.
b. Amount of Fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent of the holder’ s
gross revenues.
c. Notice to the Village. The holder shall notify the Village at least ten days prior to the date
on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the Village.
d. Holder’ s Liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the
Village. The holder’ s liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
57 REVISED 01/01/08
month following 30 days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this Article by the holder.
The ordinance adopting this Article shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address
listed on the holder’ s application notice sent, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21- 401( b)(6) to the
Village.
e. Payment Date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis,
45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the
date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.
f. Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video
service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the Village in which a fee
is paid.
g. Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an
existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees
under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator
owes under Section 14-2202b, Cable Video Service Provider Fee Imposed-Amount of Fee.
Section 14-2203 PEG Access Support Fee Imposed.
a. PEG Fee Imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing
cable service or video service in the Village in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to
Section 14-2202, Cable Video Service Provider Fee Imposed-Amount of Fee.
b. Amount of Fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one
percent of the holder’ s gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that
incumbent cable operators pay to the Village or its designee for PEG access support in the
Village.
c. Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the Village or to the entity
designated by the Village to manage PEG access. The holder’ s liability for the PEG access
support fee shall commence on the date set forth in Section 14-2202d, Cable Video Service
Provider Fee Imposed-Holder’s Liability.
d. Payment Due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly
basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid
on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis
for the calculation of the fee.
e. Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an
existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would
have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the
remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All
payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be
credited against the fees that that operator owes under Section 14-2203bPEG Access
Support Fee Imposed- Amount of Fee.
OTHER BUSINESSES
58 REVISED 01/01/08
Section 14-2204 Applicable Principles. All determinations and calculations under this Article
shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
Section 14-2205 No Impact on Other Taxes Due from Holder. Nothing contained in this
Article shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the
Village, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with
respect to cable service or video service. A State- issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the Village’ s Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the
holder. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to
payment of the local unit of government’ s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
Section 14-2206 Audits of Cable/ Video Service Provider.
a. Audit Requirement. The Village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on
other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records.
The holder shall comply with the same requirements the Village imposes on other cable
service or video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’ s books and records
and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
Village. If all local franchises between the Village and cable operator terminate, the audit
requirements shall be those adopted by the Village, pursuant to the Local Government
Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted
should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
b. Additional Payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within 30
days after the Village’ s submission of an invoice for the sum.
Section 14-2207 Late Fees/Payments. All fees due and payments which are past due, shall be
governed by ordinances adopted by this Village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill
of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
Section 14-2208 Customer Service and Privacy Protection Law.
a. Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are herby adopted by reference and made
applicable to the cable or video providers offering services within the Village’ s boundaries.
b. Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that
becomes effective after the effective date of this Article shall be incorporated into this
Article by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services
within the Municipality’s boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions
optional for adoption by municipalities shall be incorporated into this Article by reference
without formal action by the corporate authorities of the Village.
Section 14-2209 Enforcement. The Village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to
enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video
Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the Village.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
59 REVISED 10/05/09
Section 14-2210 Customer Credits. The Village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits
for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501(s)
and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the
violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible
for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit.
Section 14-2211 Severability. If any provision of this Ordinance or the application of any
provision of this Ordinance is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not
affect other provisions of this Ordinance or their application, that can be given effect without the
unconstitutional or invalid provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision
or application of such provision is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Ordinance.
Ord. #06-064, # 09-038)
Article XXIII Adult Businesses
Section 14-2301 Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms, phrases and
words shall have the meanings given herein.
a. Adult Booth. Any area of an Adult Business set off from the remainder of such
establishment by one or more walls or other dividers or partitions and used to show, play
or otherwise demonstrate Adult Materials or to view any live performance that is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of
Specified Anatomical Areas or the conduct or simulation of Specified Sexual Activities.
b. Adult Business. Any or all of the following businesses: Adult Bookstore, Adult Live
Business and Adult Theater, as defined herein:
1. Adult Bookstore. A business establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale, rent or other
distribution, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “ Specified Sexual
Activities” or “ Specified Anatomical Areas.”
2. Adult Live Entertainment Establishment. A nightclub, theater or other business
establishment which permits live performances by topless and/or bottomless
dancers, go- go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “ Specified Sexual Activities”
or “ Specified Anatomical Areas.”
3. Adult Theater. A business establishment in an enclosed building that as a
substantial or significant portion of its business regularly features for presentation
films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides or other visual representation
or recordings of any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
the exposure, depiction or description of Specified Anatomical Areas or the conduct
or simulation of Specified Sexual Activities.
c. Adult Business License. A license issued for an Adult Business pursuant to the provisions
of this Article.
OTHER BUSINESSES
58 REVISED 01/01/08
d. Adult Business Patron. Any individual, other than Adult Business Personnel, present in or
at any Adult Business at any time when such Adult Business is open for business; provided,
however, that this definition shall not include persons delivering goods, materials (other
than Adult Materials), food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the
Licensed Premises.
e. Adult Business Personnel. Any individual, including employees, entertainers and
independent contractors, who work in or at, or render any services directly related to the
operation of, an Adult Business; provided, however, that this definition shall not include
persons delivering goods, materials ( other than Adult Materials), food and beverages, or
performing maintenance or repairs, to the Licensed Premises.
f. Adult Material. Any of the following, whether new or used:
1. The following materials that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
the exposure, depiction or description of Specified Anatomical Areas, or the
conduct or simulation of Specified Sexual Activities:
a) Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or digitally-stored
materials;
b) Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer displays,
or other visual representations or recordings of any kind; or
c) Live performances.
2. Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with Specified Sexual Activities, or that depict or describe Specified
Anatomical Areas.
g. Nude or State of Nudity. A state of dress or undress that exposes to view:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; anus; or
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, but not
including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress,
blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided that the areola
is not exposed; or
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered, or any device or covering that, when worn, simulates human male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state.
h. Semi-Nude. A state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no more than the human
genitals, pubic region, anus, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body
covered by supporting straps or devices by other minor accessory apparel such as hats,
gloves and socks.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
61 REVISED 10/05/09
i. Specified Anatomical Areas. Any of the following:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; buttocks;
anus; or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola, but
not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress,
blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is
not exposed; or
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered, or any device or covering that, when worn, simulates human male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state.
j. Specified Criminal Act. Any unlawful lewd, indecent, or immoral conduct, including
specifically, but without limitation, any of the lewd, indecent, or immoral criminal acts
specified in any of the following statutes:
1. Article 11 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/11- 1 et seq. ( sex offenses);
2. Section 26-4 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/330 ( unauthorized
videotaping);
3. Section 33D-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/330-1 (contributing to the
criminal delinquency of a juvenile);
4. The Obscene Phone Call Act, 720 ILCS 135/ 0.01 et seq.;
5. The Wrongs to Children Act, 720 ILCS 150/ 0.01 et seq.;
6. The Improper Supervision of Children Act, 720 ILCS 640/ 0.01 et seq.; or
7. The Sale of Immoral Publications to Children Act, 720 ILCS 670/ 0.01 et seq.
k. Specified Sexual Activities. Any of the following:
1. Actual physical touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female
breasts;
2. Actual physical sexual acts, normal or perverted, including intercourse, oral
copulation or sodomy;
3. Actual masturbation;
4. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
5. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in
subsections 1, 2, 3, or 4 of this definition.
l. Substantial or significant portion of its business. Any commercial Establishment that
OTHER BUSINESSES
62 REVISED 10/05/09
satisfies one or more of the following criteria:
1. Gross Sales. Thirty percent or more of the retail dollar value of the Commercial
Business’ s annual gross sales derives from the sale, rental or viewing of Adult
Materials.
2. Floor Area. Thirty percent or more of the floor area of the Commercial
Establishment is devoted to the display, viewing or presentation of Adult Materials,
not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any other portion
of the Commercial Establishment not open to the public.
3. Merchandise Displayed. Thirty percent or more of the retail dollar value of all
merchandise displayed at any one time is attributable to Adult Materials.
4. Inventory. Thirty percent or more of all inventory of the Commercial Establishment
whether measured by retail dollar value or number of items) consists at any one
time of Adult Materials.
5. Stock In Trade. Thirty percent or more of the stock in trade at the Commercial
Establishment consists at any one time of Adult Materials.
6. Live Performances. Live performances by persons appearing Semi-Nude, or live
performances that are otherwise distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
the exposure, depiction or description of Specified Anatomical Areas or the conduct
or simulation of Specified Sexual Activities, and that are taking place thirty percent
or more of the time during which the Commercial Establishment is open for
business.
Section 14-2302 License Required. An Adult Business License shall be required to establish,
operate, or maintain an Adult Business within the Village.
Section 14-2303 Standards for Issuance or Denial of License.
a. Issuance. The Director of Building shall issue an Adult Business License to an applicant
if, but only if, the Director of Building finds and determines all of the following, based on
the reports, investigations, and inspections conducted by the Director of Building and the
Reviewing Departments and on any other credible information on which it is reasonable
for the Director of Building to rely:
1. All information and documents required by this Article for issuance of an Adult
Business License have been properly provided and the material statements made in
the application are true and correct.
2. All persons identified in the application pursuant to this Article are at least 18 years
of age and not under any legal disability.
3. No person identified in the application pursuant to this Article has been convicted
of, pleaded nolo contendere to, or been placed on supervision or conditional
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
63 REVISED 10/05/09
discharge for, any Specified Criminal Act within five years immediately preceding
the date of the application.
4. The Adult Business and the Licensed Premises, and the proposed operation of the
Adult Business, comply with this Article and all then- applicable building, health,
and life safety codes and regulations and have received all necessary zoning
approvals required pursuant to the then- applicable provisions of the Village’ s
Zoning Ordinance, including specifically, but without limitation, the zoning
approval, if any, required for the Adult Business.
Section 14-2304 Regulations Applicable to All Adult Businesses.
a. General Compliance. All Licensed Premises and Adult Businesses shall comply with the
provisions of this Article; all other applicable Village ordinances, resolutions, rules, and
regulations; and all other applicable federal, state and local laws.
b. Hours of Operation. No Adult Business shall be open for business between the hours of
12:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on any day. No Adult Business shall be open for business at any
time on any Sunday or any legal State of Illinois or federal holiday.
c. Animals. No animals, except only for animals trained and used to assist a person with a
disability, shall be permitted at any time at or in any Adult Business. Any such animal
must at all times remain with the disabled Adult Business Patron.
d. Restrooms. All restrooms in Adult Businesses shall be equipped with standard toilets,
sinks and other traditional lavatory facilities. No Adult Materials or live performances
shall be provided or allowed at any time in the restroom of an Adult Business. Separate
male and female restrooms shall be provided for and used by Adult Business Personnel
and Adult Business Patrons.
e. Restricted Areas. No Adult Business Patron shall be permitted at any time to enter into
any of the non-public portions of any Adult Business, including specifically, but without
limitation, any storage areas or dressing or other rooms provided for the benefit of Adult
Business Personnel. This subsection shall not apply to persons delivering goods and
materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the Licensed
Premises; provided, however, that any such persons shall remain in such non-public areas
only for the purposes and to the extent and time necessary to perform their job duties.
f. Specific Prohibited Acts.
1. No Adult Business Personnel or any other person at any Adult Business shall
perform or conduct any Specified Sexual Activity with or for any Adult Business
Patron or any other Adult Business Personnel or any other person;
2. No Adult Business Patron or any other person at any Adult Business shall perform
or conduct any Specified Sexual Activity with or for any Adult Business Personnel
or any other Adult Business Patron or any other person; and
OTHER BUSINESSES
64 REVISED 10/05/09
3. Straddle Dances are prohibited at all Adult Businesses.
g. Exterior Display. No Adult Business shall be maintained or operated in any manner that
causes, creates, or allows public viewing of any Adult Material, or any entertainment
depicting, describing, or relating to Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical
Areas, from any sidewalk, public or private right-of-way, or any property other than the lot
on which the Licensed Premises is located. No portion of the exterior of an Adult Business
shall utilize or contain any flashing lights, search lights or spotlights, or any other similar
lighting systems, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial
representations of any manner. This Subsection shall apply to any advertisement, display,
promotional material, decoration or sign; to any performance or show; and to any window,
door or other opening.
h. Noise. No loudspeakers or sound equipment audible beyond the Licensed Premises shall
be used at any time.
i. Gambling and Related Devices Prohibited. No Adult Business shall contain any gambling,
video, pinball, slot, bagatelle, pigeon-hole, pool or any other games, machines, tables or
implements.
j. Manager’ s Station. Each Adult Business shall have one or more manager’ s stations. The
interior of each Adult Business shall be configured in such a manner that there is a direct
and substantially unobstructed view from at least one manager’ s station to every part of
each area, except restrooms, of the establishment to which any Adult Business Patron is
permitted access for any purpose.
k. Alcohol Prohibition. No alcoholic liquor shall be delivered, received, sold, purchased,
provided or consumed at any time on any Licensed Premises or at any Adult Business.
l. No massage services shall be provided at an Adult Business.
m. No Adult Business Licensee shall permit any person to remain in or upon the Licensed
Premises who commits any Specified Criminal Act.
Section 14-2305 Location of Adult Businesses.
a. No Adult Business shall be located within 200 feet of:
1) A residential zoning district;
2) A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for
religious worship and related religious activities;
3) A public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care
facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private
schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools,
vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education
schools, junior colleges, and universities. “ School” includes the school grounds,
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
65 REVISED 10/05/09
but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only
incidentally as a school;
4) A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or
recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails,
swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts,
pedestrian/ bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public land within the
Village, which is under the control, operation or management of the Village or the
Arlington Heights Park District.
5) An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family
entertainment; or
b. No Adult Business shall be located within 200 feet of another Adult Business.
Section 14-2306 Special Regulations for Adult Booths.
a. Prohibited Except in Adult Stores. Adult Booths shall be prohibited in all Adult Businesses
except Adult Stores.
b. Occupancy and Prohibited Acts. Only one individual shall occupy an Adult Booth at any
one time. No individual occupying an Adult Booth shall engage in any Specified Sexual
Activities. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of an Adult Booth.
c. Open Booth Requirement. In addition to satisfying the manager station requirements of
this Article, all Adult Stores containing Adult Booths shall be physically arranged in such
a manner that the entire interior portion of each Adult Booth shall be visible from the
common area of the Adult Store. To satisfy this requirement, there shall be a permanently
open and unobstructed entrance way for each Adult Booth and for the entranceway from
the area of the Adult Store that provides other Adult Materials to the area of the Adult Store
containing Adult Books. Each of these entranceways shall not be capable of being closed
or obstructed, entirely or partially, by any door, curtain, partition, drapes or any other
obstruction whatsoever that would be capable of wholly or partially obscuring the area of
the Adult Store containing Adult Booths or any person situated in an Adult Booth. It shall
be unlawful to install Adult Booths within an Adult Business for the purpose of providing
secluded viewing of Adult Materials or live performances.
d. Aisle Required. There shall be one continuous lighted main aisle along side the Adult
Booths provided in any Adult Store. Each person situated in a Booth shall be visible at all
times from the aisle.
e. Holes Prohibited. Except holes or openings needed for installation for facilities and the
open Booth entranceway, the walls and partitions of each Adult Booth shall be constructed
and maintained solid walls or partitions without any holes or openings whatsoever.
f. Signage. A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entranceway to each
Adult Booth that states that:
OTHER BUSINESSES
66 REVISED 10/05/09
1. Only one person is allowed in an Adult Booth at any one time;
2. It is unlawful to engage in any Specified Sexual Activities while in an Adult Booth;
and
3. It is unlawful to damage or deface any portion of an Adult Booth.
g. Age Limitations.
1. No Adult Business Personnel or Adult Business Patron at an Adult Booth or a
Licensed Premises that includes an Adult Booth shall be under the age of 18;
2. No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any Adult Booth or any Licensed
Premises that includes an Adult Booth;
3. No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any Adult
Booth or at any Licensed Premises that includes an Adult Booth;
4. No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase or receive,
whether for consideration or not, any Adult Material or other goods or services at
or from any Adult Booth or any Licensed Premises that includes an Adult Booth.
Section 14-2307 Special Regulations for Adult Live Entertainment Establishment.
a. Performance Area. The performance area of an Adult Live Entertainment Establishment
shall be limited to one or more stages or platforms permanently anchored to the floor
Stage”). Each Stage shall be at least 18 inches in elevation above the level of the patron
seating areas. Each Stage shall be separated by a distance of at least eight feet from all
areas of the premises to which Adult Business Patrons have access. A continuous barrier
at least three feet in height and located at least eight feet from all points of each Stage shall
separate each Stage from all seating areas. The barrier shall consist of horizontal or vertical
members spaced no more than nine inches apart and nine inches from the floor or the walls
to which it is attached. No Adult Business Patron shall be allowed at any time on any Stage.
b. Lighting. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the
public areas of the Adult Live Entertainment Establishment so that all objects are plainly
visible at all times. A minimum lighting of not less than 30- lux horizontal, measured at
30-inches from the floor and on 10-foot centers shall be maintained at all times for all areas
of the Adult Live Entertainment Establishment where Adult Business Patrons are admitted.
c. Tipping. No tip or gratuity may be offered or accepted for any performance by Adult
Business Personnel on any Stage at any time prior to the completion of any such
performance. No Adult Business Patron shall offer, and no Adult Business Personnel
having performed on any Stage shall accept, in any form of tip or gratuity offered directly
or personally to the Adult Business Personnel by the Adult Business Patron. Rather,
following completion of a performance, all tips and gratuities to Adult Business Personnel
performing on any Stage shall be placed into a receptacle provided for receipt of such tips
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
67 REVISED 10/05/09
and gratuities by the Adult Business.
d. Notice of Select Rules. A sign at least two feet by two- feet, with letters at least one- inch
high shall be conspicuously displayed on or adjacent to every Stage stating the following:
THIS ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT IS REGULATED BY THE VILLAGE OF
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS. ENTERTAINERS ARE:
1. NOT PERMITTED TO APPEAR IN A STATE OF NUDITY OR ENGAGE IN
ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT.
2. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT ANY TIPS OR GRATUITIES FOR ANY
PERFORMANCE UNTIL COMPLETION OF THE PERFORMANCE.
3. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT ANY TIPS DIRECTLY FROM PATRONS
EVEN AFTER COMPLETION OF THE PERFORMANCE. ANY SUCH TIPS
MUST BE PLACED INTO THE RECEPTACLE PROVIDED BY
MANAGEMENT.
4. NO ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IS PERMITTED AT ANY TIME.
e. Age Limitations.
1. No Adult Business Personnel or Adult Business Patron at an Adult Live
Entertainment Establishment or a Licensed Premises used for Adult cabaret shall
be under the age of 18;
2. No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any Adult Live Entertainment
Establishment or to any Licensed Premises used for an Adult Live Entertainment
Establishment;
3. No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any Adult
Live Entertainment Establishment or any Licensed Premises used for an Adult Live
Entertainment Establishment;
4. No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase, receive,
whether for consideration or not, any Adult Material or other goods or services at
or from any Adult Live Entertainment Establishment or any Licensed Premises
used for an Adult Live Entertainment Establishment.
Section 14-2308 Special Regulations for Adult Stores.
a. Windows and Signs. Window areas for Adult Stores shall not be covered or obstructed in
any way. No signs or obstructions shall be placed in the windows.
b. Age Limitations.
1. No Adult Business Personnel or Adult Business Patron at an Adult Store or a
OTHER BUSINESSES
68 REVISED 10/05/09
Licensed Premises used for Adult Store shall be under the age of 18;
2. No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any Adult Store or to any
Licensed Premises used for an Adult Store;
3. No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any Adult
Store or any Licensed Premises used for an Adult Store;
4. No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase, receive,
whether for consideration or not, any Adult Material or other goods or services at
or from any Adult Store or any Licensed Premises used for an Adult Store.
Section 14-2309 Special Regulations for Adult Theaters.
a. Seating. Each Adult Theater shall provide seating only in individual chairs with arms or
in seats separated from each other by immovable arms and not on couches, benches or any
other multiple person seating structures. The number of seats shall equal the maximum
number of persons who may occupy the Adult Theater.
b. Aisle. Each Adult Theater shall have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating area in
order that each person seated in the Adult Theater shall be visible at all times.
c. Sign. Each Adult Theater shall have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each
entranceway to the auditorium or similar area that lists the maximum number of persons
who may occupy the auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats
in the auditorium area.
d. Age Limitations.
1. No Adult Business Personnel or Adult Business Patron at an Adult Theater or any
Licensed Premises used for Adult Theater shall be under the age of 18;
2. No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any Adult Theater or to any
Licensed Premises used for an Adult Theater;
3. No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to remain at any Adult
Theater or any Licensed Premises used for an Adult Theater;
4. No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to purchase, receive,
whether for consideration or not, any Adult Material or other goods or services at
or from any Adult Theater or any Licensed Premises used for an Adult Theater.
Section 14-2310 Licensees’ Responsibility for Adult Business Personnel. Every act or omission
by Adult Business Personnel constituting a violation of the provisions of this Article shall be
deemed and held to be the act or omission of the Licensee if such act or omission occurs either
with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the Licensee or as a result of the Licensee’ s
negligent failure to supervise the Adult Business Personnel. The Licensee shall be punishable for
any such act or omission in the same manner as if the Licensee committed the act or caused the
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
69 REVISED 10/05/09
omission. Accordingly, any such act or omission of any such Adult Business Personnel
constituting a violation of the provisions of the Article shall be deemed, for purposes of
determining whether the Licensee’ s Adult Business License shall be issued, revoked, suspended
or renewed, to be the act or omission of the Licensee.
Section 14-2311 License Revocation or Suspension. In addition to the reasons set forth in
Section 9-107, Licensing Procedure – Approval; Disapproval, of this Code, no Adult Business
License shall be issued or renewed as follows:
1. The Licensee has committed a felony or Specified Criminal Act on the Licensed Premises.
2. The Licensee authorizes, approves, or, as a result of the Licensee’ s negligent failure to
supervise the Licensed Premises or the Adult Business, allows Adult Business Personnel,
an Adult Business Patron, or any other person to ( i) violate any of the provisions or
requirements of their Article or the provisions or requirements of the Adult Business
License issued pursuant hereto, or (ii) commit any felony or Specified Criminal Act on the
Licensed Premises.
Section 14-2312 Penalty. Any person who violates, neglects, refuses to comply with or assists or
participates in any way in the violation of, any of the provisions or requirements of this Article or
any of the provisions or requirements of any Adult Business License, shall be fined not more than
750 for each such violation.
Section 14-2313 Nuisance Declared. Any Adult Business established, operated, or maintained
in violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this Article or of any Adult Business
License shall be, and the same is, declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The Village may,
in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth in this Article, commence an action to
enjoin, remove, or abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other
steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate
or remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person from establishing, operating
or maintaining an Adult Business contrary to the provisions of this Article.
Section 14-2314 Severability. In the event that any provision of this Article or any part thereof,
or any application thereof to any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction on its
face or as applied, such holding shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of any of the remaining
provisions of this Article, or any part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or
circumstance or of said provision as applied to any other person or circumstance. It is declared to
be the legislative intent of the Village that this Article would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective provisions not been included herein.
Ord. #02-086)
Article XXIV Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax
Section 14-2401 Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Rate. A tax is hereby levied
and imposed under the provisions of Section 5-25 and 5-30 of the Illinois Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax Act. The rate of the tax shall be 6% which shall take
OTHER BUSINESSES
70 REVISED 12/03/01
effect for all gross charges billed by telecommunications retailers on or after the first day of
January, 2003.
Ord. #01-064)
Article XXV Newsracks
Section 14-2501 Findings and Purposes.
a. The Village Board hereby finds, as follows:
1. The public rights- of-way historically have been used to circulate newspapers and
other publications,
2. The substantial growth in the number of newspapers and other publications has
produced a significant increase in the number of individual newsracks located on
the public rights-of-way,
3. The unregulated placement and maintenance of individual newsracks in the public
rights-of-way interferes with the free and unimpeded use of such public rights -ofway,
and threatens the health, safety and welfare of persons who use the public
rights-of-way, including pedestrians, children, the aged, persons entering and
leaving vehicles and buildings, drivers, persons performing essential utility, traffic
control and emergency services, and persons with disabilities, and,
4. The unregulated placement of multicolored, broken, rusted and abandoned
individual newsracks of various shapes and sizes in the public rights- of-way
significantly detracts from the aesthetic character of surrounding areas.
b. The Village Board further finds that there is a need for reasonable time, place and manner
guidelines regarding the installation, placement, size, appearance and maintenance of
newsracks in the public rights-of-way. Consistent with these findings, it is the purpose of
this Article to promote the health and safety of users of the public rights- of-way and to
enhance the aesthetics of the Village in a manner which may utilize newsracks as a method
of distribution of newspapers and other publications, so as to do the following:
1. Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience;
2. Restrict unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic,
including ingress into and egress from any residence or place of business, or from
the street to the sidewalk by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles;
3. Provide for the safety of the public and property during windstorms and other
inclement weather;
4. Replace, remove or relocate individual newsracks that have created visual blight on
the public rights- of-way or unreasonably detracted from the aesthetics of adjacent
businesses, landscaping and other improvements;
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
71 REVISED 07/02/07
5. Maintain and protect the values of surrounding properties; and,
6. Reduce unnecessary exposure of the public to personal injury and property damage.
It is also the purpose of this Article to ensure a diversity of viewpoints consistent
with the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, and to treat all
newspapers and other lawful publications equally, regardless of their content.
Section 14-2502 Definitions. For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings set forth below:
a. Abandoned. Any compartment of a modular newsrack, that does not contain the newspaper
or other publication specified therefor for more than four consecutive days for a daily
publication, eight consecutive days for a weekly publication, 16 consecutive days for a
biweekly publication, 32 days for a monthly publication, or 64 days for a bi-monthly
publication.
b. Compartment. The individual space within a modular newsrack that dispenses one
newspaper or other publication, including the door, coin return mechanism and associated
hardware.
c. Director. The director of the department of Building.
d. Modular Newsrack. A newsrack that is designed with multiple separate enclosed
compartments to accommodate at any one time the display, sale or distribution of multiple
distinct and separate newspapers or other publications.
Ord. #07-039)
e. Modular Newsrack District. That portion of the Village defined as the Downtown District
in the Village’ s Zoning Ordinance plus the Municipal Complex including the buildings at
33 S. Arlington Heights Road and 5 S. Arlington Heights Road.
f. Newspapers and other publications. Includes newspapers, periodicals, advertising circulars
and all other printed materials that may be distributed through the use of newsracks.
g. Newsrack. Any unmanned, self- service or coin- operated box, container, storage unit or
other dispenser located in or upon, or projecting onto, into, or over, any part of the public
rights- of-way, and which is installed, used or maintained for the display, sale or distribution
of newspapers and other publications.
h. Public rights-of-way. Includes all highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, and other real
property or easements, which are owned or controlled by the Village, including the areas
above and below such easements, and which are reserved or used for pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
i. Publisher. The person or other legal entity selling, displaying or distributing newspapers or
other publications in a newsrack.
OTHER BUSINESSES
72 REVISED 12/03/01
Section 14-2503. Provision of Modular Newsracks. In furtherance of the purpose of this
Article, the Village shall provide for the placement of modular newsracks on public rights-of-way
in the Modular Newsrack District.
a. The modular newsracks shall be purchased by a publication or publications in accordance
with Village specifications. Such purchase by the publication may be for the entire
newsrack or by compartment. If a publication purchases entire modular newsracks, it shall
allocate compartments within such racks in accordance with this Article. The Village shall
purchase the decorative shell for the newsracks. Each publication shall be required to pay
the applicable cost for each compartment it uses and shall be responsible for maintaining
such compartments. Any publication that has not provided proof of payment for its
compartment(s) shall not be assigned any compartment(s).
b. In the modular newsrack district, for the initial placement of modular newsracks, the total
number of compartments in modular newsracks shall be substantially equivalent to the
highest total number of individual newsracks known to have been maintained on the public
rights- of-way in the modular newsrack district at any one time during the year preceding
the introduction of this Ordinance. ( See Exhibit A, attached to and made a part of this
Ordinance, for the initial placement and number.)
c. After the initial installation of modular newsracks, the total number of compartments in
modular newsracks in the modular newsrack district may be increased or decreased only
consistent with the purposes stated in Section 14-2501, Findings and Purposes, of the
Municipal Code. Modular newsracks shall be placed in locations throughout the district
which afford easy, convenient service to pedestrians, but which do not obstruct or interfere
with access to abutting properties, and which do not impede or endanger pedestrian, bicycle
or vehicle traffic.
d. There shall be no newsracks of any type located within the Modular Newsrack District
except as part of a Village-approved modular newsrack. All existing newsracks shall be
removed from the Modular Newsrack District within seven days after placement of the
modular newsrack. Any newsracks not so removed or otherwise placed in violation of this
Article shall be subject to confiscation by the Village.
Section 14-2504 Allocation of Modular Newsrack Compartments. The Village shall ensure
that modular newsrack compartments are allocated in accordance with the following procedure:
a. Each compartment in a modular newsrack shall contain copies of only one newspaper or
other publication, and have a door that is sized to fit and display such newspaper or other
publication.
b. The Village shall ensure that there are enough compartments in each modular newsrack to
accommodate all publishers who initially wish to distribute their newspapers and other
publications at that location, up to a maximum of 16 compartments per newsrack in the
Modular Newsrack District in accordance with Exhibit A. If more than 16 publishers wish
to distribute newspapers or other publications at that location, then the compartments shall
be allocated as follows:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
73 REVISED 12/03/01
1. Priority shall be given to publishers who continuously have distributed newspapers
or other publications in newsracks at that location for more than 12 months before
the effective date of this Ordinance, as indicated by the publisher’ s affidavit
provided to the Village;
2. Among publishers who have priority under this Subsection, compartments shall be
allocated first to newspapers and other publications issued at least five days per
week, second to newspapers and other publications issued between two and four
days per week, third to newspapers and other publications issued once a week, and
fourth to newspapers and other publications issued less frequently;
3. If there are more compartments than publishers with priority under this
Section, then the Village shall allocate the remaining compartments among
publishers who do not have priority, first to newspapers and other publications
issued at least five days per week, second to newspapers and other publications
issued between two and four days per week, third to newspapers and other once a
week, and fourth to newspapers and other publications issued less frequently;
4. Notwithstanding the requirements of this Subsection, no newspaper or other
publication may receive a second space in modular newsrack until all other
interested publishers have had the opportunity to have their newspaper or other
publication allocated to a compartment;
5. Whenever additional compartments become available, they shall be allocated in the
manner described in this Subsection; and,
6. In the event two or more publishers have equal priority under this Subsection, then
allocation shall be by lottery or other random method.
c. For initial assignment of newsrack space, the Village shall notify all publishers who
currently distribute their newspapers and publications at each location where the Village is
installing a modular newsrack. Such notification shall, at a minimum, consist of a copy of
the Village’ s Application for Modular Newsrack Space. On the Application, each publisher
shall include the number of compartments and the locations it is seeking. All applications
shall be returned to the Director of Building, who shall ensure that compartments are
allocated in accordance with the procedure set forth above.
d. After the initial assignment of newsrack space, any publisher seeking to place its
publication within the Modular Newsrack District must fill out an Application for Modular
Newsrack Space and submit it to the Director of Building, who shall ensure that
compartments are allocated in accordance with the procedure set forth above.
e. The opportunity of publishers to have their newspapers and other publications distributed
from a modular newsrack shall not be affected whatsoever by their content, consistent with
the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
OTHER BUSINESSES
74 REVISED 10/04/04
Ord. # 04-053)
Article XXVI Valet Parking
Section 14-2601 Definition. Valet parking service, when used in this Article, shall mean a parking
service provided to accommodate patrons of any business establishment by which an attendant on
behalf of the establishment takes temporary custody of a patron’ s motor vehicle and moves, parks,
stores or retrieves that vehicle for the patron’ s convenience.
Section 14-2602 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of providing valet
parking services without first having obtained a license therefore.
Section 14-2603 Application. An application to conduct valet parking services shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to application for licenses. In
addition, the applicant must provide proof that the applicant has obtained liability insurance
covering all locations at which the applicant operates or seeks to operate in the minimum amounts
of $1,000,000 per occurrence for public liability, $100,000 per occurrence for property damage,
and $ 100, 000 per occurrence for garage keepers’ legal liability. The insurance shall be for a term
at least coextensive with the duration of the business license and shall not be subject to cancellation
except upon 30 days’ prior written notice to the Village. Upon termination or lapse of the
licensee’ s insurance coverage, any license issued to the licensee shall automatically expire.
Section 14-2604 Duties of Licensee. The Licensee is required to ensure that all of its employees
observe the following rules for valet parking operations:
a. All valet parking attendants shall wear a clearly legible patch, insignia or badge on their
clothing stating the name of the valet operation and must carry a valid driver’ s license at
all times while in control of a patron’ s vehicle.
b. Valet parking pick-up and drop-off zones shall only be allowed in locations designated by
the Village. Vehicles in such staging areas may be stored in those areas for no longer than
five minutes per vehicle.
c. Upon taking custody of a patron’ s vehicle, each valet parking attendant shall issue a
numbered receipt containing the name, address and telephone number of the company
providing the valet service. Each attendant shall also place a ticket identifying the valet
company and its telephone number on the dashboard of each vehicle so as to be
conspicuously visible through the windshield of the vehicle.
d. Valet parking attendants shall park vehicles only in those locations designated by the
Village for valet parking. It is the responsibility of the Licensee to ensure that all of its
employees are made aware of the permitted locations for the valet parking of vehicles.
e. Valet parking attendants shall not park vehicles on any street, other than for the temporary
staging of vehicles. Under no circumstances is double- parking of vehicles on any roadway
permitted.
f. If privately owned and operated parking is to be used for valet parking, the Licensee must
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
75 REVISED 10/04/04
provide written proof of authorization to use such property from the property owner or
manager.
Section 14-2605 Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation guilty of violating any provision of
this Article shall be fined not less than $ 50 nor more than $ 750 for each offense, and their license
subject to revocation. For purposes of enforcement, a citation may be issued to the Licensee or the
employee for any violation of this Article.
Article XXVII General Business Licenses
Section 14-2701 General Business License. Any commercial enterprise or activity not otherwise
enumerated in this Code shall be subject to a general business license. The fee for the license shall
be determined in accordance with Section 14-102, Licensed Businesses and Fees.
Article XXVIII Penalties
Section 14-2801 Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this Chapter shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each offense. Aseparate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or in which a violation occurs or continues.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
CHAPTER 15 REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT
IN SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Article I
Section 15-101 Purpose
Section 15-102 Definitions
Section 15-103 How to Use This Chapter
Section 15-104 Duties of the Director of Engineering
Section 15-105 Base Flood Elevation
Section 15-106 Occupation and Use of Flood Fringe Areas
Section 15-107 Occupation and Use of Designated Floodways
Section 15-108 Occupation and Use of SFHA Areas Where Floodways are not Identified
Section 15-109 Permitting Requirements Applicable to All Floodplain Areas
Section 15-110 Other Development Requirements
Section 15-111 Variances
Section 15-112 Disclaimer of Liability
Section 15-113 Penalty
Section 15-114 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
Section 15-115 Severability
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
2
Ord. #07-023)
Section 15-101 Purpose. This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this
Village by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2. The purpose of this
Chapter is to maintain this Village’ s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; to minimize
potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters,
conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise utilization of water and related land
resources. This Chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
a. To meet the requirements of 615 ILCS 5/18(g) Rivers, Lakes and Streams Act;
b. To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage hazards to others, or
creating unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
c. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
d. To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
e. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood-damaged
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations; and
f. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the Village by
fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program;
g. To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified
as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended.
h. To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and water resources; and
i. To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in
order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion,
protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic
benefits and enhance community and economic development.
Ord. #08-024)
Section 15-102 Definitions.
a. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
1. Accessory Structure. A non- habitable structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to
the use of the principal structure.
2. Act. An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the State
of Illinois", 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.
3. Applicant. Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
3
4. Appropriate Use. Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and will
be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are as
specified in Section 15-107b.
5. Base Flood. The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100- year frequency flood event.
Application of the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in Section 15-
105 of this Chapter.
6. Base Flood Elevation ( BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest
of the base flood.
7. Basement. That portion of the building having its floor subgrade ( below ground
level) on all sides.
8. Building. A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank, that is
principally above ground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated buildings,
and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational vehicles and
travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180 days per year.
9. Channel. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression,
ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash, or natural
or man-made drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or
into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently.
10. Channel Modification. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions
or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes damming, riprapping
( or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining
and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom or banks. Channel
modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or
trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form of channel modification
involving a significant change in the channel cross- section and typically involving
relocation of the existing channel (e.g. straightening).
11. Compensatory Storage. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume
of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity
when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. The uncompensated
loss of natural floodplain storage can increase off-site floodwater elevations and
flows.
12. Conditional Approval of a Designated Floodway Map Change. Preconstruction
approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map.
This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this Part, gives assurances to the property
owner that once an Appropriate Use is constructed according to permitted plans, the
floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of
as- built plans.
13. Conditional Letter of Map Revision ( CLOMR). A letter which indicates that FEMA
will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
4
floodway as shown on an effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance
Rate Map, once the as-built plans are submitted and approved.
14. Control Structure. A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes
through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface
elevation.
15. Critical Facility. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the
population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster.
Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services, can cause
greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can put special populations at
risk. Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency services facilities ( such as fire and police stations), schools,
hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads and bridges,
critical utility sites ( telephone switching stations or electrical transformers), and
hazardous material storage facilities ( chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic
substances). Examples of critical facilities where flood protection is recommended
include: sewage treatment plants, water treatment plants, and pumping stations.
16. Dam. All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments
and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or diverting
water or creating a pool. Dams may also include weirs, restrictive culverts or
impoundment structures. Underground water storage tanks are not included.
17. Designated Floodway. The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of
the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally depicted on the FEMA
FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year frequency
flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to the loss of
flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10 percent increase in velocities.
a. The floodways are designated for on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate
Map of Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008, when
two floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit
shall prevail.
b. The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village of Arlington Heights that
may be annexed into the Village of Arlington Heights are designated for the
countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by FEMA and dated
August 19, 2008.
c. To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated
floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and
located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the designated
floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
18. Development. Any man- made change to real estate, including:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
5
a. Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any
addition to a building.
b. Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured
home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more
than 180 days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is on site for more
than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
c. Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar
projects.
d. Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
e. Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction
f. Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts; channel
modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other nonagricultural
alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of
solid or liquid waste;
g. Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or velocity
of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal;
h. Substantial improvement of an existing building.
Development does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities such as re-roofing or re-surfacing of roads when there is no increase in
elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
19. Elevation Certificates. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a building has been elevated.
20. Erosion. The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave
action.
21. Exempt Organizations. Organizations which are exempt from this Chapter per
Illinois Compiled Statutes ( ILCS) including state, federal or local units of
government.
22. Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) has been completed before April 1, 1990.
23. Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed ( including the installation of
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
6
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads).
24. FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-
79, as amended.
25. Flood. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual and
rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
26. Flood Frequency. A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a
flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
27. Flood Fringe. That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated floodway.
28. Flood Insurance Rate Maps ( FIRM). A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the
Special Flood Hazard Area ( SFHA) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
29. Flood Insurance Study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
30. Floodplain. That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100- year frequency flood elevation.
Floodplains may also include detached Special Flood Hazard Areas, ponding areas,
etc. The floodplain is also known as the Special Flood Hazard Area ( SFHA).
a. The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the Village that are
subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The
SFHAs of Buffalo Creek, McDonald Creek, McDonald Creek – North
Branch, McDonald Creek – South Branch, Salt Creek – Arlington Heights
Branch within the Village are generally identified as such on panel numbers
0044F, 0063F, 0182F, 0184F, 0192F, 0201F, 0202F, 0203F, 0204F, 0211F,
and 0212F of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Village
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
November 6, 2000. The SFHAs of the Village are generally identified as
such on panel numbers 0064F of the countrywide Flood Insurance Rate Map
of the Village prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
dated August 19, 2008.
b. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village or that may be annexed into the
Village are generally identified as such on panel numbers 0044F, 0063F,
0182F, 0184F, 0192F, 0201F, 0202F, 0203F, 0204F, 0211F, and 0212F of
the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for Cook County by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency) and dated August 19, 2008.
31. Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and non- structural additions, changes
or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or
improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7
32. Floodproofing Certificate. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify that a
building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the
flood protection elevation.
33. Flood Protection Elevation ( FPE). The elevation of the base flood or 100- year
frequency floods plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in the SFHA.
34. Floodway. See 15-102a.17 Designated Floodway.
35. Historic Structure. Any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminary
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historic district or a district preliminary determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on the State inventory of historic places by the Illinois
Historic Preservation Agency;
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been
certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
36. Hydrologic and Hydraulic Calculations. Engineering analysis which determine
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and rainfall
events.
37. IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources.
38. Letter of Map Amendment ( LOMA). Official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a 100- year floodplain; amends the FIRM.
39. Letter of Map Revision ( LOMR). Letter that revises base flood or 100- year
frequency flood elevations, floodplains or floodways as shown on an effective
FIRM.
40. Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area ( including basement).
An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a
buildings lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of the applicable non- elevation design requirements of this
ordinance.
41. Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a permanent
foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “ manufactured home”
also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on site for
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
8
more than 180 consecutive days. The term “ manufactured home” does not include a
recreational vehicle”.
42. Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A parcel ( or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
43. Mitigation. Mitigation includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative
effects which floodplain development activities might have on the public health,
safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include: excavation of compensatory
storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration. Mitigation
may also include those activities taken to reduce a structure’s susceptibility to
flooding.
44. New Construction. New construction means structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
45. New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) has been completed on or after April 1, 1990.
46. NAVD 88. North American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).
47. Natural. When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the
existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A natural
stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees;
the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows
over soil and geologic materials typical of the area with no substantial alteration of
the course or cross-section of the stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified
channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders
and vegetation is re-established. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to
more natural conditions by man through regarding and revegetation.
48. Ordinary High Water Mark (OHWM). The point on the bank or shore up to which
the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a distinctive
mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristics.
49. Public Flood Control Project. A flood control project which will be operated and
maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings and
structures, including a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed
conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude the design,
engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project
by persons or parties who are not public agencies.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
9
50. Public Bodies of Waters. All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes, and
all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were capable of being
improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or discharge their waters
into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the borders of the State of Illinois,
together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to
the main channel or body of water directly accessible thereto.
51. Recreational Vehicle or Travel Trailer. A vehicle which is:
a. Built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
c. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
and
d. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
52. Regional Permits. Regional permits are offered for pre-approved projects which are
considered minor projects that are permissible per IDNR/OWR Part 3708 rules for
Northeastern Illinois regulatory floodways. A complete listing of the terms and
conditions for specific project types can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
53. Registered Land Surveyor. A land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois, under
The Illinois Land Surveyors Act. (225 ILCS 330/1, et seq.)
54. Registered Professional Engineer. An engineer registered in the State of Illinois,
under The Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act. (225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.)
55. Repair, Remodeling or Maintenance. Development activities which do not result in
any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the
dimensions of a structure.
56. Repetitive Loss. Flood- related damages sustained by a structure on two separate
occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each
such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the
structure before the damaged occurred.
57. Retention/Detention Facility. A retention facility stores stormwater runoff without a
gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of stormwater runoff and
controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm.
58. Riverine SFHA. Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent
stream, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified channel. This term does
not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow,
or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
10
59. Runoff. The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface,
flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or conduits.
60. Sedimentation. The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials either
on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
61. Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). See 15-102a.30 “Floodplain.”
62. Start of Construction. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
63. Statewide Permits. Statewide permits are offered for pre-approved projects that are
considered minor projects which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR Part 3700
rules. A complete listing of the statewide permits and permit requirements can be
obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
64. Structure. See 15-102a. 8 “ Building.”
65. Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage during the life of the building equals or exceeds
50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred
regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must
be included in this determination. The term includes Repetitive Loss Buildings
See Section 15-102a.56 “ Repetitive Loss.”
66. Substantial Improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
improvement of a structure taking place during the life of the building in which the
cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the improvement or repair is started.
a. " Substantial Improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.
b. The term does not, however, include either:
1. any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
2. any alteration of a “ historic structure” listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places, provided
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
11
that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure.
67. Transition Section. Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a
narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice versa.
68. Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with
the community’ s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence
of compliance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
Section 15-103 How to Use This Chapter.
a. The Director of Engineering shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in
Section 15-104.
b. To fulfill those duties, the Director of Engineering should first use the criteria listed in
Section 15-105, Base Flood Elevations, to determine whether the development site is
located within a floodplain.
c. Once it has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain, the Director of
Engineering must determine whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a
designated floodway, or within a SFHA or floodplain for which no floodway has been
identified.
1. If the site is within a flood fringe, the Director of Engineering shall require that the
minimum requirements of Section 15-106 be met.
2. If the site is within a floodway, the Director of Engineering shall require that the
minimum requirements of Section 15-107 be met.
3. If the site is located within a SFHA or floodplain for which no detailed study has
been completed and approved, the Director of Engineering shall require that the
minimum requirements of Section 15-108 be met.
d. In addition, the general requirements of Section 15-109 shall be met for all developments
meeting the requirements of Section 15-106, 15-107, or 15-108.
e. The Director of Engineering shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the
requirements of Section 15-110.
f. If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the Director of Engineering shall review the
requirements of Section 15-111 to make sure they are met. In addition, the Director of
Engineering shall complete all notification requirements.
g. In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this Chapter, the
Director of Engineering may take any and all actions as outlined in Section 15-113.
Section 15-104 Duties of the Director of Engineering.
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
12
a. Determining the Floodplain Designation.
1. Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a Special Flood
Hazard Area (SFHA).
2. If they are in a SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or in a
floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more
than one square mile.
3. Check whether the development is potentially within an extended SFHA (with a
drainage area less than one square mile), indicating that the development would have
adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance, or inundation which would be the
basis for the applicant being required to delineate the floodplain and floodway and
be subject to the remaining sections of this Chapter.
b. Professional Engineer Review.
1. If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for which a detailed
study has not been conducted and which drains more than one square mile, the
permit shall be referred to a registered professional engineer under the employ or
contract of the Village for review to ensure that the development meets Sections 15-
107 or 15-108.
2. In the case of an Appropriate Use, the P.E. shall state in writing that the
development meets the requirements of Section 15-107.
c. Dam Safety Requirements.
1. Dams are classified as to their size and their hazard/ damage potential in the event of
failure.
2. The construction or major modification of all Class I (high hazard) and Class II
moderate hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit.
3. Some Class III ( low hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit,
depending on the drainage area to the dam, the height of the dam and the
impounding capacity behind the dam. Most off-channel detention basins that have
an embankment are non-jurisdictional Class III dam. It is not required that
IDNR/ OWR “ sign off” on all non- jurisdictional Class III dams.
4. A consulting engineer with dam safety knowledge can estimate a hazard
classification and determine if an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit is required.
5. A permit application submittal must be made to IDNR/OWR for the construction or
major modification of jurisdictional dams.
6. Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment structures.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13
d. Other permit requirements. Ensure any and all required federal, state and local permits are
received prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit.
e. Plan Review and Permit Issuance.
1. Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the
Village meet the requirements of this Chapter, and;
2. Issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter and other regulations of this community when the development meets the
conditions of this Chapter.
f. Inspection Review.
1. Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure
proper elevation of the structure and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter; and
2. Schedule on an annual basis an inspection of the floodplain and document the results
of the inspection.
g. Damage Determinations. Make damage determinations of all damaged buildings in the
SFHA after a flood to determine substantially damaged structures which must comply with
Section 15- 109c. 3.
h. Elevation and Floodproofing Certificates. Maintain permit files including:
1. An Elevation Certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor ( including
basement) of a residential or non-residential building subject to Section 15-109 of
this Chapter, and/ or;
2. The elevation to which a non- residential building has been floodproofed, using a
Floodproofing Certificate, for all buildings subject to Section 15-109 of this Chapter.
i. Records for Public Inspection. Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base
flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies of federal or state permit
documents, variance documentation, Conditional Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map
Revision, Letter of Map Amendment and " as- built" elevation and floodproofing and/ or
elevation certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this Chapter.
j. State Permits. Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by IDNR/OWR, for
all development projects subject to Sections 15-107 and 15-108 of this Chapter, unless
enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the Village. However, the following
review approvals are not delegated to the Village and shall require review or permits from
IDNR/OWR:
1. Organizations which are exempt from this Chapter, as per the Illinois Compiled
Statutes;
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
14
2. IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in Section 15-
102.16 and all other state, federal or local unit of government projects, including
projects of the Village and County, except for those projects meeting the
requirements of Section 15- 107b.1;
3. An engineer' s determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a
source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, per
Section 15-107b. 15;
4. An engineer' s analysis of the flood profile due to Section 15-107b.4;
5. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as
indicated in Section 15-107b, 15-107b.1, 15-107b.2 and 15-107b.8;
6. Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes
and streams;
7. Any changes in the mapped floodway or published flood profiles.
k. Cooperation with Other Agencies.
1. Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to improve base
flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve the
administration of this Chapter;
2. Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a regulatory map
within 6 months whenever a modification of the floodplain may change the base
flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain map;
3. Submit reports as required for the National Flood Insurance Program; and
4. Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this Chapter.
l. Promulgate Regulations. Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and
enforce the provisions of this Chapter, subject, however, to the review and approval of
IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any chapter changes.
Ord. #08-024)
Section 15-105 Base Flood Elevation.
a. This Chapter’s protection standard is based on the Flood Insurance Study for the Village.
1. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is not available for a
particular site, then the protection standard shall be according to the best existing data
available from federal, state or other sources.
2. When a party disagrees with the best available data, they shall submit a detailed
engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data and submit it to
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
15
IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and consideration prior to any development of
the site.
b. The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the Village that are subject to
inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The SFHAs of Buffalo Creek,
McDonald Creek, McDonald Creek – North Branch, McDonald Creek – South Branch, Salt
Creek – Arlington Heights Branch within the Village are generally identified as such on
panel number 0044F, 0063F, 0182Fm 0184Fm, 0192F, 0202F, 0202F, 0203F, 0204F,
0211F, and 0212F of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Village prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated November 6, 2000. The SFHAs of
the Village are generally identified as such on panel numbers 0064F of the countywide
Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Village prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments to such study and maps as may
be prepared from time to time.
c. The base flood or 100- year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of
unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village or
that may be annexed into the Village shall be as delineated on the 100- year flood profiles in
the Flood Insurance Study of Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008,
and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to
time.
d. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an "AH
Zone" or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation ( or depth) delineated on the countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Map of Cook County.
e. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs
delineated as an " A Zone" on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Cook County
shall be according to the best existing data available from federal, state or other sources.
Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by the applicant to
determine base flood elevations.
1. When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or
100- year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined from a
backwater model, such as HEC-II, HEC-RAS, or a dynamic model such as HIP.
2. The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrologic
model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC- 1, TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in
various publications prepared by the United States Geological Survey for estimating
peak flood discharges.
3. For a non- riverine SFHA, the Base Flood Elevation shall be the historic Flood of
Record plus three feet, unless calculated by a detailed engineering study.
4. For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than one square mile)
which has been identified by the Director of Engineering pursuant to Section 15-
104a.3, the base flood elevation shall be determined by the applicant utilizing a
method as approved in Section 15-105e.
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
16
Section 15-106 Occupation and Use of Flood Fringe Areas. Development in and/or filling of the
flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or 10/0-year frequency
flood by proper elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions of this Chapter.
No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of drainage facilities or systems.
Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this Section, along with
the requirements of Section 15-109.
a. Development Permit.
1. No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a development
permit from the Director of Engineering
2. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Director of Engineering.
a. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to
scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the
property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor;
existing grade elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings.
b. For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor ( including
basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans
and the development will be subject to the requirements of Section 15-109 of
this Chapter.
3. Upon receipt of a development permit application, the Director of Engineering shall
compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100- year frequency flood
elevation.
a. Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher than the
base flood elevation of the current Flood Insurance Rate Map and which has
not been filled after the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map
without a permit as required by this Chapter is not in the SFHA and,
therefore, not subject to the requirements of this Chapter. Conversely, any
development located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and
hydraulically connected, but shown on the current Flood Insurance Rate Map
is subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
b. The Director of Engineering shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification.
4. A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This
plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the
temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate
their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
17
revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction
maintenance.
5. The Director of Engineering shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant
copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or waivers that may be
required for this type of activity. The Director of Engineering shall not issue a
permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been obtained.
b. Preventing Increased Damages. No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to
public health and safety.
1. If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100- year frequency
flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map
revision ( LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the
floodplain.
2. Compensatory Storage.
a. Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of
space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for
and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
b. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the volume of
storage lost due to the fill or structure
c. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made
opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
d. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage
lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the
proposed 10-year flood elevation.
e. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse.
c. Construction of the Lowest Floor Below The Base Flood Elevation (BFE). A person who
has obtained a Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill that removes a site in the flood
fringe from the floodplain due to the use of fill to elevate the site above the BFE, may
apply for a permit from the Village to construct the lowest floor of a residential building
below the BFE in the flood fringe. The Director of Engineering shall not issue such a
permit unless the applicant has complied with all the criteria set forth in the following
subsection.
1. Compensatory storage shall be provided per Section 15-106b.2.
2. The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall ( i.e., window wells,
access ways) shall be at or above the Flood Protection Elevation ( FPE).
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
18
3. The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above the FPE, for a
minimum distance of 10 feet beyond the outside face of the structure. However,
if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be met, the Director of
Engineering may waive the 10 foot minimum setback if an Illinois Registered
Professional Engineer certifies that an alternative method to protect the building
from damage due to hydrostatic pressures has been met. The certifications shall
be in the form of a detailed soils and structural design analysis, which shall be
submitted to the Director of Engineering for review. The Director of Engineering
may require such additional documentation as necessary to prove that the
proposed shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe. In no
case shall the setback distance be less than four feet.
4. The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a distance of 20 feet
from the structure, shall be above the BFE. However, if site conditions are such
that this requirement cannot be obtained, the Director of Engineering may waive
the 20 foot minimum setback distance if an Illinois Registered Professional
Engineer certifies that an alternative method to protect the building from damages
due to hydrostatic pressures have been met. A detailed soils analysis and
structural design proving that a shorter setback distance will keep the structure
reasonably safe from flooding, shall be submitted to the Village for review. In no
case shall the setback distance be less than four feet.
5. The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets all
requirements of this subsection and is at least five feet thick under the basement
floor slab. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to require the removal
or replacement of fill that was placed as part of a LOMR-F, if such fill consists of
material, including soils of similar classification and degree permeability, such as
those classified as CH, CL, SC or ML according to ASTM standard D-2487,
Classification of Soils for Engineering Purposes.
6. The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic; that is, the soil must be all of
one material, and the engineering priorities must be in the same direction.
7. All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and inspected by an
Illinois Registered Professional Engineer, as warranted by the site conditions.
8. The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than five below the BFE.
9. There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab, and minimum of one
quarter (¼) horsepower sump pump with a backup power supply shall be provided
to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at four times the estimated
seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and away from the building in order
to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the floor under the effect of the
seepage pressure.
10. The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of preventing
backflow.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
19
11. All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand hydrostatic pressure in
accordance with accepted engineering practices.
12. If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set forth in the preceding
paragraphs of this subsection, the Director of Engineering may allow the
construction of a basement below the BFE only if the applicant demonstrates that the
proposed fill and structure meet the guidelines and requirements set forth in FEMA
Technical Bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably safe from flooding. In order to
demonstrate that the proposed structure is reasonably safe from flooding, the
applicant shall submit a detailed engineering analysis of the proposed fill and
foundation wall. The engineered basement study shall be completed in accordance
with the latest edition of FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01, with the analysis of the
fill being prepared by an Illinois Registered Professional Engineer.
13. In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site, in no case shall the
depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the lot exceed 18 inches, as
measured from the previously existing natural grade. The rear yard shall be
permitted to have a greater depth of excavation, if necessary. All such excavation
shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse or storm sewer
system. The use of mechanical means to drain the compensatory storage area will
not be permitted.
Ord. #08-024)
Section 15-107 Occupation and Use of Designated Floodways. This section applies to proposed
development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a designated
floodway. The designated floodway for Buffalo Creek, McDonald Creek, McDonald Creek – North
Branch, McDonald Creek – South Branch, Salt Creek – Arlington Heights Branch within the Village
are generally identified as such on panel number 0044F, 0063F, 0182F, 0184F, 0192F, 0201F,
0202F, 0203F, 0204F, 0211F, and 0212F of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Village
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated November 6, 2000. The SFHAs
of the Village are generally identified as such on panel numbers 0064F of the countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Map of the Village prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
dated August 19, 2008, and referenced in Section 15-102a.28. Only those uses and structures will be
permitted which meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the minimum
necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the
requirements of Section 15-109.
a. Development Permit. No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by
state law shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining a
development permit from the Director of Building and IDNR/OWR.
1. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Director of Engineering. The application shall include the following information:
a. Name and address of applicant;
b. Site location ( including legal description) of property, drawn to scale, on the
designated floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an
incorporated or unincorporated area;
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
20
c. Name of stream or body of water affected;
d. Description of proposed activity;
e. Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
f. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
g. Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different
from the applicant;
h. Signature of the applicant or the applicant' s agent;
i. If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer
shall sign the application form;
j. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form;
and
k. If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the
trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with
the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by name and address
and defining the respective interests therein.
l. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a
minimum:
1. A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site,
graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;
2. A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of
the structure or work, elevations, using the North American Vertical
Datum of 1988, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and
flood control easements, location of any channels and any existing or
future access roads, distance between proposed activity and
navigation channel ( when the proposed construction is near a
commercially navigable body of water), designated floodway limit,
floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed
channel modifications, location and orientation of cross-sections,
north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale;
3. Cross- section views of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal
dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed
elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood
elevation, 100- year frequency flood elevation, and graphic or
numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
21
4. A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas. This
plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities
and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post- construction
maintenance.
5. A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any
proposed change in the designated floodway location.
m. Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approval letters that may
be required for this type of development.
n. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing
that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of Section 15-107b.
o. If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100- year frequency
flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the application will
not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated conditional
approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may be
built until a Letter of Map Revision has been approved by FEMA.
p. The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing ground
elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation
or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a registered
professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the
location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the
elevation of the lowest floor ( including basement) of all proposed buildings
subject to the requirements of Section 15-109 of this Chapter.
q. If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall
submit the following information:
1. A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
2. A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or
methods (see 15-107b.3.i) to accomplish the purpose of the proposed
work;
3. An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each
feasible alternative identified in 15-107b.3.i of this Section would
have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water
affected; and
4. An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering
cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the
body of water affected.
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
22
2. The Director of Engineering shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant
copies of all other federal, state, and local permits and approvals that may be
required for this type of activity.
a. The Director of Engineering shall not issue the development permit unless
all required federal and state permits have been obtained.
b. A Registered Professional Engineer, under the employ or contract of the
Village shall review and approve applications reviewed under this Section.
b. Preventing Increased Damages and a List of Appropriate Uses.
1. The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are Appropriate Uses,
which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and which will not create a
damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat
to public health and safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and
hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing
water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by
appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this Chapter. Only those Appropriate
Uses listed in 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 will be allowed. The approved
Appropriate Uses are as follows:
a. Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private
improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or water
quality or habitat for fish and wildlife.
b. Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water
or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and facilities and
improvements related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other
functionally water dependent uses;
c. Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls;
d. Underground and overhead utilities;
e. Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems, including any
related fencing ( at least 50% open when viewed from any one direction)
built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open air pavilions
and toilet facilities (four stall maximum) that will not block flood flows nor
reduce floodway storage.
f. Detached garages, storage sheds or other non- habitable accessory structures
that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
g. Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways and
any modification thereto;
h. Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
23
1. The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not
exceed 1.0 foot; or
2. The applicant of a short- term recreational use facility parking lot
formally agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events
and accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access
during all overbank flooding events.
i. Designated floodway regarding, without fill, to create a positive non-erosive
slop toward a watercourse.
j. Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures
including the construction of water tight window wells, elevating structures,
or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or industrial
principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be no more
than 10 feet away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and, which
are not considered substantial improvements to the structure.
k. The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building, provided
that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the building was
damaged to 50% or more of the market value before the damage occurred,
the building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation.
l. Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the enclosed
floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood elevation, and
which will not block flood flows including but not limited to, fireplaces, bay
windows, decks, patios, and second story additions. If the building is
improved to 50% or more of the market value before the modification
occurred ( i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will be protected
from flooding to the flood protection elevation.
2. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures,
fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done
to accommodate otherwise non- appropriate uses in the floodway, fencing ( including
landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as
specifically defined above as an Appropriate Use.
3. Within the designated floodway , the construction of an Appropriate Use, will be
considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets the following
engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans,
calculations and data by a registered professional engineer and provided that any
structure meets the protection requirements of Section 15-109 of this Chapter:
a. Preservation of Flood Conveyance, so as Not to Increase Flood Stages
Upstream. For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, onstream
structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost
due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including the
100- year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
24
1. Designated floodway conveyance, "K" = (1.486/n) (AR2/3) where "n"
is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective flow area of the
cross-section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter.
See Ven Te Chow, Open Channel Hydraulics, ( McGraw- Hill, New
York 1959)).
2. The same Manning's " n" value shall be used for both existing and
proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a
federal, state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed
conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a
vegetative to a non-vegetative land cover.
3. Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of
effective designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion
and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can
prove to IDNR/ OWR through engineering calculations or model
tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same
efficiency:
a. When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than
at a rate of one foot horizontal for every four feet of the
flooded stream's length.
b. When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster
than at a rate of one foot horizontal for every one foot of the
flooded stream' s length.
c. When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction,
a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every 10 feet of
stream length shall be used.
d. Transition sections shall be provided between cross- sections
with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the
designated floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
e. All cross- sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
b. Preservation of Floodway Storage so as Not to Increase Downstream
Flooding.
1. Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated floodway
storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or
structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
2. Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least
1.5 times the volume of floodplain storage lost.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
25
3. Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind
a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.
4. The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed
between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-
year flood elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the
existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed
10-year flood elevation. All designated floodway storage lost above
the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the
proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be
constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
5. If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the
proposed construction, the applicant' s engineer shall demonstrate
through a determination of flood discharges and water surface
elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.
6. There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a
floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to
reduce flooding at existing structure.
c. Preservation of Floodway Velocities so as Not to Increase Stream Erosion or
Flood Heights.
1. For all Appropriate Uses, except bridges or culverts or on-stream
structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the
average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage for all
flood events up to and including the 100- year frequency event.
2. In the case of bridges or culverts or on-stream structures built for the
purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood
flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour,
erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or
other design measures.
d. Construction of New Bridges or Culvert Crossings and Roadway
Approaches.
1. The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be
contained within the channel banks ( or within existing vertical
extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design
protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded
flood easements.
2. If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood stages
greater than 0.1 feet, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to
obtain a permit for a dam or waiver.
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
26
a. The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be
calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding
flood elevations for tailwater conditions for the flood study
specified in Section 15-105 of this Chapter. Bridges and
Culverts must be analyzed using any commonly accepted
FEMA approved hydraulic models.
b. Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per Section
15-107b.3.
c. Velocity increases must be mitigated per Section 15-
107b.3.c.
d. If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for
recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR
permit must be received.
e. The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the
bridge showing the existing condition and proposed
regulatory profile must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for
concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by Section 15-
107b.
f. All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be
designed per Section 15- 107b. 3.h.
e. Reconstruction or Modification of Existing Bridges, Culverts, and Approach
Roads.
1. The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase
in backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies
up to and including the 100- year event, if the existing structure is not
a source of flood damage.
2. If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of
flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning
the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into
consideration the effects on flood stages on upstream and
downstream properties.
3. The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a
source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared
in accordance with 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 ( Floodway
Construction in Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR
for review and concurrence before a permit is issued.
f. On- Stream Structures Built for the Purpose of Backing Up Water.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
27
1. Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot when
compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and
including the 100- year frequency event shall be contained within the
channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel
banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees
or flood walls or within recorded flood easements.
2. A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained
from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing
up water in the stream during normal or flood flow.
3. All dams and impoundment structures as defined in Section 15-
102a. 16 shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Adm. Code
Part 3702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed
activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to
accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
a. The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest
by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional
stormwater detention;
b. The impoundment will not prevent the migration of
indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream
areas as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning;
c. The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded
water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design
should include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank
stabilization measures and a pre- sedimentation basin;
d. A non- point source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff
as well as minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease,
metals, and other pollutants. If there is more than one
municipality in the upstream watershed, the municipality in
which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate
with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive
watershed control;
e. The project otherwise complies with the requirements of
Section 15-107.
g. Flood Proofing of Existing Habitable, Residential and Commercial
Structures.
1. If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing
construction shall be placed no further than 10 feet from the outside
of the building.
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
28
2. Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required
for floodproofing activities.
h. Excavation in the Floodway.
1. When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert
openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing
bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance
or other Appropriate Uses, transition sections shall be provided for
the excavation.
2. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless
an applicant' s engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through
engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions
may be used with the same efficiency:
a. When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than
at a rate of one foot horizontal for every four feet of the
flooded stream's length; and
b. When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster
than at a rate of one foot horizontal for every one foot of the
flooded stream' s length; and
c. When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction,
a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every 10 feet of
stream length shall be used; and
d. Erosion/ scour protection shall be provided inland upstream
and downstream of the transition sections.
i. If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be
demonstrated that:
1. There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would
accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of
the body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank
stabilization, flood proofing of existing structures, removal of
structures from the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow
channel, or the establishment of a stream side buffer strip or green
belt. Channel modification is acceptable if the purpose is to restore
natural conditions and improve water quality and fish and wildlife
habitat;
2. Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
29
area may be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement
of an equivalent degree of natural resource values;
3. The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed
in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the
following criteria:
a. The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall
match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in
length, cross-section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing
channel has been previously modified, restoration of more
natural physical conditions should be incorporated into
channel modification design, where practical.
b. Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both
the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed
such that they will prevent erosion.
c. One- sided construction of a channel shall be used when
feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should
be limited to one side of the channel, where possible, to
preserve the shading and stabilization effects of the
vegetation.
d. Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to that
which is essential for construction of the channel.
e. Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no
steeper than 3:1 horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable.
Native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred
methods for bank stabilization. Where high velocities or
sharp bends necessitate the use of alternative stabilization
measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural rock or riprap
are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as
concrete, gabions, or construction rubble should be avoided
unless there are no practicable alternatives.
f. All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon
completion of construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent
material shall be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks
prior to establishment of the vegetative cover.
g. If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity
such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such
features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and
nesting areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish
habitat shall also be established, where appropriate.
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
30
h. A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of
the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of
downstream water quality.
i. New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all
items of construction, including vegetation, should be
completed prior to diversion of water into the new channel.
j. There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the
channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency
flood unless necessitated by a public flood control project or
unless such an increase is justified as part of a habitat
improvement or erosion control project.
k. Unless the modification is for a public flood control project,
there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater
storage outside the floodway as a result of the modification;
and
4. The project otherwise complies with the requirements of Section 15-
107.
5. Seeding and Stabilization Plan. For all activities located in a
floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the
applicant.
6. Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Measures. For all activities in the
floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there
is potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with
the following criteria:
a. The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the
maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be
scheduled to minimize the time soil is exposed and
unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation
be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than 15 days prior
to the initiation of improvements.
b. Temporary and/ or permanent soil stabilization shall be
applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum,
soil stabilization shall be provided within 15 days after final
grade is reached on any portion of the site, and within 15
days to denuded areas which may not be at final grade but
will remain undisturbed for longer than 60 days.
c. Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any
significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent
the movement of eroded sediments off site or into the
channel. Potential sediment control devices include filter
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
31
fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion ditches, and
sediment traps and basins.
d. A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width shall be
preserved and/or re-established, where possible, along
existing channels ( See 15- 107b. 3.11). Construction vehicle
use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream
crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to minimize
erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be
restabilized immediately.
e. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
designed and implemented consistent with " Procedures and
Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
in Illinois" (1988) also known as the "Green Book" and "The
Illinois Urban Manual" ( NRCS, 1995).
7. Public Flood Control Projects. For public flood control projects, the
permitting requirements of this Section will be considered met if the
applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and
hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly
or cumulatively result in increased flood heights outside the project
right-of-way or easements for all flood events up to and including the
100- year frequency event.
8. General Criteria for Analysis of Flood Elevations.
a. The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated
floodway study, referenced in Section 15-105, must be used
for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears
to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall
be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate
base conditions data to use.
b. If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of
the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a
downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the
proposed construction shall be shown to meet:
1. The requirements of this section for the 100- year
frequency flood elevations of the designated
floodway conditions; and
2. Conditions with the receiving stream at normal water
elevations.
3. If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local
governments, or a private owner that a downstream
restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be
removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
32
control project is scheduled to be built, removed,
constructed or modified within the next five years,
the proposed construction shall be analyzed and
shown to meet the requirements of this section for
both the existing conditions and the expected flood
profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood
control project is built.
9. Conditional Letter of Map Revision.
a. If the Appropriate Use would result in a change in the
designated floodway location or the 100- year frequency flood
elevation, the applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and
FEMA all information, calculations and documents necessary
to be issued a conditional designated floodway map revision
and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of
the designated floodway change before a permit is issued.
b. The final designated floodway map will not be changed by
FEMA until as- built plans or record drawings of initial
filling, grading, dredging, or excavating activities are
submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR.
c. In the case of non- government projects, the municipality in
incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas
shall concur with the proposed conditional designated
floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval can be
given.
d. No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place
until a conditional approval is issued.
e. After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no
activities shall take place until a final Letter of Map Revision
LOMR) is issued by FEMA with concurrence from
IDNR/OWR.
10. Professional Engineer' s Supervision. All engineering analyses shall
be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional
engineer.
11. For all activities in the floodway involving construction within 25 feet
channel, the following criteria shall be met:
a. A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at
least 25 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
b. Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the
construction of an Appropriate Use, a vegetated buffer strip
shall be established upon completion of construction.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
33
l2. After receipt of conditional approval of the designated floodway
change and issuance of a permit and a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision, construction as necessary to change the floodway
designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or other
construction that is not an Appropriate Use may be placed in that
area until the designated floodway map is changed and a final Letter
of Map Revision is received. The designated floodway map will be
revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and
FEMA of the " as- built" plans.
4. Development Activities In Delegated Communities Requiring State Review. For
those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the following criteria
shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and concurrence and/ or permit
prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or county delegated state
permitting authority in the floodway.
a. An engineer' s analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant
to Section 15-107b.3.d.
b. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not
a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood
profile, pursuant to Section 15-107b.3.f.
c. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant
to Section 15-107b.( a., b., h.).
d. The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams ( as defined in Section
15-102a.16) and all other federal, state, or local units of government projects,
including projects of the municipality or county.
e. An engineer’ s determination that a proposed bridge affected by backwater
from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller opening.
f. Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood profiles.
g. Projects in public bodies of water.
5. Other Permits.
a. In addition to the other requirements of this Chapter, a development permit
for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless the applicant first
obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required from
IDNR/ OWR, issued pursuant to 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.
b. No correspondence from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the project meets
the requirements of Regional Permit 3.
c. No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated
this responsibility to the Village.
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
34
6. Permits for Dams.
a. Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam as
defined in Section 15-102a.16 per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules for
Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start
of construction of a dam.
b. If the Director of Engineering finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR
permit, the Director of Engineering shall immediately notify the
IDNR/OWR Bartlett office.
c. If the Director of Engineering the finds a dam which is believed to be in
unsafe condition, the Director of Engineering shall immediately notify the
owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency ( IEMA).
7. Activities That Do Not Require a Registered Professional Engineer' s Review. The
following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer’s
review. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this Chapter,
including the mitigation requirements.
a. Regional Permit 3 which authorizes, for example, underground and overhead
utilities, storm and sanitary sewer outfalls, sidewalks, patios, athletic fields,
playground equipment and streambank protection activities
Section 15-108 Occupation and Use of SFHA Areas Where Floodways Are Not Identified. In
SFHA or floodplains, ( including AE, AH, AO and Unnumbered A Zones) where no floodways
have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations have been established
by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the
cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and
structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of the floodwaters nor
significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
a. Development Permit.
1. No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by state law,
shall commence any development in a SFHA or floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Director of Engineering.
2. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Director of Engineering.
a. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale
showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and all
changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed
engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings
and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor ( including
basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of Section
15-109 of this Chapter.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
35
b. The application for a development permit shall also include the following
information:
1. A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, a and
intended use;
2. Site location ( including legal description) of the property, drawn to
scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
3. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
4. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a
minimum:
a. A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of
the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;
b. A plan view of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal
dimensions of the structure or work, elevations, using the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988, adjacent property
lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
distance between proposed activity and navigation channel
when the proposed construction is in or near a commercially
navigable body of water), floodplain limit, location and
orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphical or
numerical scale;
c. Cross- section views of the project perpendicular to the flow
of floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing
and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of
the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed
elevations, normal water elevation, 10- year frequency flood
elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical
or numerical scales ( horizontal and vertical); and
d. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence
of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion
control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects.
This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization
and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure post- construction maintenance.
c. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing
that the proposed work will meet the criteria of Section 15-108b.
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
36
d. Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approvals that may be
required for this type of development.
3. Based on the best available existing data according to federal, state or other sources,
the Director of Engineering shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
or 100- year frequency flood elevation.
a. Should no elevation information exist for the site, the developer' s engineer
shall calculate the elevation according to Section 15-105e.
b. Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher
than the base flood elevation of the current Flood Insurance Rate Map
Identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this Chapter.
c. The Director of Building shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification.
d. The Director of Engineering shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or
waivers that may be required for this type of activity. The Director of
Engineering shall not issue the development permit unless all required
federal, state, and local permits have been obtained.
b. Preventing Increased Damages.
1. No development in the SFHA where a floodway has not been determined shall
create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or
threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and
hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality or
aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation
methods as called for in this Chapter.
2. Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been determined, the
following standards shall apply:
a. The developer shall have a Registered Professional Engineer state in writing
and show through supporting plans, calculations and data that the project
meets the engineering requirements of Sections 15-107b.3 through 15-
107b. 3.i for the entire floodplain as calculated under the provisions of
Section 15-105e of this Chapter.
1. As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study
performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering
study to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for acceptance as a designated
floodway.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
37
2. Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR and FEMA, the
developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the
requirements of Section 15-107 for the designated floodway. The
floodway shall be defined according to the definition in Section 15-
102a.17 of this Chapter.
b. A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a
IDNR/ OWR permit or a determination has been made that an IDNR/ OWR
permit is not required.
c. Permits for Dams.
1. Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a
dam as defined in Section 15-102a. 16 per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part
3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR
permit prior to the start of construction of a dam.
2. If the Director of Engineering finds a dam that does not have an
IDNR/OWR permit, the Director of Engineering shall immediately
notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office.
3. If the Director of Engineering finds a dam which is believed to be in
unsafe condition, the Director of Engineering shall immediately
notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the
Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
3. The following activities may be permitted without a Registered Professional
Engineer’ s review or calculation of base flood elevation and designated floodway.
Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this Chapter.
a. Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting conditions of
IDNR/ OWR Statewide Permit number 2;
b. Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit
No. 3;
c. Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit
No. 4
d. Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No.
5;
e. Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 6; activities ( not involving fill or positive change in
grade) are covered by this permit:
f. Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting conditions of
IDNR/ OWR Statewide Permit No. 7;
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
38
g. Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8;
h. Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 9;
i. Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings meeting
the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10;
j. Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of DNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 11;
k. Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 12;
l. Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 13;
m. Special Uses of Public Waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit No. 14; and
n. Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely within a
flood fringe area shall be exempt from State Floodway permit requirements.
4. The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be
maintained.
5. Compensatory Storage.
a. Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of
space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the
base flood or 100- year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for
and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100- year frequency flood elevation.
b. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the volume of
storage lost due to the fill or structure.
c. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made
opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
d. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10- year flood elevation shall be
replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage
lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the
proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed
to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
Section 15-109 Permitting Requirements Applicable to All Floodplain Areas. In addition to the
requirements found in Sections 15-106, 15-107 and 15-108 for development in flood fringes,
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
39
designated floodways, and SFHA or floodplains where no floodways have been identified, the
following requirements shall be met.
a. Public Health Standards.
1. No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals,
explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids,
pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation
FPE) unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank
and certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of Section 15-109c of this Chapter.
2. Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
3. Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
4. New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on-site
waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all manholes or other above
ground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
5. All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to alter flood
flows or increase potential flood damages
b. Carrying Capacity and Notification.
1. For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including
levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained.
2. In addition, the Village of Arlington Heights shall notify adjacent communities in
writing 30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the
watercourse.
c. Protecting Buildings.
1. All buildings located within a 100- year floodplain, also known as a SFHA, shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection criteria applies to the following situations:
a. Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or addition to an
existing building valued at more than $1,000 or 70 square feet.
b. Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an existing
building that increase the floor area by more than 20% or equal or exceed the
market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively during the life
of the building. If substantially improved, the existing structure and the
addition must meet the flood protection standards of this Section.
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
40
c. Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs shall be
figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially damaged
the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this Section.
d. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home
on an existing site ( the building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage).
e. Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180
days per year; and
f. Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in Section 15-102a.56. This
building protection requirement may be met by one of the following methods.
2. A residential or non- residential building, when allowed, may be constructed on
permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
a. The lowest floor ( including basement) shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation; and
b. Fill Requirements:
1. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches deep
before compaction and should extend at least 10 feet beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection
elevation; and
2. The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation.
However, the 10 foot minimum may be waived if a structural
engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from
damages due to hydrostatic pressures; and
3. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding
by vegetative cover, riprap or other structural measure; and
4. The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporate debris
or refuse materials; and
5. The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties, and when necessary, stormwater
management techniques such as swales or basins shall be
incorporated.
3. A residential or non-residential building may be elevated in accordance with the
following:
a. The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts, piles,
walls or other foundation that is permanently open to flood waters and not
subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or 100- year
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
41
frequency flood. Designs must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or the permanent openings, one on each wall, shall be no
more than one foot above existing grade, and consists of a minimum of two
openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the
Base Flood Elevation; and
b. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in
relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure to
known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris;
and
c. All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of
materials resistant to flood damage; and
1. The lowest floor ( including basement) and all electrical, heating,
ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and utility
meters, shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation; and
2. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible
pumps and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the flood protection elevation provided they are waterproofed;
and
d. The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be used for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and not later modified or occupied as habitable space; and
e. In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with these
requirements may be certified by registered professional engineer or architect.
f. Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than
180 days, shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; and,
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the Illinois
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code Part 870.
In addition, all manufactured homes shall meet the following elevation
requirements:
1. In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved
1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (2) in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision, ( 3) in an expansion to an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (4) in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured
home has incurred substantial damage from a flood, the top of the
lowest floor shall be elevated to or above the flood protection
elevation.
2. In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
42
manufactured home shall be elevated so that either the top of the
lowest floor is above the base flood elevation or the chassis is at least
36 inches in height above grade and supported by reinforced piers or
other foundations of equivalent strength, whichever is less.
g. Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to meet the elevation
and anchoring requirements of Subsection 15-109c.3.f above unless:
1. They are on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and,
2. They are fully licensed, ready for highway use, and used only for
recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as a permanent
dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utility and service devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.
4. Only a non- residential building may be structurally dry floodproofed ( in lieu of
elevation) provided that:
a. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the building
has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection elevation,
the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the base flood or 100- year frequency flood.
b. The building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy and
impacts from debris or ice.
c. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and
without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and similar
works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this Subsection).
5. A building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the flood protection
elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
a. The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and
b. Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have openings
that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a total
net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed area.
The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade; and
c. The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection elevation
must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade; and
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
43
d. The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior grade of the
crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet at any point;
and
e. An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters from
the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of time after a
flood event; and
f. Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
g. Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the flood
protection elevation.
6. Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities shall be located
outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new critical facilities shall be
permissible within the floodplain if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical
facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor ( including
basement) elevated or structurally dry floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency
elevation or three feet above the level of the 100- year flood frequency elevation
whichever is greater. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure
that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access
routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
7. Tool sheds, detached garages, and other minor accessory structures on an existing
single-family platted lot, may be constructed with the lowest floor below the flood
protection elevation in accordance with the following:
a. The building is not used for human habitation; and
b. All areas below the base flood or 100- year frequency flood elevation shall be
constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in a designated
floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as not to block
the flow of flood waters and shall also meet the Appropriate Use criteria of
Section 15-107. In addition, all other requirements of Sections 15-106, 15-
107 and 15-108 must be met; and
c. The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation; and
d. Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation; and
e. The building shall be valued at less than $ 10,000 and be less than 500 square
feet in floor size; and
f. The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools and may
not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses and cannot
be modified later into another use ; and
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
44
g. The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of Section 15-
109c.3.a.
h. All flammable or toxic materials ( gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers, etc.)
shall be stored above the flood protection elevation; and
i. The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner advised of
the flood insurance implications.
8. Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also meet the more
restrictive Appropriate Use standards included in Section 15-107. Non-conforming
structures located in a designated floodway may remain in use and may only be
enlarged, replaced or structurally altered in accordance with Section 15-107.b. A
non- conforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or man- made
disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds 50% of its market value before it
was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this Chapter.
Section 15-110 Other Development Requirements. The Board of Trustees shall take into account
flood hazards, to the extent that they are known in all official actions related to land management, use
and development.
a. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and Planned Unit
Developments ( PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed
developments are consistent with Sections 15-106, 15-107, 15-108 and 15-109 of this
Chapter and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile
home parks and Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a
Registered Professional Engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of
surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
b. Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit
developments ( PUDs) and additions to manufactured home parks and additions to
subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and
floodway delineations.
1. Where this information is not available from an existing adopted study, the
applicant’ s engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or 100- year
frequency flood elevation per Section 15-105e and the floodway delineation per the
definition in Section 15-102a. 17.
c. Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a
manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever possible, the
floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds.
d. The Board of Trustees shall not approve any Planned Unit Development ( PUD) or plat of
subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
e. All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or
increase potential flood damages.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
45
Section 15-111 Variances.
a. No variances shall be granted to any development located in a designated floodway as
defined in Section 15-102a.16.
1. Whenever the standards of this Chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Director of Engineering for a
variance.
2. The Director of Engineering shall review the applicant’ s request for a variance and
shall submit its recommendation to the Board of Trustees. The Village may attach
such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the flood
protection intent of this ordinance.
b. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all of the following
conditions are met:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA; and
2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted; and
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary; and
4. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses and
functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation of a nuisance; and
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental
stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to
streambeds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public facilities; and
6. The provisions of Sections 15-106b and 15-108b of this Chapter shall still be met;
and
7. The activity is not in a designated floodway; and
8. The applicant' s circumstances are unique and do not establish a pattern inconsistent
with the intent of the NFIP; and
9. The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved
including existing stream uses; and
10. All other required state and federal permits or waivers have been obtained.
c. The Director of Engineering shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the
requirements of Section 15-109 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25
per $100 of insurance coverage; and
2. Increase the risks to life and property; and
REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
46
3. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that the
applicant will acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and liability.
d. Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site or historic structure as
defined in 15- 102a. 35 “ Historic Structures”, may be granted using criteria more permissive
than the requirements of Sections 15-111b and 15-111c, subject to the conditions that:
1. The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure; and
2. The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being removed as a certified
historic structure.
Section 15-112 Disclaimer of Liability.
a. The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and
scientific methods of study.
b. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
c. This Chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will be
free from flooding or damage.
d. This Chapter does not create liability on the part of the Village or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder.
Section 15-113 Penalty.
a. If such owner fails after ten days notice to correct the violation:
1. The Village may make application to the Circuit Court for an injunction requiring
conformance with this Chapter or make such other order as the Court.
2. Any person who violates this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less
than $ 50.00 or more than $ 1,000.00 for each offense.
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
4. The Village shall record a notice of violation on the title to the property.
b. The Director of Engineering shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a
willful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause coverage by a Standard Flood
Insurance Policy to be suspended.
1. The Director of Engineering is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension
of the subject development. The stop- work order shall be in writing, shall indicate the
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
47
reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the
circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes a
suspension of the permit.
2. No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the ( Board of Appeals). Written notice of such hearing shall be
served on the permittee and shall state: ( 1) the grounds for compliant or reasons for
suspension or revocation; and ( 2) the time and place of the hearing. At such hearing,
the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on his/her behalf. At
the conclusion of the hearing, the ( Board of Appeals) shall determine whether the
permit shall be suspended or revoked.
c. Nothing herein shall prevent the Director of Engineering from taking such other lawful action
to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person
or persons responsible.
Section 15-114 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
a. This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants,
or deed restrictions.
b. Where this Chapter and other ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict
or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
c. This Chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to
meet the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, but is not intended to repeal the
resolution which the Village passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program
Section 15-115 Severability. The provisions and sections of this Chapter shall be deemed separable
and the invalidity of any portion of this Chapter shall not affect the validity of the remainder.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
CHAPTER 16 DOG LICENSES AND ANIMAL PROVISIONS
Article I General Provisions
Section 16-101 Intent and Purpose
Section 16-102 Definitions
Section 16-103 Prohibited Animals
Section 16-104 Number of Animals
Section 16-105 Exhibition of Dangerous Animals
Section 16-106 Killing of Dangerous Animals
Section 16-107 Noisy Animals
Section 16-108 Uncontrolled Animals
Section 16-109 Hunting of Animals
Section 16-110 Indecent Exhibition of Animal
Section 16-111 Diseased Animals
Section 16-112 Dead Animals
Section 16-113 Slaughtering Animals
Section 16-114 Care to be Provided
Section 16-115 Striking of Animal by Motor Vehicle
Section 16-116 Animal Bite
Section 16-117 Preventing the Spread of Rabies
Section 16-118 Cruelty to Animals
Article II Dogs
Section 16-201 License Required
Section 16-202 License Renewed
Section 16-203 Application for License
Section 16-204 Rabies Inoculation of Dogs
Section 16-205 Certificate of Inoculation
Section 16-206 Registry for Licensed Dogs
Section 16-207 Dog License Fees
Section 16-208 Dog License Tags
Section 16-209 Unlicensed Dogs
Section 16-210 Leashes
Article III Cats
Section 16-301 Rabies Inoculation of Cats
Article IV Nuisances
Section 16-401 Nuisance Prohibited
Section 16-402 Owner to Abate Nuisances
Section 16-403 Location of Dog Runs
Article V Penalties
Section 16-501 Penalties
DOG LICENSES AND ANIMAL PROVISIONS
2
Article I General Provisions
Section 16-101 Intent and Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is:
a. To provide security of persons against annoyance, intimidation or injury by animals.
b. To prevent nuisances by animals through responsible ownership.
c. To protect animals from abuse and neglect.
Section 16-102 Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words or terms shall,
for the purpose of this Chapter, have the meanings indicted in this Section.
a. Animals. Any creature other than a human being.
b. Bite. Any activity with the mouth of an animal which breaks through the skin, but does not
necessarily have to draw blood.
c. Cruelty to Animals. Any one of the following activities:
1. To overwork, overdrive, beat, torture, torment, poison, mutilate or inhumanely kill
any animal;
2. To unnecessarily fail to provide any animal with proper food, drink, shelter or air;
3. To abandon or fail to reclaim any impounded animal; or
4. To inhumanely treat any animal in any manner.
d. Dangerous Animal. Any animal which is inherently incapable of being domesticated and is
considered by the law to be inherently dangerous (ferae naturae).
e. Diseased Animal. Any animal infected with a contagious or infectious disease, including
those diseases contagious or infectious only to animals.
f. Leash. A strong cord, thong or chain, not more than eight feet in length.
g. Neutered. Any animal that has been spayed or castrated.
h. Owner. Any person having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps or harbors an
animal, or who has it in his or her care, or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits an
animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him or her.
i. Person. Any natural person, partnership, trust, corporation or association. Whenever used
with respect to any penalty, the term person, as applied to partnerships or associations, shall
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to trusts or corporations, shall mean the
trustees or officers thereof.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
3 REVISED 08/05/13
j. Unneutered. Any animal that has not been spayed or castrated.
Ord. 12-014, # 13-013, #13-042)
Section 16-103 Prohibited Animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or raise any of the
following animals or fowl in any Residential District within the Village: pigs, cattle, horses, goats,
sheep, or any other farm animals, or similar animals, or any chickens, geese, or ducks or similar
fowl.
INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
DOG LICENSES AND ANIMAL PROVISIONS
4 REVISED 08/05/13
Section 16-104 Number of Animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep more than four
animals over four months of age on his or her property. This Section shall not apply to persons who
are licensed to engage in the business of pet shop operator, kennel operator or animal shelter.
Ord. #06-078)
Section 16-105 Exhibition of Dangerous Animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or
parade any dangerous animal within the Village without first obtaining a permit from the Police
Chief. This permit shall be issued upon proper showing that the demonstration will be entirely safe
to the public and upon payment of a fee of $30 for each day or part of a day the exhibition of animal
or animals shall continue.
Section 16-106 Killing of Dangerous Animals. The members of the police department may kill a
dangerous animal or any other animal when it is necessary for the protection of the public, any
person or property.
No person may knowingly poison or cause to be poisoned any dog or other domestic animal. The
only exception will be written permission from the State of Illinois Department of Agriculture for the
purpose of controlling diseases transmittable to humans or other animals and only when all other
methods and means have been exhausted. Such written permission shall name the person or persons
conducting the poisoning, specify the products to be used, give the boundaries of the area involved,
and specify the precautionary measures to be employed to ensure the safety of humans and other
animals. Any drug used for euthanasia shall be by, or under the direction of, a licensed veterinarian.
Section 16-107 Noisy Animals. It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which habitually
or continually disturbs the peace and quiet of any family, individual or neighborhood by loud noises
at any time of the day or night.
Ord. #13-042)
Section 16-108 Uncontrolled Animals. Any animal found to be running at large outside the
property of the owner or place of residence shall be deemed to be an uncontrolled animal. The
owner of any uncontrolled animal shall be responsible for its being uncontrolled. Any uncontrolled
animal may be impounded by the Village at an animal control facility designated by the Village to
receive such animals.
Ord. #02-018, #13-042)
a. Impoundment Fee. No animal shall be removed from the Village-designated facility until a
fee of $25 has been paid to the Village. In addition, no animal shall be removed from the
Village-designated facility until all fees owed to the facility have been paid to the facility by
the owner. Any improper removal of any animal from the facility designated for impounding
uncontrolled animals shall be considered a violation of this Section.
b. Disposal of Unclaimed Impounded Animals. Any impounded animal which remains
unclaimed after three days from the time its owner is notified of its impoundment by the
Police Chief, or which remains unclaimed five days after its impoundment and no owner is
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
5
known or can be located, may be sold at public auction. If the animal cannot be sold, it may
be disposed of in some humane manner under the direction of the Police Chief.
Section 16-109 Hunting of Animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or engage in killing
any animal within the Village limits, except as authorized under other provisions of this Chapter.
Section 16-110 Indecent Exhibition of Animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit any
animal in an indecent manner, or to let any male animal to any female animal in a public place.
Section 16-111 Diseased Animals. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a diseased animal to allow
the animal to be exposed in any manner in any public place; nor shall the diseased animal be shipped
or removed from the premises of the owner thereof, except under the supervision of the Police Chief
or the Director of Building & Health Services.
The Police Chief or the Director of Building & Health Services shall secure the disposition of any
diseased animal and the treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread
of the contagious or infection except in cases where the State of Illinois Department of Agriculture is
empowered to act.
Section 16-112 Dead Animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any dead animal which
he or she owned to remain within the Village more than 24 hours. No such animal shall be buried
within the Village limits.
Section 16-113 Slaughtering Animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to slaughter any animal
or maintain any building for slaughtering any animal within the Village limits.
Section 16-114 Care to be Provided. Each owner shall provide for his or her animals:
a. Sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and water;
b. Proper protection and shelter from the weather;
c. Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; and
d. Humane care and treatment.
Section 16-115 Striking of Animal by Motor Vehicle. Any person who, as the operator of a motor
vehicle, strikes a domestic animal, shall stop at once and shall immediately report such injury to the
Village Police Department.
Section 16-116 Animal Bite. Whenever any animal bites a human being, the owner of the animal
shall immediately notify the Police Chief, who shall order the animal held for a period of ten days,
and the animal shall be observed by a licensed veterinarian as may be required by the Police Chief.
It shall be unlawful for any person having knowledge that any person has been bitten by any animal
to refuse to notify the Police Chief or the County Rabies Inspector promptly. It shall be unlawful for
the owner of the animal to refuse or fail to comply with the written or printed
recommendations made by the County Rabies Inspector or the Police Chief, in any particular case.
DOG LICENSES AND ANIMAL PROVISIONS
6
The written or printed recommendations shall be mailed by regular mail, postage prepaid, and
addressed to the owner of the animal. The affidavit or testimony of the Police Chief or the County
Rabies Inspector who mailed such recommendations shall be prima facie evidence of the receipt of
such recommendations by the owner of the animal. Any expense incurred in the handling of any
animal under this Section shall be borne by the owner.
Section 16-117 Preventing the Spread of Rabies. Whenever a case of rabies has occurred within
the Village or surrounding locality, or when the Village Manager is apprehensive of the spread of
rabies, the Police Chief may take the following steps to prevent its spread among animals:
a. Require that all animals be confined within an enclosure;
b. Require that owners of animals take such prophylactic measures as deemed necessary to
prevent the spread of rabies; and
c. Determine the area and time during which the preventive measures of (a) and (b) of Section
16-117 shall be effective.
Section 16-118 Cruelty to Animals. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner or
otherwise, to indulge in, or cause to be done, any activities deemed to be cruelty to animals.
Article II Dogs
Section 16-201 License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to own any dog over three
months of age in the Village unless each dog so owned is licensed each year as hereinafter provided
in this Article.
Section 16-202 License Renewed. It shall be necessary for the owner of any dog to obtain a new
license for each dog every year. The new license must be procured before January 1 of each year or
the dog is unlicensed and the owner is in violation of Section 16-201 of this Article.
Section 16-203 Application for License. All applications for a dog license shall be made to the
Finance Director, on the forms he shall provide, each year before January 1. The form provided by
the Finance Director shall contain at least the following: the name and address of the owner of the
dog, the sex and breed of the dog, the color of the dog, and the date of the most recent rabies
vaccination.
Section 16-204 Rabies Inoculation of Dogs. Each calendar year, or at such intervals as may be
promulgated by the Village Manager, every owner of a dog shall cause the dog to be inoculated
against rabies by the County Rabies Inspector or any licensed veterinarian.
a. Evidence of such inoculation shall consist of a certificate signed by the person administering
the vaccine.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any dog into the Village unless the dog has been
inoculated as provided by 510 ILCS 5/8. All dogs must also have a substantial collar,
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7 REVISED 05/01/04
attached to which shall be a current metallic tag signifying a rabies inoculation within the last
year, as required by 510 ILCS 5/8.
Section 16-205 Certificate of Inoculation. No dog license shall be issued unless a valid certificate
of inoculation against rabies is attached to the application for a dog license and unless the certificate
was issued by the County Rabies Inspector, or by his deputy, or bya licensed veterinarian, within one
year prior to the date of the application for a dog license.
Section 16-206 Registry for Licensed Dogs. The Finance Director shall keep a complete registry,
in a book to be kept for that purpose, of all licensed dogs, describing the breed, color and sex of each
dog and its owner's name and address and the number of the dog license tag.
Ord. #03-078)
Section 16-207 Dog License Fees. The Finance Director shall not issue a dog license tag or a
duplicate dog license tag until he has received the payment of one or more of the following fees, as is
appropriate:
a. There shall be an annual fee of $12 for each dog license issued or renewed by the Village.
b. There shall be an additional fee of $10 for each license issued or renewed on or after January
1 of each year. The additional charge is for the processing of late applications.
c. There shall be a fee of $2 for each duplicate dog license tag issued by the Village.
Section 16-208 Dog License Tags. Every dog licensed under this Article must have a metallic dog
license tag and a metallic tag indicating a rabies inoculation.
a. The Finance Director shall provide, each year, as many metallic dog license tags as may be
necessary, the shape to be changed each year, with the year for which the dog license tag is
paid, the words "Arlington Heights Dog Tag" and also the number of the tag stamped on the
tag.
b. The Finance Director shall issue one metallic dog license tag, the number of which shall
correspond with the number of the registry of the dog, to the person having paid the
appropriate dog license fees.
c. Every dog kept within the Village shall be provided with a substantial dog collar byits owner
who shall cause to be attached thereto in a secure manner the metallic dog license tag issued
by the Village and the metallic tag signifying a rabies inoculation. It shall be unlawful for
any owner of any dog to allow a dog to be without a collar which has a current dog license
tag and rabies tag attached.
e. The Finance Director shall deliver to any owner of any dog upon demand, a duplicate dog
license tag to correspond with the tag originally issued, provided the appropriate fee is paid.
f. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or cause to be used a duplicate dog license tag
unless the tag is used on the same dog for which it was issued.
DOG LICENSES AND ANIMAL PROVISIONS
8
g. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or cause to be used the original dog license tag
unless such tag is used on the same dog for which it was issued.
h. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the dog license tag or collar from any dog
without the owner's consent, except that the Police Chief may authorize such removal during
the course of normal impoundment and sale.
Section 16-209 Unlicensed Dogs. Any dog without a current dog license tag attached to its collar
shall be considered an uncontrolled animal, and subject to impoundment under Section 16-108 of
Article I of this Chapter.
Section 16-210 Leashes. It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog to allow the dog to go upon
any public street, alley or sidewalk or other public place unless the dog is securely on a leash.
Article III Cats
Section 16-301 Rabies Inoculation of Cats. Each calendar year, or at such intervals as may
hereafter be promulgated by the Village Manager, every owner of a cat over four months old shall
cause such cat to be inoculated against rabies by the County Rabies Inspector, his deputy, or by any
licensed veterinarian. Evidence of such inoculation shall consist of a certificate signed bythe person
administering the vaccine.
Article IV Nuisances
Section 16-401 Nuisance Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal to permit the
animal to defecate on any property, other than that of the animal owner. If the animal defecates on
any property in the Village, the owner or person in control of the animal must remove the defecation
and dispose of it properly. Permitting any animal to defecate on the property of others, including
public property, or allowing defecation to remain on such property is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. Every owner of any animal shall exercise proper care and control of the animal to prevent
it from becoming a public nuisance. It shall also be deemed a nuisance and therefore unlawful to
permit the following:
a. To allow any animal to run at large in the Village at any time.
b. To permit any animal to enter any place where food or beverages are stored, prepared, served
or sold to the general public or any other public building or hall; provided, however, that this
Section shall not apply to any blind person using a trained seeing eye dog.
c. To permit any dog and/or cat to enter a public park whether or not such dog and/or cat is
restrained by a leash.
d. To allow any place where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unsanitary or
endanger the health of the animal. Unsanitary shall mean a condition which is likely to
attract vermin or rodents or endanger the public health or welfare of the surrounding area.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
9 REVISED 12/19/11
e. To allow excessive or untimely noise, causing annoyance and discomfort to surrounding
neighbors so as to disturb the reasonable use and enjoyment of their property.
f. To permit any animal to molest passersby, chase vehicles, attack persons or other animals,
deposit excretory matter on property other than that of the owner, damage property or allow
acts of a similar nature.
g. To abandon an animal.
Section 16-402 Owner to Abate Nuisances.
a. If any animal shall defecate in violation of this Code, the owner or person having control of
the animal shall immediately clean and remove the defecation.
b. If an animal runs at large, causes excessive noise, molests persons or commits any other
nuisance in violation of this Code, the owner or person having control of the animal shall
immediately cause the nuisance to be abated.
Section 16-403 Location of Dog Runs. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, permit or
maintain a dog run within ten feet of the lot line of any adjacent property used for residential
purposes. For the purpose of this Section, a dog run shall consist of any area set aside, intended or
used primarily as an area for the defecation by or penning of dogs. Nothing herein contained shall
prohibit a dog owner from allowing his or her dogs to be allowed on the owner's premises, provided
such premises are completely fenced.
No dog run shall be established without securing a permit from the Village. A dog run shall be
constructed and maintained in a clean and sanitary manner in accordance with regulations and
standards established by the Village.
Article V Penalties
Ord. #06-008, #10-023, # 11-060)
Section 16-501 Penalties.
a. Except as provided in paragraph f. herein, any person violating any provision of this Chapter
shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $750 for each such offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs;
provided, however, that any person charged with such a violation may, within the time after
the date of the citation alleging the violation set forth below, settle and compromise the
charge by paying to the Village the penalty set forth below:
within ten days $ 25
after ten days but within 21 days $ 30
after 21 days $ 35
b. In the event that payment has not been made within 90 days of the original issue date, an
additional cost of 30% of the fine amount shall be assessed to defray the cost of collection.
DOG LICENSES AND ANIMAL PROVISIONS
10 REVISED 12/19/11
c. In the event that the person to whom the citation is issued fails to settle and pay the violation
claim within the prescribed time, the officer is authorized to cause a notice to be served upon
the alleged violator and is authorized to file a complaint and to prosecute the same in the
Circuit Court of Cook County.
d. All persons who plead not guilty to the offense indicated maydeliver the citation in person to
the Police Department of the Village of Arlington Heights at the Police Station within 21
days after the date and hour indicated. Arrangements for hearing will be made by the Police
Department.
e. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the filing of a complaint in the first instance in the
Circuit Court of Cook County and the payment of any fine and costs which shall be
determined and established by the Circuit Court.
f. In all instances involving an attack by an animal upon another animal or person, or in which
the other animal or person sustains a physical injury, the owner must be given a mandatory
appearance request for court, not less than ten days, nor more than 45 days after the
occurrence. Any person found guilty of violating this subsection (b) shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $750 if the subject occurrence is the first involving the animal. A
second conviction within two years shall require a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
750.
Upon any conviction for three or more such physical attacks, or for any situation where there
are less than three convictions but the Court finds that there is great bodily harm or death
caused by a dangerous animal, the owner shall be subject to any of the following penalties at
the discretion of the court:
1. A fine of not less than $250, nor more than $750; and/or
2. The court shall issue an order requiring the confiscation and destruction of the animal
by the municipal authorities.
In addition to the fines set forth above, in any circumstance as deemed appropriate by the
court, restitution, including property damage and/or medical costs, to the victim may also be
ordered.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 04/01/19
Ord. #19-010)
CHAPTER 17 VEHICLE STICKERS
Article I General Provisions
Section 17-101 Vehicles Defined
Section 17-102 Vehicle Sticker Required
Section 17-103 Application
Section 17-104 Sticker Period
Section 17-105 Fees for Sticker Period
Section 17-106 Exemption to Vehicle Stickers and or Sticker Fees
Section 17-107 Location of Sticker on Vehicle
Section 17-108 Duplicate Issue
Section 17-109 Transfer of Vehicle Sticker
Section 17-110 Penalty
VEHICLE STICKERS
17-2 REVISED 04/01/19
Chapter 17 Vehicle Stickers
Article I General Provisions
Section 17-101 Vehicles Defined. Automobiles, motorcycles, trucks and all vehicles by which any
person or property may be transported upon a street except devices moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Section 17-102 Vehicle Sticker Required. Every motor driven vehicle, motor driven cycle, motor
bicycle or other vehicle as defined in this Chapter which is: 1) owned or operated by a person who
resides in the Village; or 2) owned by a company, firm or corporation which has a place of business
located within the Village; or 3) registered with the State to an address located with the Village shall
display a current, properly purchased Village vehicle sticker.
Section 17-103 Application. Application for a vehicle sticker shall be made to the Village on a
form provided. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, operator or custodian of each vehicle
coming within the meaning of this Chapter to make application when due. The sticker issued
pursuant to the application shall be issued only for the vehicle described on the application and the
sticker shall be affixed only to that vehicle.
Section 17-104 Sticker Period. The vehicle sticker period shall be on a calendar basis from January
1 to December 31. Vehicle stickers shall be available for issuance no later than October 1
immediately preceding the effective sticker year at the annual fee for that sticker period.
Section 17-105 Fees for Sticker Period. There shall be a fee for each sticker period as set forth
below. Ahalf-year fee shall apply only to those vehicles becoming subject to this Chapter on or after
July 1 of the applicable sticker year. Apenalty for late payment is applicable for fees paid on or after
January 1 of the annual sticker period or more than 30 days after the applicant has acquired title to
the subject vehicle or has moved into the Village, whichever is later. The annual fees are as follows:
Classification Annual Fee
Passenger Vehicles, including Recreational Vehicles $ 30.00
Motorcycles $ 20.00
Motor Driven Cycles (Mopeds) $ 12.00
Senior Citizens $ 12.00
Citizens with Disabilities $ 12.00
Dealers - First Plate $ 35.00
Dealers - All subsequent plates $ 12.00
Trucks (Gross Weight in Pounds)
8,000 lbs. or less B $ 35.00
8,001 to 12,000 lbs. D $ 45.00
12,001 to 16,000 lbs. F $ 55.00
16,001 to 26,000 lbs. H $ 65.00
26,001 to 28,000 lbs. J $ 70.00
28,001 to 32,000 lbs. K $ 75.00
32,001 to 36,000 lbs. L $ 80.00
36,000 to 40,000 lbs. N $ 85.00
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
17-3 REVISED 04/01/19
40,001 to 45,000 lbs. P $ 90.00
45,001 to 50,000 lbs. Q $ 95.00
50,001 to 54,999 lbs. R $ 100.00
50,001 to 59,500 lbs. S $ 105.00
59,501 to 64,000 lbs. T $ 110.00
64,001 to 73,280 lbs. V $ 115.00
73,281 to 77,000 lbs. X $ 120.00
77,001 to 80,000 lbs. Z $ 125.00
Penalty for Stickers Purchased between January 1 - March 1 $ 10.00
Penalty for Stickers Purchased after March 1 $ 30.00
Fee for Duplicate Stickers $ 5.00
Active duty military personnel presenting a valid identification as such shall be exempt from the
annual fee.
In order to qualify for the discounted vehicle sticker for senior citizens, the owner of the vehicle must
be at least 65 years of age. No more than one such discounted vehicle sticker shall be sold per
household.
In order to qualify for the vehicle sticker discount for a citizen with disabilities, the individual
requesting the discount must:
1. meet the definition of a person with a disability under the Americans with Disabilities Act, as
now or hereafter amended, as certified to in writing by a physician on a form provided bythe
Village, or
2. present proof of handicapped plates or placard.
No more than one such discounted vehicle sticker shall be sold per household.
Section 17-106 Exemption to Vehicle Stickers and/or Sticker Fees. Antique vehicles, which are
those vehicles having an AV or EA designation on their license plate, do not need to purchase
vehicle stickers. Vehicles owned by the Village of Arlington Heights, school districts, and Federal,
State and local governments or their agencies may be issued vehicle stickers at no fee.
Section 17-107 Location of Sticker on Vehicle. Vehicle stickers for the current sticker period shall
be placed on the inside of the windshield in the far lower right-hand corner no later than January 1 of
the sticker period.
Section 17-108 Duplicate Issue. Duplicate issue of a vehicle sticker may occur when the original
sticker has become mutilated beyond serviceability, lost, stolen, or for other proper cause. Whenever
possible, the original sticker shall be surrendered upon duplicate issue. A fee as set forth in this
Chapter shall be charged for duplicate stickers unless it is clearly established that the need for reissue
is no fault of the applicant, in which case no fee shall be charged.
VEHICLE STICKERS
17-4 REVISED 04/01/19
Section 17-109 Transfer of Vehicle Sticker. Transfer of a vehicle sticker from one person to
another is prohibited. Transfer from one vehicle to another vehicle of the same ownership is
permitted.
Section 17-110 Penalty.
a. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than $50
nor more than $750 for each such offense; provided, however, that any person charged with
such a violation may, within the time after the date of the citation alleging the violation set
forth below, settle and compromise such charge by showing proof of payment of the vehicle
sticker fee and paying to the Village of Arlington Heights the penalty set forth below:
Within ten days $ 30.00
After ten but within 21 days $ 40.00
After 21 days $ 60.00
In the event that payment has not been made within 90 days of the original issue date, an
additional cost of 30% of the fine amount shall be assessed to defray the cost of collection.
b. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the filing of a complaint in the first instance in the
Circuit Court of Cook County and the payment of any fines and costs, which shall be
determined and established by the Circuit Court.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 12/04/17
CHAPTER 18 TRAFFIC
Article I Adoption of the Illinois Vehicle Code
Section 18-101 Definition of Words and Phrases
Section 18-102 Adoption of the Illinois Vehicle Code
Article II Parking
Section 18-201 Parking Prohibited in Specified Places
Section 18-202 Parking for Persons with Disabilities
Section 18-203 Prohibited Parking Provisions – Adopted by Reference
Section 18-204 Parallel Parking
Section 18-205 Parking for Sale of Vehicle or Merchandise
Section 18-206 Loading Zone
Section 18-207 All Night Parking
Section 18-208 Limited Time Parking Areas
Section 18-209 Limited Parking for Snow Removal Purposes
Section 18-210 Emergency Towing for Construction and Snow Removal Purposes
Section 18-211 Parking of School Buses
Section 18-212 Alleys
Section 18-213 Cab Stands - Bus Stands
Section 18-214 Fire Lanes
Section 18-215 Village -Owned Parking Facilities
Section 18-216 Regulations for Village Parking Facilities
Section 18-217 Permits for Parking in Village Parking Facilities
Section 18-218 Fees for Daily Parking
Section 18-219 Deposit of Slugs or Foreign Coins Prohibited
Section 18-220 Tampering
Section 18-221 Responsibility of Registered Owner
Section 18-222 Fines and Penalties
Section 18-223 Suspension of Driving Privileges Due to Failure to Pay Fine or Penalty
for Standing, Parking or Compliance Violations
Section 18-224 Towing and Storage of Improperly Parked Vehicles and Abandoned
Vehicles
Section 18-225 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
Section 18-226 Mailing of Notices
Article III Miscellaneous Traffic Regulations
Section 18-301 Direction of Traffic at Scene of Fire
Section 18-302 Temporary Construction Traffic Restrictions
Section 18-303 Motor Vehicles of the Second Division
Section 18-304 Solid- Tired Vehicles
Section 18-305 Prima Facie Evidence of Violation
Section 18-306 Obstructing Grade Crossings
Section 18-307 Unattended Animals
Section 18-308 Skates and Other Toy Vehicles in Roadway
Section 18-309 Riding on Running Boards
Section 18-310 Second Division Vehicles - Affixing Name and Address of Owner -
Exceptions
Section 18-311 Trailer and Towed Vehicles
TRAFFIC
18-2 REVISED 12/04/17
Section 18-312 Trucks Prohibited on Certain Streets
Section 18-313 Motorized Scooters
Article IV Vehicle Seizure and Impoundment
Section 18-401 Definitions
Section 18-402 Conduct Prohibited
Section 18-403 Seizure and Impoundment
Section 18-404 Notice
Section 18-405 Administrative Hearing
Section 18-406 Posting of Bond
Section 18-407 Disposition of Vehicle
Article V Bicycles
Section 18-501 Bicycle Equipment
Section 18-502 Rental Agencies
Section 18-503 Operation of Bicycles on Certain Sidewalks Prohibited
Section 18-504 Riding Regulations
Article VI Tickets, Arrests, Penalties and Disposition of Fines
Section 18-601 Traffic Violation Tickets
Section 18-602 Arrests
Section 18-603 Penalties for Misdemeanor
Section 18-604 Disposition of Fines
Section 18-605 Alternative Penalties - Compliance Warning Tickets
Article VII Overweight/Oversize Vehicle Permits
Section 18-701 Limited Weight Streets- Truck Routes- Overweight/ Oversize
Vehicle Permits
Section 18-702 Excessive Weight Permits from Other Jurisdictions
Section 18-703 Special Load Permits
Section 18-704 Waivers
Section 18-705 Conflicts with Other Jurisdictions
Section 18-706 Permit Fees
Section 18-707 Penalties
Article VIII Administrative Adjudication of Parking and Compliance Violations
Section 18-801 Purpose – Scope – Adoption of Rules and Regulations
Section 18-802 Traffic Compliance Officer Designated
Section 18-803 Hearing Officer Appointed
Section 18-804 Violation – Penalty
Section 18-805 Prima Facie Responsibility for Violation and Penalty – Parking Violation
Issuance and Removal
Section 18-806 Violation Notices – Contents, Distribution and Record Keeping
Section 18-807 Respondent’ s Options
Section 18-808 Second Notice of Violation
Section 18-809 Grounds for Adjudication by Mail or Administrative Hearing
Section 18-810 Adjudication by Mail – Procedure
Section 18-811 Administrative Hearings – Procedures
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
18-3
REVISED 12/04/17
Section 18-812 Hearing – Determination of Liability – Petition to Set Aside
Section 18-813 Final Determination
Section 18-814 Notice of Final Determination
Section 18-815 Lessor of Vehicle Not Liable for Violation – When
Article IX Vehicle Immobilization Program
Section 18-901 Vehicle Immobilization Program
Section 18-902 Pre-Immobilization Notice
Section 18-903 Pre- Immobilization Review
Section 18-904 Post-Immobilization Notice
Section 18-905 Post- Immobilization Review
Section 18-906 Post-Tow Notice
Section 18-907 Post- Tow Hearings
Section 18-908 Release of Vehicle
TRAFFIC
18-4
Article I Adoption of the Illinois Vehicle Code
Section 18-101 Definition of Words and Phrases. There is hereby adopted by reference 625
ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as now or hereafter amended. Additionally, the following words and phrases
when used in this Chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
a. Bus Stand. A designated area in the roadway, parallel and adjacent to the curb or shoulder
to be occupied exclusively by buses for purposes of maintaining schedules or awaiting
passengers.
b. Bus Stop. A designated area in the roadway, parallel and adjacent to the curb or shoulder,
used for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers.
c. Funeral Procession. A caravan or motorcade consisting of two or more motor vehicles, in
combinations of any of the following: automobiles designed and used for carrying not
more than ten passengers, funeral hearses, and floral cars, when such vehicles are
proceeding to places of burial. For purposes of this Chapter, pedestrians or equestrian units
may also constitute funeral processions either alone or in combinations of any of the motor
vehicles described in this Section.
d. Holidays. When used in this Chapter or on official signs authorized by this Chapter,
holidays shall mean New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
e. Loading Zone. A designated area in the roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder, to be
occupied exclusively by vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or material.
f. Official Time. Standard or daylight saving time, whichever may be in current use in this
Village.
g. Parking Meter. A mechanical device located upon a public street, sidewalk or other place
designated as a parking meter zone, which may be activated by the insertion of appropriate
United States coins and which clocks the number of minutes of parking privilege extended
to the person depositing such coin or coins.
h. Parking Meter Zone. A designated and marked off area in the roadway, adjacent to the
curb or shoulder or any other place designated, to be occupied exclusively by vehicles for
the purpose of parking for the period of time allocated to the zone by the parking meter.
i. Parkway. The area between the outer edge of a roadway and the property line of the
adjoining property.
j. Public Building. Any building or portion of any building occupied and used by any
governmental agency.
k. Public Way. Any sidewalk, roadway, alley or other thoroughfare open to the use of the
public as a matter of right, for the purposes of travel.
l. Push Cart. A conveyance designed to be propelled by a person afoot.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
18-5 REVISED 12/04/17
m. Recklessness. The state of mind accompanying an act, which either pays no regard to its
probably or possibly injurious consequences, or which, though foreseeing such
consequences, persists in spite of such knowledge.
n. Taxicab Stand. A designated area in the roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder, to be
occupied exclusively by taxicabs for purposes of standing or awaiting passengers.
o. Taximeter. Any instrument or device which records and indicates a charge or fare,
measured by distance traveled, waiting time and extra passengers.
p. Terminal. A designated area, including buildings, structures and equipment located at the
origin or destination of a transportation movement, and used for the transferring, handling,
delivering and receiving of passengers and property.
Ord. #17-046)
Section 18-102 Adoption of the Illinois Vehicle Code. The Illinois Vehicle Code, Chapter 625
of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, current edition, is hereby adopted by reference insofar as such
terms and provisions may be applicable and not inconsistent with any specific terms, provisions
or definitions contained in this Chapter, the same as if set out in length in this Chapter for the
purpose of regulating traffic on the roadways of the Village. Any ticket or complaint charging a
violation of the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, including its Rules of the Road
incorporated herein, may note that the offense is being charged as violation of the municipal law,
but may also describe the specific offense using the statutory section number from ILCS Chapter
625.
Article II Parking
Ord. #09-026, # 10-023)
Section 18-201 Parking Prohibited in Specified Places.
a. It shall be the duty of the officers of this Village to report to the Police Department:
1. The State license number of any vehicle that has been parked in violation of and
contrary to any of the provisions of this Article;
2. The time such vehicle parked in violation of any of the provisions of this Article;
and
3. Such other information as may be necessary for a thorough understanding of the
circumstances attending such violation.
b. No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic
or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device in any of
the following places:
1. At any place where official signs restrict or prohibit parking; or
2. Upon any improved parkway.
TRAFFIC
18-6 REVISED 05/17/10
Section 18-202 Parking for Persons with Disabilities.
a. There is hereby adopted by reference 625 ILCS 5/11- 1301. 3 excluding the penalty
provision, as now or hereafter amended.
b. The Village Manager may, from time to time, designate and cause locations to be marked
for the parking of persons with disabilities only, as deemed proper and convenient for the
use of such persons.
Ord. #06-008)
c. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Section shall be fined no less
than $250 in addition to any costs or charges connected with the removal or storage of any
motor vehicle authorized under this Section.
Ord. #09-026, # 10-010)
Section 18-203 Prohibited Parking Provisions – Adopted by Reference. The following parking
prohibitions, adopted by reference from 625 ILCS 5/11-101 et seq., pursuant to Section 18-105,
Rules of the Road, as set forth below shall be observed:
625 ILCS 5/11- 1303( a)1a Prohibited Parking - Double Parked
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1b Prohibited Parking - on Sidewalk
625 ILCS 5/11- 1303( a)1c Prohibited Parking – Intersection
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1d Prohibited Parking - Blocking Crosswalk
625 ILCS 5/11- 1303( a)1e Prohibited Parking - Safety Zone
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1f Prohibited Parking – Street Excavation/
Obstruction
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1g Prohibited Parking – Bridge
625 ILCS 5/11- 1303( a) 1i Prohibited Parking – Stopping
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1.l Parking of Vehicle with Expired
Registration – Public Parking Area
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)2a Prohibited Parking – Driveway
625 ILCS 5/11- 1303( a)2b Prohibited Parking – Within 15’ of a Fire
Hydrant
625 ILCS 5/11- 1303( a)2c Prohibited Parking within 20’ of Crosswalk
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)2d Prohibited Parking within 30’of Stop Sign
625 ILCS 5/11- 1303( a)2e Prohibited Parking - Fire Station
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)2f Prohibited Parking - Standing
625 ILCS 5/11- 1303( a)3a Prohibited Parking - Railroad
625 ILCS 5/11-1304(a) Prohibited Parking – Left Wheel to Curb
625 ILCS 5/11- 1304( a) Prohibited Parking – Left Wheel to Curb
625 ILCS 5/11-1304.5 Parking of Vehicle with Expired Registration – On
Street or Roadway
The police officers may, in the first instance of an alleged violation, in lieu of filing a complaint
in court, issue a citation advising the person that a specified ordinance has been violated, requesting
payment in an amount applicable to the alleged violation as set forth in this Section 18-222, Fines
and Penalties, as settlement of the violation claim and informing the person that upon failure to
settle, a complaint will be filed in the Circuit Court of Cook County, charging that person with the
violation.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
18-7 REVISED 05/17/10
Ord. #10-023)
Section 18-204 Parallel Parking. Except on streets designated for one-way traffic, no vehicle
shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb, and it shall be unlawful to stand
or park any vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two right wheels of
the vehicle within 12 inches of the regularly established curb line.
Section 18-205 Parking for Sale of Vehicle or Merchandise. It shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any
street for the purpose of selling merchandise from such vehicle.
Section 18-206 Loading Zone. During the times specified herein, it shall be unlawful for the
driver to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or
unloading of passengers, not to exceed five minutes, and for the driver to stand any freight- carrying
vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload, and deliver materials, not to
exceed 30 minutes, in any of the following places:
1. In any public alley during any hour of the day or night;
2. Within 75 feet along the curb of the entrance to any hospital or hotel;
3. Within 75 feet along the curb of the entrance to a public building between 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m., except on Sunday.
Section 18-207 All Night Parking.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person, except physicians on emergency calls, to park a vehicle
on any public street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day.
b. Any person, firm, or corporation desiring temporary exemption from the provisions of
subsection (a) shall first notify the Police Department of the Village of Arlington Heights.
The Police Chief or designee shall evaluate any such request with due regard for length of
time, existing traffic and weather conditions in the area, availability of reasonable
alternative parking, and any other relevant circumstances. After review of the facts, the
Police Chief or designee may grant a temporary exemption from the provisions of
subsection ( a) for a period determined to be appropriate.
Section 18-208 Limited Time Parking Areas.
Ord. #97-044, # 01-011, # 07-055)
a. Between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays, no person shall
park a vehicle in any space designated by the Village Manager as a limited time parking
area, for a period longer than the period specified on signs posted in the area.
b. Each consecutive period, equal in length to the maximum permitted parking period, during
which a vehicle is parking in a limited time parking area shall constitute a separate violation
of this Section.
Ord. #97-044)
c. The movement of a vehicle from one parking space to another space within a limited time
parking area in the same four block area shall not avoid a violation of this Section.
TRAFFIC
18-8 REVISED 10/05/09
Ord. #03-078)
Section 18-209 Limited Parking for Snow Removal Purposes. In addition to any other
restriction now or hereafter imposed, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
park or cause to be parked any vehicle on any public street or public parking facility within the
Village after an accumulation of two inches or more of snow until snow removal has been
completed. Any person, firm or corporation who violates this Section shall be fined not less than
25 nor more than $ 750 for each separate offense and each day that a violation continues shall be
a separate offense; provided, however, that any person charged with this violation may pay, within
the time after the date of the citation alleging the violation set forth below, settle and compromise
the charge by paying to the Village the penalty set forth below:
within ten days $ 25
after ten days but within 21 days $ 30
after 21 days $ 35
In the event that payment has not been made within 90 days of the original issue date, an additional
cost of 30% of the fine amount shall be assessed to defray the cost of collection. Nothing contained
herein shall prevent the filing of a complaint in the Circuit Court of Cook County and the payment
of any fines which are determined by the Circuit Court.
Section 18-210 Emergency Towing for Construction and Snow Removal Purposes.
a. It is declared to be an emergency for a car or other vehicle to be parked in violation of
Section 18-209, Limited Parking for Snow Removal Purposes, or for any parked vehicle to
otherwise prevent or obstruct the plowing or removal of snow from public streets or public
sidewalks. The Police Department shall be authorized to cause the removal of the car or
other vehicle by towing and storage.
b. Cars or vehicles pursuant to subsection a. shall be taken to and stored in designated
locations and shall be returned to the owner or operator upon the payment of all towing
and storage fees. The Police Department shall notify the owner of any vehicle moved from
its location as soon as it is reasonably possible in accordance with established department
procedure.
c. The towing fee for the removal of any car or other vehicle in violation of Section 18 -209,
Limited Parking for Snow Removal Purposes, shall be the prevailing fee charged by
licensed towing services. In addition, the owner or operator may be subject to an additional
charge of up to $25 for the preparation of the vehicle for towing if the vehicle is embedded
or positioned in a manner that normal towing services cannot be readily performed, as well
as a storage fee. These fees shall be in addition to any fines, penalties or court costs which
may be assessed for the violations of any of the provisions of this or any other applicable
section.
d. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to remove, cause the removal of or
be in the possession of any car or vehicle taken from a designated storage location without
first having paid all towing, preparation for towing and/or storage fees as provided above.
Ord. #09-037)
Section 18-211 Parking of School Buses and Trucks. It shall be unlawful:
a. To park any school bus upon any public street within the Village when that bus is not
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
18-9 REVISED 10/05/09
engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers.
b. To park any commercial vehicle on any public street in a residential zoning district or
directly adjacent to a residential zoning district. For purposes of this Section, commercial
vehicle means any vehicle having a license class designation greater than “ B” under the
Illinois Vehicle Code except that this limitation shall not apply to a pick-up style
commercial vehicle with the license class designation of “ D”. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to any vehicle making a delivery or picking up a load or
performing a requested service at a particular residence, in which case the commercial
vehicle may be parked on the street only for the minimum time required to make the
delivery or pickup or to perform the requested service.
Section 18-212 Alleys.
a. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner as to leave available less
than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicle traffic.
b. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block
the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
Section 18-213 Cab Stands - Bus Stands. No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be
parked in any area designed by ordinance as a taxicab stand and no vehicle other than a bus shall
be parked in a place designated as a bus-loading zone.
Section 18-214 Fire Lanes. No person shall park a motor vehicle within or in such a manner as
to block or obstruct, wholly or in part, any fire lane designated and posted in accordance with the
provisions of Section F-311 of the Fire Prevention Code.
Section 18-215 Village-Owned Parking Facilities.
a. The Village may from time to time acquire or construct off-street parking structures or
surface lots, and may regulate use of those facilities. The President and Board of Trustees
may approve agreements between the Village and others to reserve a portion of such
facilities for use by the other parties, their employees, tenants, invitees or other persons
authorized by such party to use the spaces, on such terms as the President and Board of
Trustees determine to be in the best interests of the Village.
Ord. #01-011, # 04-007, # 06-068)
b. Village- owned parking facilities subject to the provisions of Sections 18-216 through 18-
217 are:
1. The garage located in the block bounded by Vail Street, Highland Avenue, Sigwalt
Street and Campbell Street;
2. The garage located in the block bounded by Arlington Heights Road, Miner Street,
Evergreen Avenue and Eastman Street;
3. The garage located adjacent to the Municipal Building, at the intersection of
Arlington Heights Road and Sigwalt Street;
TRAFFIC
18-10 REVISED 11/20/06
4. The garage located under the Arlington Town Square development;
5. Lot O: The lot located at the southeast corner of Arlington Heights Road and
Sigwalt Street;
6. Lot K: The lot located at the southeast corner of Pine Street and Sigwalt Street;
7. Lot Y: The lot located at the southeast corner of Belmont Avenue and Sigwalt
Street;
8. Lot B: The lot located on Northwest Highway, between Dunton Avenue and
Evergreen Street;
9. Lot S: The lot located at the northwest corner of Vail Avenue and St. James Street;
10. Lots A and P: The lots located along Northwest Highway, west of Vail Avenue;
11. Lot T: The lot located west of the Arlington Park Train Station;
12. Lot E: The lot located north of Davis Street between Vail and Dunton Avenues;
13. Lot C: The lot located on Northwest Highway, between Vail Avenue and Dunton
Avenue.
c. The Village Manager is authorized to establish regulations for the use of Village parking
facilities, and to enforce those regulations through the posting of appropriate signs, patrol
of the facilities by the Police Department, and other action incidental to such enforcement.
The Village Manager is authorized to:
1. Designate areas for the use of Village vehicles or vehicles of persons doing business
with the Village;
2. Limit the period of time a vehicle may park in designated areas;
3. Restrict parking in designated areas to those holding permits issued pursuant to the
authority of Section 18-217, Permits for Parking in Village Parking Facilities;
4. Designate areas for daily parking and install coin boxes in convenient locations in
those areas for collection of the fees established by Section 18- 218, Fees for Daily
Parking;
5. Designate areas restricted to the use of handicapped persons;
6. Establish speed limits within the facilities;
7. Establish "No Parking" zones;
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
18-11 REVISED 11/20/06
8. Prohibit use of the facilities for roller-skating, skateboarding or other non-vehicular
use that presents a danger to the use of the facility for parking of motor vehicles or
to the persons engaged in such unpermitted use;
9. Designate lots as limited to employees only for certain hours and only to employees
with the proper parking sticker in its proper location on the vehicle;
10. Establish such other regulations as may be required to promote the safe and efficient
operation of the parking facilities.
Section 18-216 Regulations for Village Parking Facilities. It shall be unlawful for any person:
a. To back into any parking space;
b. To park or let stand any vehicle across or upon any marking designating a parking space;
c. To park or let stand any vehicle that does not bear a 24- hour permit, issued in accordance
with Section 18-217, Permits for Parking in Village Parking Facilities, in any parking space
at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.;
d. To park or let stand any vehicle in any parking space in violation of restrictions posted on
signs in the area, including restrictions concerning the following:
1. The maximum consecutive time period that a vehicle may occupy a parking space;
2. The hours of the day during which parking is allowed;
3. The requirement for a permit displayed on a vehicle parked in the space;
e. To park or let stand any vehicle in any area marked "No Parking" or in any other manner
that will interfere with traffic into, through or out of the facility;
f. To park or let stand any vehicle that does not bear a current permit issued pursuant to the
authority of Section 18-217, Permits for Parking in Village Parking Facilities, in any
parking space available for daily use without depositing the fee established by Section 18-
218, Fees for Daily Parking, in the coin box for such parking space;
g. To alter, deface or counterfeit any permit stickers issued by the Village of Arlington
Heights.
Section 18-217 Permits for Parking in Village Parking Facilities.
a. The Village Manager shall cause suitable permit stickers to be prepared and made available
for issuance and sale to persons desiring to park in those portions of the Village parking
facilities in which parking is restricted to holders of such permits. The number of permits
issued shall not exceed the number of parking spaces actually available for parking, unless
the Village Manager determines, on the basis of surveys of parking space vacancy rates
and other relevant criteria, that the sale of an additional number of permits is justified, in
which event, an additional number of permits may be sold at the direction of the Village
TRAFFIC
18-12 REVISED 08/07/17
Manager. Permit stickers shall designate the Village parking facility for which issued, and
shall be issued and sold for monthly periods.
b. Under the direction of the Village Manager, permit stickers shall be sold during regular
business hours at the Village offices, and shall be sold in accordance with chronological
priority of application for such permits, except that the Village Manager may establish a
schedule for sale only to persons residing within the corporate limits of the Village or
persons who own or are employed by businesses within the corporate limits of the Village,
prior to any offer of such permits for sale to the general public.
Ord. #03-078, # 17-031)
c. The fee for a monthly parking permit sticker purchased from the Village that allows
parking between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. the following day shall be as follows:
Commuter fee for use through September 30, 2017 $ 30.00
Resident commuter fee for use on or after October 1, 2017 $ 40.00
Non- Resident commuter fee for use on or after October 1, 2017 $ 50.00
The fee for a parking permit sticker purchased from the Village that allows 24 hour
parking shall be as follows:
Reverse overnight commuter permit for use through September 30, 2017 $ 40.00
Reverse overnight commuter permit for use on or after October 1, 2017 $ 50.00
24-hour residential permits for use through September 30, 2017 $ 40.00
24-hour residential permits for use on or after October 1, 2017 $ 50.00
d. The Village Manager is authorized to refuse to issue any permit stickers to any person who
has committed three or more violations of the provisions of Section 18-216, Regulations
for Village Parking Facilities, during any period of six months.
Section 18-218 Fees for Daily Parking.
Ord. #01-011, # 03-078, # 17-031)
a. In parking zones having a parking time of 12 hours, the fee for each 12 -hour period shall
be $ 1.50 through September 30, 2017 and $ 2.00 on or after October 1, 2017. Parking
begun after 6:00 p.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day, shall not require a fee.
b. The Village Manager shall cause to be erected parking meters or other coin boxes for
deposit of the fee for parking in such zone.
Section 18-219 Deposit of Slugs or Foreign Coins Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to deposit any slug or substitute for United States coins or cent pieces in parking meters or
coin boxes.
Section 18-220 Tampering. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, tamper with, open,
willfully break or destroy any parking meter, coin box or regulatory sign or to damage the post to
which it is attached.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
18-13 REVISED 05/17/10
Section 18-221 Responsibility of Registered Owner.
a. The registration of a motor vehicle with the Secretary of State in the name of the alleged
violator, or the issuance of a vehicle sticker by a municipality to the alleged violator, shall
constitute prima facie proof that the alleged violator was in control of or was the operator
of the motor vehicle at the time of such alleged violation.
b. Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered pursuant to law and who leases such
vehicles to others, after receiving written notice of a violation of this Article involving such
vehicles, shall provide the police with a written statement of the name and address of the
lessee at the time of such offense and the identifying number on the registration plates of
the vehicle.
Ord. #09-026, # 10-023)
Section 18-222 Fines and Penalties. A person accused of a violation pursuant to this Article, as
well as Section 18-106, (625 ILCS 5/12-603.1), Section 18-110, Section 16-108, Section 16-204,
Section 16-208 and Section 16-301, may settle and compromise the violation claim by paying to
the Village Finance Department the applicable amount as shown in the schedule set forth in this
Section within a period to be specified in the citation.
a. Any person, firm or corporation that violates Section 17-111, Duplicate Issue, shall be
subject to the penalty provided in Section 17-114, Penalty, of this Code.
b. Any person, firm or corporation that violates Section 18- 202, Parking for Persons with
Disabilities, shall be fined not less than $250, in addition to any costs or charges connected
with the authorized removal or storage of any motor vehicle.
Ord. #09-037)
c. Any person, firm or corporation that violates Section 18-211b, Parking of Trucks, or
Section 18-214, Fire Lanes, or 625 ILCS 5/11-1303a2b, shall be fined not less than $ 50 nor
more than $750.
d. Any person, firm or corporation that violates any other section of this Article or Ordinance
No. 79- 43 (Resident Parking) shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750; provided,
however, that if the alleged violator shall plead guilty and make payment within the time
set forth below, the penalty shall be as follows:
If paid within ten days $ 25
After ten days, but within 21 days $ 30
After 21 days $ 35
e. In the event that payment has not been made within 90 days of the original issue date, an
additional cost of 30% of the fine amount shall be assessed to defray the cost of collection.
f. In the event that the person to whom the citation is issued fails to settle and pay the violation
claim within the prescribed time, the officer is authorized to cause a notice to be served
upon the alleged violator and is authorized to file a complaint and to prosecute the same in
the Circuit Court of Cook County.
TRAFFIC
18-14 REVISED 05/17/10
g. All persons who plead not guilty to the offense indicated may deliver the citation in person
to the Police Department of the Village of Arlington Heights at the Police Station within 21
days after the date and hour indicated. Arrangements for hearing will be made by the Police
Department.
h. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the filing of a complaint in the first instance in the
Circuit Court of Cook County and the payment of any fine and costs which shall be
determined and established by the Circuit Court.
Ord. #09-026)
Section 18-223 Suspension of Driving Privileges Due to Failure to Pay Fine or Penalty for
Standing, Parking or Compliance Violations.
a. When a person has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing pursuant to this Article
on ten or more parking violations, the Police Chief or designee shall cause a notice of
impending driver's license suspension to be sent, in accordance with Section 18- 226,
Mailing of Notices, of this Chapter. The notice shall state that failure to pay the amount
owing within 45 days of the date of the notice will result in the Village’ s notifying the
Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings
pursuant to section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as now or hereafter amended.
b. If a person sent a notice pursuant to subsection ( a), of this Section fails to pay the amount
owing within the time stated on the notice, the Police Chief or designee may file with the
Secretary of State a certified report, in accordance with section 6-306.5(c) of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings, the Police
Chief or designee shall assess a $ 20 filing fee against the person named in the certified
report with the Secretary of State.
c. A person named in a certified report filed pursuant to subsection (b) of this Section may,
within 21 days of the date of the notice sent by the Secretary of State pursuant to section
6-306.5(b) of the Illinois Vehicle Code, file with the Police Chief or designee a written
statement and supporting documentation to challenge the report; provided, however, the
grounds for such challenge shall be limited to:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
15 REVISED 08/03/09
1. The person not having been the owner or lessee of the vehicle or vehicles receiving
ten or more parking violation notices on the date or dates such notices were issued;
or
2. The person having already paid the fine and penalty for the ten or more violations
indicated on the report. The Police Chief or designee shall send, within three
business days, notice of the decision or the challenge of the report after receipt
thereof.
d. If a person named in a certified report has paid the previously reported fine or penalty or if
the report is determined by the Police Chief or designee to be in error, the Police Chief or
designee shall notify the Secretary of State in accordance with Section 6-306.5(d) of the
Illinois Vehicle Code. A certified copy of such notification shall be given, upon request
and at no charge, to the person named therein.
Ord. #09-026)
Section 18-224 Towing and Storage of Improperly Parked Vehicles and Abandoned
Vehicles.
a. Any vehicle parked in violation of Sections 18-201b, 18-202, 18-212 or 18-216 or
determined to be abandoned shall be subject to being towed by the Village or any of its
officers, employees or agents to a location designated by the Village, at the expense of the
owner of the vehicle.
b. The vehicle shall have a tow notice applied to it. A pre-tow warning notice shall be sent
to the registered owner and the lienholder, if any, by both first class and certified mail.
The pre-tow warning notice will include a description of the vehicle, the license plate and
vehicle identification numbers ( VIN) and notice that a hearing will be granted, if requested.
If a hearing is requested, it will be granted within two working days and held during normal
business hours. The hearing will be conducted by the Village Manager or designee.
c. If, after ten days, there has been no response to the pre- tow warning notice, the vehicle may
be towed. A post-tow notice form will be sent by both first class and certified mail to the
owner and the lienholder, if any, no more than ten days after the vehicle was towed, and it
must include a copy of the Village’s tow order. This notice must also include the
opportunity for a post- tow hearing. If a hearing is requested, it will be granted within two
working days and held during normal business hours. The hearing will be conducted by
the Village Manager or designee.
d. For vehicles that are seven years old or newer, the towing company shall also send a second
post-tow notice by both first class and certified mail to the owner and the lienholder, if any.
This notice must be sent no less than ten days prior to the vehicle being sold at public
auction or otherwise disposed of. A copy of this notice must also be sent to the Village.
e. Immediate towing, without prior notice, of an illegally parked or abandoned vehicle is
permitted if the registered owner and lienholder cannot be located because the license
plates and VIN have been removed or made illegible, the vehicle poses an immediate
hazard to others, the vehicle is obstructing traffic or access to a roadway or pedestrian
TRAFFIC
16 REVISED 08/03/09
walkway or otherwise creates an emergency, the vehicle is discovered to be stolen, or the
vehicle otherwise presents an immediate threat to the public health and safety.
f. The Village shall not be liable for any damage to any vehicle which occurs as a result of
the towing and storage of any vehicle under the provisions of this Section.
Ord. #09-026)
Section 18-225 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles. There is hereby adopted by reference 625
ILCS 5/4-202 and 205. Except as set forth in Section 18- 223, Suspension of Driving Privileges
Due to Failure to Pay Fine or Penalty for Standing, Parking or Compliance Violations, abandoned
vehicles may be disposed of by the Police Chief in the following manner:
a. Whenever a motor vehicle is appraised at a value not exceeding $ 100, the Police Chief may
offer the vehicle at any public auction of motor vehicles, to the highest bidder for cash, the
time and place of such sale to be published at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county without the necessity of notice to the owner or other persons if the
name and address of the owner and other persons cannot be ascertained by identification
in or on the vehicle or by reasonable inquiry in the neighborhood where the vehicle has
been abandoned and if there are no State of Illinois registration plates displayed on the
vehicle or, even though State of Illinois registration plates are displayed on the vehicle, if
the registration plates are displayed in violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code or if the
registered owner has been notified by certified United States mail, return receipt requested,
that the motor vehicle is to be disposed of and has subscribed to an affidavit disclaiming
any future interest in the vehicle or has failed to subscribe to such an affidavit and has, for
a period of 15 days after notification, failed to reclaim the vehicle. The refusal or failure
to reclaim shall constitute a waiver of all interest in the vehicle;
b. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, whenever a motor vehicle has remained
unclaimed by the owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a period of 30
days from the day when the motor vehicle was delivered to the officer, and after notices
have been given as is provided in this Section, it shall become the duty of the Police Chief
to cause the motor vehicle to be sold at public auction to the highest bidder for cash, the
time and place of the sale to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county not less than ten nor more than 15 days from expiration of the 30 days, and the
Chief shall also cause a notice of the sale to be mailed to the Secretary of State and to the
owner or other persons legally entitled to the possession not less than ten nor more than 15
days from the expiration of the 30 days. The notice shall contain a full description of the
motor vehicle to be sold and the time and place of sale; provided that any such motor
vehicle not sold at the first sale may be offered for sale and sold at any subsequent sale
without further notice of publication;
c. Whenever any motor vehicle remains unsold for a period of 60 days from and including the
day when it was delivered to the Police Chief, any such motor vehicle may be given to the
use of any municipal department of the Village or may be destroyed and removed in the
discretion of the Police Chief;
d. The proceeds of any sale after paying all liens and deducting all reasonable charges and
expenses incurred by the Police Chief in receiving, keeping, advertising for sale, or selling
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
17 REVISED 08/03/09
or otherwise disposing of any such motor vehicle, shall be paid into the treasury of the
Village;
e. Whenever the owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of any motor vehicle
delivered to the care and custody of the officer charged with the keeping of the same,
desires to claim any such motor vehicle at any time before it has been sold at public auction,
he or she shall be entitled to the return of any such motor vehicle upon making application
for return in writing addressed to the Police Chief, including a reasonable proof of
ownership or right to possession; provided, however, that no claimant shall be entitled to a
return of any motor vehicle until all reasonable and necessary charges and expenses
incurred by any person or officer in dealing with it as contemplated under the provisions
of this Section have been paid.
Ord. #09-026)
Section 18-226 Mailing of Notices. Whenever a notice is required under this Chapter, the Police
Chief shall be responsible for ensuring that the notice is served, where applicable, by first class
mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the Village vehicle as recorded
with the Secretary of State of Illinois. If the vehicle is registered in a state other than Illinois, the
Police Chief shall ensure that the appropriate notice is sent to the address of the registered owner
as recorded in such other state’ s registry of motor vehicles.
Article III Miscellaneous Traffic Regulations
Section 18-301 Direction of Traffic at Scene of Fire. Any Fire Department Officer in command,
or any firefighter designated by that officer, may exercise the powers and authority of a Police
Officer in directing traffic at the scene of a fire or where the Fire Department has responded to any
emergency call while Fire Department equipment is on the scene, in the absence of or in assisting
police.
Section 18-302 Temporary Construction Traffic Restrictions.
a. No person shall operate a motor vehicle on a restricted street as a means of gaining access
to or exiting from a construction site when the entrance to such street has been posted with
signs prohibiting construction traffic.
b. The Village Manager is authorized to restrict use of streets by vehicles traveling to and from
construction sites, where reasonable alternative access to the site is available, and to cause
the erection of appropriate signs at the entrances to such streets.
Section 18-303 Motor Vehicles of the Second Division. No person shall drive any vehicle of
the second division, as defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-146, which has a gross weight of 15,000 pounds
or more, at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour on any Village street, notwithstanding the
provisions of any other Section of this Article.
Section 18-304 Solid-Tired Vehicles. No person shall drive any vehicle equipped with two or
more solid tires at a speed greater than ten miles per hour on any Village street.
Section 18-305 Prima Facie Evidence of Violation. If any person drives a vehicle in excess of
the speed limits established in this Article, the excessive speed shall be deemed prima facie
TRAFFIC
18 REVISED 07/02/07
evidence that the person is driving at a speed greater than is reasonable, proper and safe, with
regard to traffic and the use of the way, so as to endanger the life, limb and property of other
persons.
Section 18-306 Obstructing Grade Crossings. It shall be unlawful for the driver, engineer,
conductor or any other person in charge of a railroad train to cause a railroad train to be stopped
within the Village of Arlington Heights and thereby block or obstruct traffic on any street for a
period in excess of five minutes.
Section 18-307 Unattended Animals. It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other draft animal
unattended in any street or highway without having such animal securely fastened.
Ord. #96-052, # 07-039)
Section 18-308 Skates and Other Toy Vehicles in Roadway. It shall be unlawful for any person
upon ice or roller skates, in-line skates, coasters, sleds, skateboards or other toy vehicles to go
upon any arterial street, other than at a crosswalk or to go upon any such vehicle in the Downtown
District or any parking garage.
Section 18-309 Riding on Running Boards. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the
fenders, running boards or outside steps of any vehicle.
Section 18-310 Second Division Vehicles - Affixing Name and Address of Owner -
Exceptions. No second division vehicle, other than farm tractors, farm machinery and
implements, farm wagons, wagon- trailers or like vehicles used primarily in agricultural pursuits,
camping trailers, or trailers designed to carry a single watercraft, shall be operated upon the streets
or highways of this Village unless there is painted or otherwise firmly affixed to such vehicle on
both sides thereof in a color or colors vividly contrasting to the color of the vehicle the name and
address of the owner thereof, the maximum empty weight of such vehicle and the certificate or
permit number of such vehicle, if any, as prescribed by the Division of Illinois State Highway
Police of the Department of Public Safety.
Section 18-311 Trailers and Towed Vehicles. No trailer shall be operated on the streets or
highways of this Village while attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle or to a leading trailer or
semi- trailer, unless in addition to the regular coupling device it shall have suitable and adequate
safety chains or devices attached to the corners of the trailer frame of sufficient strength to pull the
trailer and its maximum load; provided that any trailer having a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or
less including the weight of the trailer and maximum load may be coupled to the towing vehicle
by means of clamp- on hitches which hitches shall be designed and installed to effectively transfer
stresses to the chassis of the towing vehicle. Such clamps and coupling bar shall be of sufficient
strength to hold and control such trailer when fully loaded. Such trailers shall be equipped with
two safety chains or cables which are permanently affixed to the tongue of the trailer. When such
trailer is attached to the towing vehicle, the free end of each chain or cable shall be attached to the
towing vehicle. Any such trailer complying with this proviso meets the safety requirements of this
Section.
Section 18-312 Trucks Prohibited on Certain Streets. It shall be unlawful to drive any truck
upon streets designated by the Board of Trustees as non-commercial traffic streets and which are
appropriately posted with signs so indicated, provided that a truck may make a delivery upon such
a street if it uses the street for not more than one block.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
19 REVISED 03/21/05
Ord. #05-019)
Section 18-313 Motorized Scooters. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or be in
control of a motorized scooter on any public street, parking lot, sidewalk, bike path or other area
open to the public in the Village.
a. For purposes of this Section, a motorized scooter is defined as any electric or gas -driven
wheeled scooter, motor driven cycle or other similar motor driven vehicle for which the
State of Illinois does not issue a title document and does not issue license plates or
registration documents.
The following uses are exempt from the provisions of this Section:
1. Motorized wheelchairs designed to provide mobility for persons with
disabilities or used by others for medical reasons and electric personal
assistive mobility devices, as defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-117.7, as now or
hereafter amended,
2. Operation of a motorized scooter when being used as part of a Village
sanctioned event or by a governmental entity while performing maintenance
duties.
b. Fines and Penalties. The police officer may, in the first instance of an alleged violation, in
lieu of filing a complaint in court, issue a citation advising the person that a specified
ordinance has been violated, requesting payment in an amount applicable to the alleged
violation as set forth in this Section as settlement of the violation claim and informing the
person that upon failure to settle, a complaint will be filed in the Circuit Court of Cook
County, charging that person with the violation.
Pursuant to the citation, the person accused of the violation may settle and compromise the
violation claim by paying to the Village Finance Department the applicable amount as
shown in the schedule set forth in this Section within a period to be specified in the citation.
In the event that the person to whom the citation is issued fails to settle and pay the violation
claim within the prescribed time, the officer is authorized to cause a notice to be served
upon the alleged violator and is authorized to file a complaint and to prosecute the same in
the Circuit Court of Cook County.
All persons who plead not guilty to the offense indicated may obtain a court date by
contacting the Police Department’ s Records Section during regular business hours, within
ten days after the date and hour indicated. Arrangements for hearing will be made by the
Police Department.
Any person, firm or corporation that violates this Section shall be fined not less than $ 25
nor more than $750; provided, however, that if the alleged violator shall plead guilty and
make payment within the time set forth below, the penalty shall be as follows:
If paid within ten days $ 25
After ten days, but within 21 days $ 30
TRAFFIC
20 REVISED 06/01/09
After 21 days $ 35
In the event that payment has not been made within 90 days of the original issue date, an
additional cost of 30% of the fine amount shall be assessed to defray the cost of collection.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the filing of a complaint in the first instance in the
Circuit Court of Cook County and the payment of any fine and costs that shall be
determined and established by the Circuit Court.
c. Impoundment and Redemption. Any person violating this Section shall be subject to a
citation and imposition of a fine as set forth above. Additionally, any person who has been
issued a citation for the same offense and found guilty or pled guilty within the previous
12 months shall be required to surrender, at the time of issuance of the second citation, the
motorized scooter to the police officer or other authorized official who issues the citation.
The surrendered motorized scooter shall be impounded and held by the Village Police
Department and shall be returned to the owner only after one of the following sets of
conditions has been met:
1. The person against whom the citation was issued shall have paid all outstanding
fines related to the citation as well as the fees and costs of the Village in the amount
of $100; or
2. The person against whom the citation was issued shall have presented to the
Village, proof that a determination of not guilty was made for the cited offense.
Ord. #05-021)
Article IV Vehicle Seizure and Impoundment
Section 18-401 Definitions. For purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases have
the following meanings:
a. Motor Vehicle. Every vehicle which is self- propelled, including but not limited to
automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles and motor scooters;
b. Owner of record. The record titleholder(s) of the vehicle.
Ord. #09-018)
Section 18-402 Conduct Prohibited. A motor vehicle that is used in connection with the charge
of driving under the influence, as provided in 625 ILCS 5/11-501(a), as adopted by reference in
Section 18-105, Firearms for Minors, or a motor vehicle that is driven by a person driving under a
revoked driver’s license, that license having been revoked for driving under the influence, may be
subject to seizure and impoundment by the Village and the owner of record of that vehicle shall
be liable to the Village for an administrative penalty in addition to any towing fees as hereinafter
provided.
Section 18-403 Seizure and Impoundment. Whenever a police officer has reason to believe that
a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this Article, the police officer shall
provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility approved by the Police Chief. This Section shall
not apply if the vehicle used in the alleged violation was stolen at that time and the theft was
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
18-21
reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered or
reasonably should have been discovered.
Section 18-404 Notice. The police officer shall notify any person identifying himself as owner
of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner’s right to request an administrative
hearing to be conducted pursuant to this Article.
Section 18-405 Administrative Hearing. Within five business days after a vehicle is seized and
impounded pursuant to this Article, the Village shall, by certified mail, notify the owner of record
of the owner’ s right to request a hearing to challenge whether a violation of this Article has
occurred. A request for hearing must be made to the Police Chief, in writing, and served by either
certified mail or personal service, no later than 14 calendar days after the notice of the right to a
hearing from the Village was mailed. The hearing shall be scheduled no later than 14 days after a
request for hearing was filed.
All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The
formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible.
If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the
vehicle was used in violation of this Article, then the hearing officer shall enter an order finding
the owner of record of the vehicle civilly liable to the Village for the administrative penalty of
500. If, after a hearing, the hearing officer does not determine by a preponderance of evidence
that the vehicle was used in violation of this Article, the hearing officer shall enter a finding for
the owner and order the immediate return of the owner’s vehicle or cash bond. If the owner of
record requests a hearing but fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a default
order in favor of the Village in the amount of the administrative penalty.
Any final decision by a hearing officer as to whether the vehicle was used in violation of this
Article shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to
review pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101, et seq. as now or
hereafter amended).
Section 18-406 Posting of Bond. If a bond in the amount of $ 500 is posted with the Police
Department, the impounded vehicle shall be released to the owner of record or his or her agent;
the owner of the vehicle shall remain liable to the towing agent for all applicable towing and
storage fees. If a $ 500 penalty is imposed for a violation of this Article, the $ 500 bond shall
beorfeited to the Village. If a violation of this Article is not found, the $ 500 bond shall be returned
to the person who posted the bond. The Village shall hold all bond money posted pursuant to this
Article until the hearing officer issues a decision or, if there is a judicial review, until there is a
final court decision.
Section 18-407 Disposition of Vehicle. Apenalty imposed pursuant to this Article shall constitute
a debt due and owing to the Village. A vehicle impounded pursuant to this Article shall remain
impounded until:
a. the penalty of $500 is paid to the Village and all applicable towing and storage fees
are paid to the towing agent, at which time the vehicle will be released to the owner
of record, or
TRAFFIC
18-22 REVISED 06/18/18
b. a bond in the amount of $500 is posted with the Police Department and all
applicable towing and storage fees are paid to the towing agent, at which time the
vehicle will be released to the owner of record, or
c. the vehicle is deemed abandoned, in which case the vehicle shall be disposed of in
the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned vehicles.
Article V Bicycles
Ord. #18-021)
Section 18-501 Bicycle Equipment. No person shall operate a bicycle not equipped with a bell
or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet, except that a
bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use a bicycle with any siren or whistle,
other than law enforcement personnel.
Section 18-502 Rental Agencies. Bicycles offered for rent by a rental agency shall be equipped
by such agency with the lights and other safety equipment required by this Article, and shall be
kept in good and safe working order. Rental agencies shall comply with all the provisions of this
Article and shall be responsible for the condition of the bicycles they rent. The Police Chief shall
make or cause to be made inspections from time to time to insure compliance with the provisions
of this Article.
Ord. #07-039)
Section 18-503 Operation of Bicycles on Certain Sidewalks Prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any person to ride a bicycle on any sidewalk in the Downtown District which is that area
bounded by and including Sigwalt Street from Highland Avenue to Arlington Heights Road;
Arlington Heights Road from Sigwalt Street to St. James Street; St . James Street from Arlington
Heights Road to Highland Avenue; and Highland Avenue from St. James Street to Sigwalt Street.
Section 18-504 Riding Regulations.
a. When two or more persons in a group are operating bicycles, they shall not ride abreast but
in single file.
b. The owner, operator of any bicycle emerging from any alley, driveway or garage shall stop
immediately prior to driving onto or across a sidewalk or onto a sidewalk line projected
across an alley, and shall exercise extreme care in those cases.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person under the influence of liquor or drugs to operate a
bicycle in the Village.
d. Bicycles, when parked in a business district, shall be parked in zones, officially designated
for that purpose. Bicycles shall not, at any time, in any place, be indiscriminately parked
by anyone along buildings, in such a manner as to interfere with pedestrians or along
roadways or sidewalks where they may interfere with traffic, or with persons getting into
or out of automobiles. No person shall move, or in any manner interfere with any bicycle
which is properly parked, nor shall any person interfere, or in any manner hinder any person
from properly parking a bicycle, except that the members of the Police Department or Fire
Department may move, or, in proper cases, prevent the parking of a bicycle when, in their
judgment, such action is necessary in order to properly safeguard persons or property.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
23
e. All bicycles, when operated on roadways, shall be kept to the right and shall be operated
as nearly as practicable at the right hand edge of the roadway.
f. No bicycle shall be operated faster than is reasonable and proper, and each bicycle shall be
operated with reasonable regard for the safety of the rider or other persons and property.
g. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle in the Village to guide the bicycle
in any manner except through the use of both hands upon the handlebars thereof. It shall
be unlawful to engage in any kind of trick or unsafe riding.
h. Turns in traffic shall be in accordance with the provisions relating to turns in traffic in this
Chapter.
i. All bicycles shall obey all applicable traffic regulations.
Article VI Tickets, Arrests, Penalties and Disposition of Fines
Section 18-601 Traffic Violation Tickets. Except where otherwise provided in this Chapter,
police officers may issue traffic violation tickets, setting forth the date, time and place of the
offense, the nature of the offense, the make, year, registration and license numbers of the vehicle
involved, the name and address of the driver where possible, and notifying the offender to appear
in court on a specific time and date, as is designated for hearing such cases. In the event that the
offender does not appear at the time, date and place specified, the arresting officer may sign a
complaint for the issuance of a warrant for the offender's arrest.
Section 18-602 Arrests. Any person arrested for violation of this Chapter shall be released upon
proper bail being furnished, as required by Statute. The amount of bail or bond in each instance
may be prescribed by the police officer in command of the police station in the absence of a police
magistrate or justice of the peace, provided that the arrested person may elect to have the amount
of such bail or bond set by a magistrate or justice as provided by Statute.
Section 18-603 Penalties for Misdemeanor.
a. It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter unless
such violation is by this Chapter or other law of this State declared to be a felony.
b. Every person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter for which another penalty is not provided, shall for first conviction thereof be
punished by a fine of not less than $ 1 nor more than $ 100; for a second such conviction
within the one year thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $ 200; upon a third and subsequent conviction within one year after the first
conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not less than $100 nor more than $300.
c. In addition to any fine imposed pursuant to this Section or pursuant to the provisions of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, adopted by reference by Section 18-105 of this Chapter, any person
violating 625 ILCS 5/11-501 shall be required to pay to the Village, for deposit to the
account of the Crime Prevention Bureau, the amount of $50 for each offense.
TRAFFIC
24 REVISED 12/01/03
Section 18-604 Disposition of Fines. For offenses committed upon the streets or highways of this
Village, or within the limits or jurisdiction of this Village, fines and penalties recovered under the
provisions of this Chapter shall be paid over to the Treasurer of this Village.
Ord. #98-065)
Section 18-605 Alternative Penalties - Compliance Warning Tickets.
Ord. #03-078)
a. Any person, pursuant to the issuance of a compliance warning ticket, who is accused of a
violation of any of the following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted by reference
to the Arlington Heights Municipal Code, except a traffic offense for which a court
appearance is required pursuant to current State law, may settle and compromise that ticket
as follows:
1. If proof of compliance can be validated by the Village within 21 days from the date
of the ticket, no fine shall be assessed.
2. On the 22nd day from the date the alleged violation was committed, a $30 fine shall
be assessed, which shall be due within 14 days.
3. After 35 days from the date the alleged violation was committed, the fine shall be
increased to $45. A final notice shall be mailed 45 days from the date that the ticket
was issued.
4. In the event that payment had not been made within 90 days of the original issue
date, the ticket shall be submitted for collection and an additional cost of 30% of
the fine shall be assessed to defray the cost of collection.
625 ILCS 5/3-101 Failure to Apply for Certificate of Title – All Terrain Vehicles
and Off-Highway Motorcycles Purchased After 12/31/97
625 ILCS 5/3-112(b) Failure to Transfer Title within Twenty Days
625 ILCS 5/3-404 No Bill of Lading or Manifest/Dispatch Record
625 ILCS 5/3-411(a) Failure to Carry Registration Card or Reciprocity Permit –
Second Division Vehicle
625 ILCS 5/3-413(a)(b) Improper Display of Registration (License) Plates
625 ILCS 5/3-413(f) Operation of Vehicle with Expired Registration Plate or
Sticker
625 ILCS 5/3-416 Failure to Notify the Secretary of State of Name/Address
Change within Ten Days (Registration/Title)
625 ILCS 5/3-417(a) Failure to Immediately Apply for Replacement Registration
Card, Plate or Sticker
625 ILCS 5/3-701(1) No Valid Registration – No Valid Plate or Sticker Obtained
625 ILCS 5/3-701(2) No Valid Registration – Reciprocity, Prorate or
Apportionment
625 ILCS 5/5-201(h) No In-Transit License Plates
625 ILCS 5/5-202(e) Failure to Display Three Tow-Truck Plates
625 ILCS 5/6-116 Failure to Notify the Secretary of State of Name/Address
Change within Ten Days (Drivers License)
625 ILCS 5/6-303(a) Driving While Drivers License Suspended – Vehicle
Emissions Suspension Only
625 ILCS 5/11-1419.01 Failure to Display Illinois Motor Fuel Tax Identification Card
625 ILCS 5/11-1419.02 Failure to Display External Illinois Motor Fuel Tax
Identification Device
625 ILCS 5/11-1507(a) Operation of Bicycle without Lamp and Reflector
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
25 REVISED 12/01/03
625 ILCS 5/11- 1507. 1 Operation of Motorized Pedalcycle without Lamp and Reflector
625 ILCS 5/12-101(a) Operation of Vehicle with Unsafe Equipment
625 ILCS 5/12-201(b) Driving Vehicles without Two Lighted Headlamps and Tail
Lamps When Required
625 ILCS 5/12-201(c) No White Rear Registration Light
625 ILCS 5/12-202(a)(b) Insufficient Clearance, Identification or Side Marker Lamps
and Reflectors – Second Division Vehicle
625 ILCS 5/12-207(a) Improper Use or More than One Spot Lamp
625 ILCS 5/12-207(b) Improper Use of More than Three Auxiliary Driving Lamps
625 ILCS 5/12-208(a) No Stop Signal Lamp or Device
625 ILCS 5/12-209(c) Defective Backup Lights
625 ILCS 5/12-211(a) Improper Lighting on Vehicles Other Than Motorcycles –
Only One Headlamp
625 ILCS 5/12-211(b) Improper Use of More than Four Lighted Headlights/Auxiliary
Driving Lamps
625 ILCS 5/12-212(a) Improper Use of Red Light Visible from Front of Vehicle
625 ILCS 5/12-301 Use of Defective Brakes
625 ILCS 5/12-401 Unlawful Use of Metal Studded Tire
625 ILCS 5/12-405(c) Use of Unsafe Tire
625 ILCS 5/12-501(a) Operation of Vehicle without Windshield
625 ILCS 5/12-502 Operation of vehicle without rear reflecting mirror
625 ILCS 5/12-503(a) Obstructed View of Windshield or Side Windows Adjacent to Driver
625 ILCS 5/12-503(b) Unlawful Application of Tinted Film to Windshield and/or
Side Windows Adjacent to Driver – All Vehicles
Manufactured after 12/31/81
625 ILCS 5/12-503(c) Obstructed View of any Window by Stationary or Suspended
Object(s)
625 ILCS 5/12-503(d) Operation of Vehicle without Windshield Cleaning Device; Operation
of Vehicle with View Obstructed by Snow, Ice or Moisture
625 ILCS 5/12-503(e) Obstructed View Due to Defective Condition or Repair of any Window
625 ILCS 5/12-601(a) Operation of Vehicle with Defective Horn
625 ILCS 5/12-601(b) Unlawful Possession or Use of Siren
625 ILCS 5/12-602 Operation of Vehicle with Defective or Modified Exhaust System
625 ILCS 5/12-603(b) Operation of Vehicle without Two Sets of Front Seat Safety
Belts – Vehicles of 1965 or Later Model Years
625 ILCS 5/12-604(a) Operation of Vehicle with Television Receiver Visible to Driver
625 ILCS 5/12-606 Operation of Tow Truck without:
a) Identifying Sign Attached on each Side
b) Required Equipment – One Broom, Shovel, Trash Can and
Fire Extinguisher
c) Removing Roadway Debris and Spreading Dirt or Sand on
Oil/Grease Deposits
d) Insurance Policy in Cab
625 ILCS 5/12-607(a) Operation of Vehicle with Unlawfully Altered Vehicle
Suspension System – Body Lifted in Excess of Three Inches
from Chassis
625 ILCS 5/12-607.1(a) Operation of First Division Vehicle with Frame in Excess of
22 Inches Above Ground
625 ILCS 5/12-607.1(b) Operation of Second Division Vehicle with Frame in Excess
of Specified Limits Above Ground - Refer to Statute
625 ILCS 5/12-608(a) Operation of Vehicle with a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating
GVWR) of 9000 Pounds or Less or a Recreational Vehicle
without Two Bumpers
625 ILCS 5/12-608(a) Operation of Vehicle with Unlawful Bumper Height
625 ILCS 5/12-702 Failure to Carry and/or Utilize Flares/Warning Devices –
Second Division Vehicle
625 ILCS 5/12-711 Operation of Garbage Truck, Roll-Off Hoist or Roll-on
Container without Audible Backing Warning System
TRAFFIC
26 REVISED 08/03/09
625 ILCS 5/12-806 Failure to Cover School Bus Sign
625 ILCS 5/12-808 Operating School Bus without Fire Extinguisher
625 ILCS 5/12-809 Operating School Bus without First Aid Kit
625 ILCS 5/13-111 Operating without Certificate of Valid Safety Test Attached to
Windshield - Second Division Vehicle
625 ILCS 5/15-106 Failure to Fasten Loose Projecting Member
625 ILCS 5/18C-4104(A) Operation Without Registration - Intrastate or Interstate
625 ILCS 5/18C-4604(1) Operation Without Current Cab Card and Illinois Identifier
Stamp
625 ILCS 5/18C-4604(3) Use of a Cab Card and Illinois Identifier Stamp Issued to
Another Carrier
625 ILCS 5/18C-4604(4) Failure to Display or Present a Cab Card and Illinois Identifier
Stamp
625 ILCS 5/18C-4701(1) Operating Without Trade Name, License and Registration
Number of Carrier Painted or Affixed to Both Doors of
Power Unit
625 ILCS 40/3-1 Operation of Unnumbered Snowmobile
625 ILCS 40/4-1 Operation of Snowmobile without Required:
a) One White Headlamp During Darkness
b) One Rear Taillight During Darkness
c) Brake System in Good Mechanical Condition
d) Reflective Material on Each Side of Cowling
e) Adequate Sound Suppression Equipment
625 ILCS 40/5-1D Operation of Snow Mobile without Lighted Headlamp and
Taillight
b. In the event that payment has not been made within 90 days of the original issue date, an
additional cost of 30% of the fine amount shall be assessed to defray the cost of collection.
c. The issuance of compliance warning tickets shall be as a courtesy in lieu of instituting a
prosecution in court for the alleged offense. However, nothing herein contained shall
prevent the filing of a complaint in the first instance in the Circuit Court of Cook County
and the payment of fines and costs, which shall be established by the Circuit Court.
Ord. #09-026)
Article VII Overweight/Oversize Vehicle Permits
Section 18-701 Limited Weight Streets – Truck Routes – Overweight/ Oversize Vehicle
Permits.
a. Except as set forth in subsections b. and c. of this Section, it shall be unlawful to operate
any vehicle having a gross weight exceeding 12,000 pounds ( F plate or above) upon any
street or highway within the Village’ s maintenance jurisdiction. The owner and operator
of the vehicle shall be jointly and severally responsible for notifying the Arlington Heights
Police Department in writing prior to operating such a vehicle within the Village limits.
Information including, but not limited to, company name, address, phone number and
contact person as well as the highway authority permit number, route detail and schedule
shall be provided to the Public Works Department.
b. Vehicles exceeding 12,000 pounds may be operated on streets which are not designated as
truck routes for the purpose of making a pickup, delivery and/ or provide services, or
successive pickups, deliveries and/or services, but not for purposes of peddling or
soliciting. Such vehicles may only leave a truck route to make pickups, deliveries or to
provide services by use of a direct route from the point on the truck route, which is closest
to the pickup, delivery or service location. When a vehicle making or providing successive
pickups, deliveries and/or services on non-truck route(s) arrives at a truck route, such
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
27 REVISED 03/15/10
vehicle must then utilize the truck route(s) until reaching the next point on a truck route
closest to the next delivery or service location.
c. The following vehicles are completely exempt from the provisions of this Article:
1. Vehicles owned and operated by governmental agencies such as fire apparatus and
equipment for snow and ice removal operations;
2. Vehicles engaged in snow and ice removal functions under contract with the
Village;
3. Vehicles engaged in the collection and removal of garbage and refuse;
4. Vehicles so directed by a police officer.
d. The following vehicles are also exempt from the provisions of this Article, but only to the
extent that such vehicle is operated along the shortest route between the point of origin or
destination and the nearest truck route. Such vehicles must also have legitimate reason to
be operating on streets not designated as truck routes.
1. Vehicles under contract with the Village performing construction activities.
2. Vehicles engaged in snow and ice removal functions on private property.
3. Vehicles owned and operated by private utilities or moving companies.
4. School and public transportation buses.
5. Vehicles registered and used as recreational vehicles consistent with other Village
regulations.
6. Tow trucks.
7. Implements of husbandry.
8. Vehicles operating under the terms of a valid permit issued by the Village.
Section 18-702 Excessive Weight Permits from Other Jurisdictions. The operation of a vehicle
over truck routes under the jurisdiction of the State of Illinois, Cook County, or any township of
size, weight or load exceeding the regulations of such highway authority, shall obtain a permit
from such highway authority and pay the appropriate fees pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois
Vehicle Code or other governing regulation. Fines for violation of the regulations of such highway
authority shall be punishable pursuant to the penalties defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code.
Ord. #10-010)
Section 18-703 Special Load Permits.
a. Except as set forth in subsections b. and c. of Section 18-701, no vehicle having a gross
weight in excess of 12,000 pounds shall be operated over, upon or across any public
roadway within the Village' s maintenance jurisdiction without first obtaining a special load
permit.
b. Applications for special load permits shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Police Department - Police Chief or designee.
TRAFFIC
28 REVISED 03/15/10
1. A permit for a single trip shall specify the date the excessive weight vehicle will be
operated on Village streets. A permit for a single trip shall only be valid for the
date specified on the special load permit.
2. A permit for a round trip shall specify the date( s) the excessive weight vehicle will
be operated on Village streets. A permit for a round trip shall only be valid on the
date( s) specified on the special load permit.
3. The fees for such permit shall be as set forth in this Article. All fees shall be paid
prior to the issuance of a permit.
c. In the event the permittee of a special load permit for a single trip or round trip needs to
modify the date(s) specified for travel on Village streets, he or she must receive written
approval from the Police Department prior to operation of an excessive weight vehicle on
Village streets.
d. A copy of the excessive weight permit issued by the State of Illinois, Cook County, or any
township that has jurisdiction over those streets or highways included in the route shall be
provided to the Police Department prior to the issuance of a special load permit.
e. Every permit issued under the provisions of this Article shall be carried in each vehicle to
which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer.
f.. The Police Chief or designee is authorized to withhold any permit if it is believed that the
issuance will cause an unreasonable risk to persons or property or will unreasonably create
traffic congestion. If such permit is issued, the Police Chief or designee may limit the
number of trips, or establish seasonal or other time limitations within which the vehicle
may be in operation on the streets or highways indicated, or otherwise limit the operation
of such vehicle or vehicles.
Section 18-704 Waivers. Written waivers to this Article related to weight limits on any street over
which the Village has jurisdiction may be granted by the Director of Public Works. The Police
Chief and Village Manager shall be notified immediately of any such waiver.
Section 18-705 Conflicts with Other Jurisdictions. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to
permit the operation of trucks over routes within the jurisdiction of the State of Illinois, Cook
County, any township or any privately owned street to the extent that such operation is prohibited
or regulated by the ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations of such highway authority.
Section 18-706 Permit Fees. The permit fees shall be as set forth below:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
29 REVISED 08/03/09
OVERSIZE ONLY VEHICLE PERMIT FEES
CATEGORY
MAXIMUM
DIMENSIONS
ESCORT SINGLE TRIP ROUND TRIP
1C
Width: 10’
Height: 14’
Length: 115’
No $ 15.00 $ 25.00
2C
Width: 12’
Height: 14’
Length: 115’
Yes $ 20.00 $ 25.00
3C
Width: 16’
Height: 15’
Length: 115’
Yes $ 30.00 $ 55.00
4C
Width: 18’
Height: 16’
Length: 120’
Yes $ 50.00 $ 95.00
5C
Width: >18’
Height: >16’
Length: >120’
Yes $ 100.00 $ 195.00
OVERWEIGHT & OVERSIZE VEHICLE PERMIT FEES
MAX LENGTH: 115’
MAX WIDTH: 12’
MAX HEIGHT: 13’ -
6”
CATEGORY
TOTAL
AXLES
MAXIMUM
WEIGHT
PER AXLE
SINGLE
TRIP
ROUND
TRIP
SINGLE VEHICLES
1A 2
48,000
25,000
Gross
Any Single Axle $
15.00 $ 25.00
2A 2
54,000
28,000
Gross
Any Single Axle $
20.00 $ 35.00
3A 3+
60,000
21,000
40,000
Gross
Any Single Axle
2 Axle Tandem
25.00 $ 45.00
4A 3+
68,000
25,000
48,000
Gross
Any Single Axle
2 Axle Tandem
30.00 $ 55.00
5A 4+
72,000
21,000
40,000
Gross
Any Single Axle
2 Axle Tandem
35.00 $ 65.00
6A 4+
76,000
23,000
44,000
Gross
Any Single Axle
2 Axle Tandem
40.00 $ 75.00
COMBINATION VEHICLES
2B 5+
88,000
23,000
44,000
Gross
Any Single Axle
2 Axle Tandem or 3 or 4 Axle Group
30.00 $ 55.00
4B 5+
100,000
25,000
48,000
Gross
Any Single Axle
2 Axle Tandem or 3 or 4 Axle Group
40.00 $ 75.00
TRAFFIC
30 REVISED 02/15/10
Section 18-707 Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation that operates a vehicle in violation of
any provisions of this Article shall be punishable by a fine as set forth in this Article. Each day
that a violation is found to exist shall constitute a separate violation. The owner and operator of
the vehicle shall be jointly and severally liable for any such fine. An operator cited for an excessive
weight vehicle shall be required to post a bond consistent with the requirements set forth by the
Circuit Court of Cook County for uniform traffic citations. The penalties are as follows:
a. Any person, firm or corporation that fails to obtain a special load permit shall be subject to
a fine of $1,000 per trip;
b. Any person, firm or corporation that fails to obtain written approval of modification shall
be subject to a fine of $1,000 per trip;
c. Any person, firm or corporation that exceeds the weight limits on Village streets shall be
fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,500 per each violation.
Ord. #10-006)
Article VIII Administrative Adjudication of Parking and Compliance Violations
Section 18-801 Purpose – Scope - Adoption of Rules and Regulations. The purpose of this
Article is to provide for the administrative adjudication of compliance violations and vehicular
standing and parking violations, as these offenses are set forth in Article II, Parking, of Chapter 18
of the Arlington Heights Municipal Code, through a fair and efficient system for the enforcement
of such ordinances. The administrative adjudication system set forth in this Article is established
pursuant to Division 2.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3, as now or
hereafter amended.
Section 18-802 Traffic Compliance Officer Designated. A Traffic Compliance Officer shall be
designated who is authorized to:
5B
6+
110,000
23,000
44,000
54,000
Gross
Any Single Axle
2 Axle Tandem
3 or 4 Axle Group
45.00 $ 85.00
6B 6+
120,000
25,000
48,000
60,000
Gross
Any Single Axle
2 Axle Tandem
3 or 4 Axle Group
50.00 $ 95.00
7B 6+
143,000
27,000
54,000
78,000
Gross
Any Single Axle
2 Axle Tandem
3 or 4 Axle Group
60.00 $ 115.00
8B 7+
162,000
25,000
50,000
75,000
100,000
Gross
Any Single Axle
2 Axle Tandem
3 Axle Group
4 Axle Group
70.00 $ 135.00
9B 8+ 187,000
Gross
Same Axle Weights as
8B**
80.00 $ 155.00
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
31 REVISED 02/15/10
a. Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing,
parking and compliance violations;
b. Adopt, distribute and process parking and compliance violation notices and additional
notices, collect money paid as fines and penalties for violations of parking and compliance
ordinances;
c. Establish procedures necessary for the prompt, fair and efficient operation of the
administrative adjudication system;
d. Certify copies of final determinations of violations liability and factual reports, verifying
that the final determination of violation liability was issued in accordance with this Article
and 625 ILCS 5/11-203.3;
e. Promulgate rules and regulations pertaining to the hearing process, the content of forms
and procedures, and the daily operation of the administrative adjudication of parking and
compliance violations program.
Section 18-803 Hearing Officer Appointed. A Hearing Officer shall be appointed who shall be
empowered and directed to:
a. Preside over the administrative hearings established herein, as the adjudicator;
b. Administer oaths;
c. Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and production of relevant papers or
documentation;
d. Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the existence of the code violation;
e. Assess fines and penalties for violations as established in the Village Code;
f. Make final determinations of violation liability;
g. Provide for the accurate recordation of the administrative adjudication system.
Section 18-804 Violation - Penalty. The violation of any provision of the traffic prohibiting or
restricting vehicular standing or parking, or establishing a compliance violation, shall be a civil
offense punishable by fine only.
Section 18-805 Prima Facie Responsibility for Violation and Penalty – Parking Violation
Issuance and Removal.
a. Whenever any vehicle exhibits a compliance violation or is parked in violation of any
provision of any applicable provision of Article II, Parking, of Chapter 18 of the Arlington
Heights Municipal Code prohibiting or restricting vehicular parking or standing, any
person in whose name the vehicle is registered with the Secretary of State of Illinois or
such other state’ s registry of motor vehicles shall be prima facie responsible for the
violation and subject to the penalty therefore. The Village and the police officer shall
accurately record the state registration number of the ticketed vehicle.
TRAFFIC
32 REVISED 02/15/10
b. For purposes of Section 17-103, Vehicle License Required, of the Arlington Heights
Municipal Code, a prima facie case shall not be established when the registered owner was
not a resident of the Village of Arlington Heights on the day the violation was issued.
c. Whenever any vehicle exhibits a compliance violation during operation or is parked in
violation of any provision of Article II, Parking, of Chapter 18 of the Arlington Heights
Municipal Code prohibiting or restricting vehicular parking or standing or regulating the
condition of a parked or standing vehicle, any police officer, public service officer or other
person designated by the Police Chief observing such violation may issue a parking or
compliance violation notice, as provided for in the Arlington Heights Municipal Code and
serve the notice on the owner of the vehicle by handing it to the operator of the vehicle, if
present, or by affixing it to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
d. The issuer of the notice shall specify on the notice his identification number, the particular
parking or compliance ordinance allegedly violated, the make and state registration number
of the cited vehicle, and the place, date and time of the alleged violation, the fine and any
penalty that may be assessed for late payment and shall certify the correctness of the
specified information by signing his name as provided in Section 11-208.3 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, as now or hereafter amended.
e. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner of the vehicle or his designee, to
remove, from a vehicle a parking or compliance violation notice affixed pursuant to the
ordinance codified in the Municipal Code.
Section 18-806 Violation Notices – Contents, Distribution and Record Keeping.
a. In addition to the information set forth above, the notices shall state the applicable fine as
provided in Chapter 18 of the Municipal Code, the monetary penalty which shall be
automatically assessed for late payment, a statement that vehicle immobilization and
driver’ s license suspension ( if applicable) may be imposed if fines and penalties are not
paid in full, that payment of the indicated fine, and of any applicable penalty for late
payment, shall operate as a final disposition of the violation, and information as to the
availability of an administrative hearing in which the violation may be contested on its
merits and the time and manner in which such hearing may be had.
b. The Traffic Compliance Officer shall distribute parking and compliance violation notices
to all persons authorized to issue parking and compliance violating notices.
c. The Traffic Compliance Officer shall compile and maintain complete and accurate records
relating to all parking violation notices issued pursuant to this Article and the dispositions
thereof. In addition, the Traffic Compliance Officer shall make certified reports to the
Secretary of State pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5, as now or hereafter amended.
Section 18-807 Respondent’s Options.
a. Prior to the 21st day after issuance of the violation notice, a person on whom a parking or
compliance violation notice has been served has the following options:
1. pay the indicated fine; or
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
33 REVISED 07/01/13
2. submit the materials set forth in this Article to obtain an adjudication by mail; or
3. request an administrative hearing as set forth in this Article to contest the charged
violation.
A response by mail shall be deemed timely if postmarked within 21 days of the issuance
of the violation notice. If none of these options is selected, the Respondent will be deemed
to have waived his/her rights to exercise any of these options.
b. If the respondent submits documentary evidence to obtain adjudication by mail pursuant
to this Article, the Traffic Compliance Officer shall send the respondent a copy of the
determination in accordance with this Article.
c. If the respondent requests an administrative hearing to contest the cited violations pursuant
to this Article, the Traffic Compliance Officer shall notify the respondent in writing of the
location and time available for a hearing in accordance with this Article.
Section 18-808 Second Notice of Violation. Upon the failure of the registered owner of the cited
vehicle to pay the appropriate fine and/or penalty prior to the 21st day, or request an adjudication
by mail, or request a hearing, the Traffic Compliance Officer shall send out a second notice of
violation which shall contain the following:
a. Date and location of violation cited in the violation notice;
b. Particular standing, parking or compliance regulation violated;
c. Vehicle make and state registration;
d. Fine and penalty that may be assessed for late payment;
Ord. # 13- 033)
e. Availability of an administrative hearing at which the alleged violation may be contested
on its merits;
f. A statement that failure to either pay the fine and any applicable penalty or appear at a
subsequent hearing on its merits on the date and at the time and place specified will result
in a determination of liability in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated; and
g. A statement that upon the occurrence of a determination of liability, and the exhaustion of,
or the failure to exhaust, available administrative and judicial procedures for review, any
unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the Village.
Section 18-809 Grounds for Adjudication by Mail or Administrative Hearing. A person
charged with a parking or compliance violation as set forth in this Article may contest the charge
through adjudication by mail or at any administrative hearing, limited to one or more of the
following grounds with appropriate evidence to support that:
a. The respondent was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle at the time of violation;
b. The cited vehicle or its State registration plates were stolen at the time the violation
occurred;
TRAFFIC
34 REVISED 02/15/10
c. The facts alleged in the parking or compliance violation notice are inconsistent or do not
support a finding that the specified ordinance was violated; and
d. The illegal condition described in the compliance violation did not exist at the time the
notice was issued.
e. In addition to the above- listed grounds, at a hearing, the hearing officer may determine that
there were other grounds sufficient to disprove liability.
Section 18-810 Adjudication by Mail – Procedure.
a. Administrative hearings to review materials submitted for the adjudication by mail of
parking and compliance violations cited pursuant to this Article shall be conducted in
accordance with this Article.
b. The respondent may contest a parking or compliance violation, based on one or more of
the grounds provided in this Article, by mailing to the Police Department the following
materials and information: the notice of violation, the full name, address and telephone
number( s) of the respondent; the make, model and year of the vehicle; any documentary
evidence that rebuts the charge; and a written statement signed by the respondent setting
forth facts relevant to establishing a defense to the charge in accordance with Section 18-
809, Grounds for Adjudication by Mail or Administrative Hearing. A photocopy of any
documentary evidence submitted by any party shall be accepted as the equivalent of the
original document.
c. No violation may be established except upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence;
provided, however, that a parking or compliance violation notice, or a copy thereof, issued
in accordance with this Article shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts
specified therein.
d. Upon review of the materials submitted in accordance with this Section, the hearing officer
shall enter a determination of no liability or of liability and, if liability is found, the amount
of the fine. Upon issuance, such determination shall constitute a final determination for
purposes of judicial review under the Administrative Review Law of Illinois.
Section 18-811 Administrative Hearings – Procedures.
a. Administrative hearings for the adjudication of parking and compliance violations issued
pursuant to this Article shall be conducted in accordance with this Article.
b. Respondents who have failed to request a hearing after a second violation notice has been
issued shall be placed on a hearing docket containing all individuals who have failed to
respond to notices. In the event the respondent appears at the date and time of this hearing,
the hearing officer may, but is not required to, conduct a hearing at that date and time. If
the hearing officer has time after the regularly scheduled hearing to conduct the hearing,
he may do so. In the event there is no time to conduct a hearing, a hearing shall be
scheduled at a regularly scheduled hearing date in the future.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
35 REVISED 02/15/10
c. The respondent may appear pro se or, at his own expense, by an attorney. An attorney who
appears on behalf of any person shall file with the hearing officer a written appearance on
a form provided by the Village for such purpose.
d. The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the conduct of the hearing.
e. All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation, which shall be administered by the
hearing officer. The hearing officer may issue subpoenas to secure the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant documents; provided, however, that
a respondent who appears by an attorney shall not be compelled to attend the hearing and
may submit his testimony, if any, by affidavit. In addition, witnesses who have not been
subpoenaed to attend the hearing may submit their testimony, if any, by affidavit.
f. No violation may be established except upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence;
provided, however, that a parking or compliance violation notice or a copy thereof, issued
and signed in accordance with this Article shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness
of the facts specified therein.
g. The hearing officer may, on a showing of good cause, grant one continuance to a date
certain.
h. The Village shall cause a record to be made of each hearing, and recording devices may be
used for such purposes.
Section 18-812 Hearing – Determination of Liability – Petition to Set Aside.
a. Upon conclusion of a hearing under this Article, the hearing officer shall issue a
determination of no liability or of liability in the amount of the fine for the relevant
violation as provided in this Article.
b. If a person fails to respond to the violation notice and the second notice of violation, or has
requested an administrative hearing and fails to appear, a determination of liability shall be
entered against the respondent pursuant to this Article. Such determination shall become
final for purposes of judicial review under the Administrative Review Law of Illinois upon
the denial or the expiration of the time in which to file a timely petition to set aside the
determination as provided in this Chapter.
c. Within 21 days from the issuance of a determination of liability pursuant to this Article,
the person against whom the determination was entered may submit a written request to
the Traffic Compliance Officer to set aside the determination, provided, however, the
grounds for the petition shall be limited to:
1. the person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the parking
violation notice was first issued;
2. the person already paid the fine or penalty for the parking violation in question; or
3. there was an excusable failure, based upon criteria established by the hearing
officer, to appear at or request a new date for a hearing. The Traffic Compliance
Officer shall set a hearing date and provide written notice of that date to the
petitioner.
TRAFFIC
36 REVISED 02/15/10
Section 18-813 Final Determination. A final determination of violation liability shall occur
following failure to pay the fine and/or penalty after a hearing officer’ s determination of violation
liability, and the exhaustion of or failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures,
including denial of a timely petition to set aside or failing to file the set aside petition within 21
days of the determination.
Section 18-814 Notice of Final Determination.
a. If any fine or penalty is owing and unpaid after a determination of liability under this
Article has become final, and the respondent has exhausted or failed to exhaust judicial
procedures for review, the Traffic Compliance Officer shall cause a Notice of Final
Determination of Liability to be sent to the respondent in accordance with this Article.
b. Any fine and penalty, if applicable, remaining unpaid after the notice of final determination
of liability is sent, shall constitute a debt due and owing the Village which may be
enforced in any legal manner consistent with 625 ILCS 5/11- 208.3, as now or hereafter
amended. Failure of the respondent to pay such fine or penalty may result in:
1. The immobilization of the person’ s vehicle for failure to pay fines or penalties for
five or more parking or compliance violations; and/or
2. The suspension of the person’ s driver’ s license for failure to pay fines or penalties
for ten or more parking violations.
Section 18-815 Lessor of Vehicle Not Liable for Violation – When.
a. In accordance with Section 11-1306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, no person who is the
lessor of a vehicle pursuant to a written lease agreement shall be liable for a violation of
any standing or parking regulation of this Article involving such vehicle during the period
of the lease if, upon receipt of a notice of violation sent within 120 days of the violation
that person shall, within 60 days thereafter, provide to the Traffic Compliance Officer the
name and address of the lessee.
b. Upon receipt of a lessor’ s notification of the name and address of the lessee provided
pursuant to Section 11-1305 or 11-1306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the Traffic
Compliance Officer shall cause a notice of violation to be sent to the lessee as provided for
in this Article.
Ord. #10-006)
Article IX Vehicle Immobilization Program
Section 18-901 Vehicle Immobilization Program.
a. The Police Chief or designee is hereby authorized to direct and supervise a program of
vehicle immobilization for the purpose of enforcing the parking ordinances set forth in
Chapter 18, Article II, Parking, of the Arlington Heights Municipal Code. The program of
vehicle immobilization shall provide for immobilizing any eligible vehicle located on the
public way or any Village- owned property by placement of a restraint in such a manner as
to prevent its operation.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
37 REVISED 02/15/10
b. Definitions. For purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases have the
following meanings:
1. Owner. The registered or legal owner or person who is otherwise entitled to
possession of the motor vehicle.
2. Police Immobilized Vehicle (Wheel-Lock). A vehicle located on a public way at a
time or in such a manner as to require police intervention pursuant to this Article.
c. When the registered owner of a vehicle has accumulated five or more citations of parking
violation liability, in any combination, which are each at least 120 days past the date of the
violation, for which the fines and applicable penalties, if applicable, have not been paid in
full, the Police Chief or designee shall cause a notice prior to vehicle immobilization to be
sent, in accordance with Section 18-902, Pre- Immobilization Notice, of this Article.
d. The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other authorized person may secure the release of
the vehicle by paying the immobilization, towing and storage fees provided in subsection
g) of this Section, and all fines and penalties remaining due on each final determination of
liability issued to such person.
e. All motor vehicles towed pursuant to this Article shall be impounded in locations
determined by the Police Chief.
f. The owner of a vehicle covered by this Article shall have the right to an administrative
hearing to determine whether the immobilization or any subsequent towing was erroneous.
Hearings requested pursuant to this Article shall be conducted by a hearing officer upon
receipt of a written request for a hearing. Hearing officers shall be appointed by the Village
to conduct any of the administrative hearings provided for in this Article. The hearing
officers shall have the authority to require the presence of Village personnel or witnesses
at such hearing. Any determination of the hearing officer regarding the validity of any
action pursuant to this Article shall be a final determination for the purpose of judicial
review under the Administrative Review Law of Illinois upon issuance.
g. The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall be subject to a fee of $ 125 for such
immobilization. The owner will also be liable to the private towing company for all towing
charges and storage fees.
h. It shall be unlawful to remove or damage the immobilizing device or to relocate or tow any
vehicle restrained by an immobilization device without the prior approval of the Village.
Any person who violates this Section shall be subject to a penalty of $500 for each such
violation.
Section 18-902 Pre-Immobilization Notice. Upon accumulation of five or more outstanding or
otherwise unsettled parking violation notices and/ or Village vehicle license violation notices, a
pre-immobilization notice shall be sent by regular mail to the owner of such vehicle or placed on
the owner' s vehicle when the owner cannot be reached by mail.
The notice shall state the name and address of the registered owner, the state registration number
of the vehicle or vehicles registered to such owner, and the serial numbers of parking violation
notices which have resulted in final determination of liability for which fines and/ or penalties
remain unpaid. Failure to pay the fines and penalties owed within 21 days from the date of the
notice will result in the inclusion of the state registration number of the vehicle or vehicles of such
TRAFFIC
38 REVISED 02/15/10
owner on an immobilization list.
Section 18-903 Pre- Immobilization Review. A person may challenge the validity of the preimmobilization
notice by presenting to the Police Department written documentation of any of the
following:
a. That all fines and penalties for the violations cited in the notice have been paid in full; or
b. That the registered owner has not accumulated five or more final determinations of parking
violation liability which were unpaid at the time the notice of impending vehicle
immobilization was issued.
Section 18-904 Post-Immobilization Notice. Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a postimmobilization
notice shall be affixed to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. The notice shall warn
that the vehicle is immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its damage.
The notice shall also state that the unauthorized removal of or damage to the immobilizing restraint
is a violation of Section 18-901h, Vehicle Immobilization Program. The notice shall also provide
information specifying how release of the immobilizing restraint may be had, and how the
registered owner may obtain a post-immobilization hearing. If the restraint has not been released
within 24 hours of its placement, the restraint shall be released and the vehicle towed and
impounded.
Section 18-905 Post-Immobilization Review. A person may challenge the validity of the vehicle
immobilization by presenting to the Police Department written documentation of any of the
following:
a. That all fines and penalties for the violations cited in the notice have been paid in full; or
b. That the registered owner has not accumulated five or more final determinations of parking
violation liability which were unpaid at the time the notice of impending vehicle
immobilization was issued.
Section 18-906 Post- Tow Notice. Whenever a vehicle is towed following immobilization in
accordance with this Article, the Police Department shall provide to the owner of the vehicle the
notice described in this Section no later than one business day after the day of the tow, except that
when a motor vehicle is towed after 3:00 P.M. on a Friday, Saturday, Sunday or holiday, as that
term is defined in Section 18-101d, Definition of Words and Phrases- Holidays, or the day before
a holiday, the notice described herein shall be provided no later than the second business day after
the tow.
a. Within ten days after a vehicle has been towed and impounded, a notice of impoundment
shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the registered
owner as listed with the Secretary of State.
b. The post- tow notice shall include the following information:
1. The description of the motor vehicle including year, make, model, registration and
vehicle identification number ( VIN);
2. The present location of the motor vehicle;
3. The basis for the removal of the vehicle;
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
39 REVISED 02/15/10
4. The right of the owner to a hearing as set forth in Section 18-907, Post Tow
Hearings, of this Article;
5. The consequences of the failure to request a hearing;
6. The consequences of a failure to reclaim the motor vehicle, including a statement
that if the vehicle is not claimed within 30 days from the date of the post- tow notice,
the vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with Section 4-208
of the Illinois Vehicle Code;
7. A deadline date seven calendar days from the date of notice, by which the owner
must respond to the post- tow notice.
b. The notice required in this Section shall, at the discretion of the Police Department, be
given by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery. The date of
personal delivery or the date of mailing of the certified letter shall be the date of providing
notice.
c. A notice containing the requirements set forth above shall be posted at the Arlington
Heights police station and at all tow impound areas.
d. If the registered or legal owner or person who is otherwise entitled to possession of a motor
vehicle does not request a hearing within seven days of the mailing of the post- tow notice,
the right to a post- tow hearing shall be forfeited. The registered or legal owner or person
who is otherwise entitled to possession of a motor vehicle must pay the total cost of the
tow and any storage incurred.
Section 18-907 Post- Tow Hearings.
a. The owner of a vehicle towed following wheel lock immobilization pursuant to this Article
shall be provided the opportunity for a post- tow hearing only for the limited purpose of
challenging the validity of the tow and any tow or storage charges. Aperson may challenge
the validity of the tow by filing a written request for a hearing with the Police Department.
This hearing will not be determinative of, or adjudicate, any citation issued relative to any
towed vehicle.
b. Hearings shall take place as follows:
1. In those instances where the vehicle has been released upon the deposit of a cash
bond in an amount equal to the tow and storage charge, the hearing shall take place
within seven days after the posting of cash bond.
2. In those instances where the vehicle remains impounded, the hearing shall take
place at the option of the owner, either within seven days after receipt of a written
request or within 14 days for good cause shown by the owner of the motor vehicle.
c. The Hearing Officer shall review all evidence presented and make a finding as to whether
there was lawful authority for the tow and storage of the vehicle. The Village must
establish its authority by a preponderance of the evidence. The Village shall establish a
prima facie case upon a showing of the documents related to the tow, i.e., the police
citation( s), police order or the police report and/ or the tow report. The Police Chief shall
TRAFFIC
40 REVISED 02/15/10
establish procedures to authenticate and present the above documents at an administrative
post-tow hearing.
d. Documentary evidence which disproves liability shall be based on the following grounds:
1. That all fines and penalties for the violations cited in the notice have been paid in
full; or
2. That the registered owner has not accumulated five or more final determinations of
parking violation liability which were unpaid at the time the notice of impending
vehicle immobilization was issued. Such notice shall indicate that the owner' s
vehicle is subject to being immobilized unless the owner of said vehicle, within 30
days of the date of notice: or
3. A sufficient explanation so that the hearing officer finds it disproves liability.
e. The Hearing Officer shall advise the owner and the Village of the findings at the conclusion
of the hearing:
1. If the tow and storage is determined to have been in accordance with this Article,
the owner shall be so informed and further advised of the amount owed, if any, for
tow and storage;
2. If the tow and storage is determined to not be in accordance with this Article, the
Hearing Officer shall so inform the owner and:
a) If the vehicle is impounded at the time of hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
order the vehicle to be immediately released;
b) If the vehicle has been released, the Hearing Officer shall order that a refund
of the cash bond be made to the owner within five business days.
3. If the owner has requested a continuance, the Hearing Officer may, upon a showing
of good cause, grant a continuance for no greater than 14 days.
f. The registered or legal owner or person who is otherwise entitled to possession of a motor
vehicle does not claim and take possession of said motor vehicle within 15 days after the
date of the post-tow hearing, the motor vehicle shall be considered abandoned and shall be
disposed of pursuant to applicable State statutes.
Section 18-908 Release of Vehicle. The owner of an immobilized vehicle, or other authorized
person, shall be permitted to secure release of the vehicle upon payment of any of the following,
such payment to be only in cash or by check:
a. Depositing with the Village, as collateral for his or her appearance at the administrative
hearing to answer for each violation, 50% of the total fines and penalties for all violations
for which there are outstanding or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices and/ or
Village vehicle license violations; or
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
41 REVISED 02/15/10
b. Depositing with the Village the amount of the fine or penalty for each violation for which
there is an outstanding or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices and/or Village
vehicle license violations; and
c. The payment of the immobilized vehicle fees as required by Section 18-901g and h,
Vehicle Immobilization Program, of this Article.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 02/20/12
CHAPTER 19 HEALTH AND SANITATION
Article I Garbage and Refuse
Section 19-101 Definitions
Section 19-102 Administration
Section 19-103 Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants
Section 19-104 Recycling Programs
Section 19-105 Refuse Containers Required; Placing and Maintenance
Section 19-106 Content of Containers
Section 19-107 Location of Solid Waste Containers
Section 19-108 Solid Waste to be Placed at the Curb
Section 19-109 Collection and Disposal
Section 19-110 Solid Waste Collection Fees
Section 19-111 No Dumping or Burying of Solid Waste
Section 19-112 Disposal of Solid Waste Other than by Collection
Section 19-113 Licensing Requirements
Section 19-114 Transportation Sanitation Requirements
Section 19-115 Residential Service Required
Section 19-116 Service to Industry, Business, Etc.
Section 19-117 Solid Waste from Building Contractors’ Operations
Section 19-118 Hours of Collection
Section 19-119 Multi-Family Recycling Programs Required
Section 19-120 Plan Requirements and Timetables
Section 19-121 Recycling Collection; Specific Requirements
Section 19-122 Notice
Section 19-123 Reporting Requirements
Section 19-124 Continuation of Program Required
Section 19-125 Compost
Section 19-126 Penalty
Article II Nuisances
Section 19-201 Definitions
Section 19-202 Unlawful to Cause a Nuisance
Section 19-203 Nuisances
Section 19-204 Smoke and Particulate Matter
Section 19-205 Dust Prevention
Section 19-206 Odors
Section 19-207 Further Restrictions
Section 19-208 Abatement of Nuisances - Village
Section 19-209 Growth or Accumulation - Lots
Section 19-210 Adoption of the State of Illinois Noise Pollution Control Regulations
Article III Drugs and Narcotics
Section 19-301 Definitions
Section 19-302 Unlawful to Possess
Section 19-303 Place of Use
Section 19-304 Distribution by a Licensed Physician, Dentist or Veterinary Surgeon
Section 19-305 Distribution by a Licensed Pharmacist
HEALTH AND SANITATION
2 REVISED 10/01/11
Section 19-306 Records
Section 19-307 Possession by Patients
Section 19-308 Possession by a Licensed Wholesaler or Manufacturer
Section 19-309 Seizure and Confiscation
Section 19-310 Exemptions from this Article
Article IV Swimming Pools
Section 19-401 Adoption of Minimum Sanitary Requirements for the Design and
Operation of Swimming Pools and Bathing Beaches
Section 19-402 Safety Precautions
Article V Prohibiting Smoking in Certain Places
Section 19-501 Title
Section 19-502 Definitions
Section 19-503 Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places
Section 19-504 Prohibition within Distance of Public Places
Section 19-505 Exemptions
Section 19-506 Posting of Signs
Section 19-507 Violations and Penalties
Article VI Adoption of Illinois Department of Public Health Private Sewage Disposal Code
Section 19-601 Adoption of Private Sewage Disposal Code
Article VII Penalties
Section 19-701 Penalty
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
19-3 REVISED 03/07/16
Article I Garbage and Refuse
Ord. #11-006, #12-007, # 16-004)
Section 19-101 Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words or terms, for
the purposes of this Article, shall have the meanings indicated in this Section.
a. Approved Solid Waste Container. Garbage carts, landscape waste carts, recycling carts and
recycling bins, as provided by the Village’ s solid waste contractor.
b. Compost. Amixture of decayed or decaying organic matter used to fertilize soil. Compost is
made by gathering plant material, such as leaves, grass clippings, and vegetable peels, into a
pile or bin and letting it decompose as a result of the action of aerobic bacteria, fungi, and
other organisms.
c. Compost Container. Aprefabricated bin, tumbler, or structure made of fencing or blocks no
larger than 5 feet x 5 feet x 5 feet.
d. Disposable Waste Container. Any bag, box or other container of sufficient strength and
durability to withstand handling until its contents are put into the hopper of the Contractor’ s
vehicle for removal.
e. Dwelling Unit. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single
habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking and eating.
f. Family Unit. One or more persons living together in a dwelling and maintaining a common
household.
g. Garbage. Any rejected or waste, household food, offal, swill or carrion and every
accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use, cooking
and dealing in, or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables and any other matter of
any nature, which are subject to decay, putrefaction and the generation of noxious or
offensive gases or odor, or which during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding
material for flies or other germ-carrying insects.
h. Landscape Waste. All accumulation of grass, shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs or trunks
less than six inches in diameter, and other materials accumulated as a result of the care of
lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees.
i. Multi-family Properties. Any dwelling containing more than three dwelling units.
j. Owner. The person, corporation, partnership or other entity who owns the multi-family
property or the designated agent or association responsible for refuse collection.
k. Person. Any natural person, partnership, trust, corporation or association, or any
governmental agency or municipal or quasi municipal corporation. Whenever used with
respect to any penalty, the term "person" as applied to partnerships or associations shall mean
HEALTH AND SANITATION
19-4 REVISED 02/20/12
the partners or members thereof, and as applied to trusts or corporations shall mean the
trustees or officers thereof.
l. Premises. Any house, residence, building, flat, apartment, room, dwelling place or place of
abode.
m. Recyclables or Recyclable Materials. Newspaper, aluminum and steel food and beverage
cans, glass containers, and any other materials designated or approved by the Village for
recycling by a licensed scavenger operating within the Village.
n. Recycling. The collection and processing of recyclables in a manner that enables further use
of such materials in the manufacturing of new, reusable or reconstituted products. Recycling
does not include landfilling or incineration.
o. Recycling Program. A waste recovery program which provides for collection, separation,
and composting of solid waste and processing of collected materials into new products.
p. Refuse. All garbage, ashes, discarded household litter, scraps, junk and waste, furniture,
furnishings, carpet and paddings, mattresses, laundry tubs, bathtubs, kitchen sinks, plumbing
fixtures, small appliances, small auto parts, manure, dead animals or parts thereof, tree limbs,
trunks and roots six inches or greater in diameter, building material, sod, dirt, concrete,
asphalt and other waste not separated at the source and disposed of through a recycling
program.
q. Residential Solid Waste Contractor. The contractor with whom the Village has contracted
for the removal of garbage, refuse, recyclable material, landscape waste and white goods in
accordance with the Village’ s residential solid waste collection and removal program.
r. Reusable Refuse Container. A container of galvanized iron or non-corrodible metal or
plastic, durable and leak-proof, of the type commonly sold as a garbage can, of a suitable
gauge and construction to insure durability, with suitable handles on both the can and the lid.
Refuse containers for commercial facilities and apartment houses containing four or more
family units, shall be rodent-proof, leak-proof and with fitted covers.
s. Scavenger. A licensed waste hauler responsible for collecting waste from property.
t. Sheet Composting. Spreading a thin layer of organic materials, such as leaves, over a garden
area.
u. Solid Waste. Garbage, refuse, recyclable material, landscape waste and white goods.
v. White Goods. Refrigerators, ranges, water heaters, freezers, air conditioners, humidifiers and
other similar domestic and commercial large appliances.
Section 19-102 Administration. The Village Manager or designee shall supervise all matters
relating to or affecting the accumulation, collection, removal or disposal of solid waste. All solid
waste containers shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Village Manager. The Village
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
5 REVISED 02/21/11
Manager is authorized to cause all solid waste to be collected regularly and systematically in
accordance with the Village’ s current contract for collection of solid waste.
Section 19-103 Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants.
a. No person, except at construction sites, shall permit any solid waste to accumulate on his or
her premises, except in covered reusable refuse containers.
b. The owner of a multiple dwelling containing two or more family units or the owner of a
commercial or industrial establishment containing one or more businesses:
1. Shall provide approved type solid waste storage and collection facilities and disposal
services for all occupants whether the occupants be the owner or tenants;
2. Shall not permit any solid waste to accumulate which is not contained in an approved
solid waste storage and refuse collection facility and shall not allow litter in
alleyways, parking lots, or other outdoor areas of the property.
c. Written agreements between owner and occupants shall not relieve the owner of final
responsibility for proper solid waste storage, disposal or collection facilities.
d. Solid waste storage sites for newly constructed or substantially remodeled multi-family
residential, commercial or industrial establishments shall meet the following criteria:
1. Container Site:
a. Area shall be of a sufficient size to easily accommodate the container;
b. The surface shall be paved, curbed and graded to the front to prevent
accumulation of liquid;
c. Visual screening of the site shall be provided;
2. Access to Container:
a. Sufficient space to accommodate the turning requirements of the scavenger
truck shall be provided;
b. Parking, fences, plantings, etc., shall be located so as to create no obstacles to
service vehicles.
e. The Director of Health Services shall be responsible for implementation of all regulations
pertaining to refuse storage and collection.
Ord. #11-006)
Section 19-104 Recycling Programs. Recyclable materials separated from refuse and destined to be
reused or recycled, and which are not discarded with refuse, are considered to be the property of the
owner and may be disposed of through a recycling program rather than a refuse disposal
HEALTH AND SANITATION
6 REVISED 02/21/11
system. Recycling operations must be conducted in such a way as to avoid fire and sanitation
hazards. Storage and handling of waste materials must conform to the applicable provisions of the
Life Safety Code of the National Fire Protection Association and the health and sanitation
requirements of this Code.
Recyclable materials from which refuse is not separated must be disposed of through the facilities of
a solid waste contractor. It shall be unlawful for persons other than the owner or the contractor to
remove recyclable materials from the recycling bins or recycling carts.
Section 19-105 Refuse Containers Required; Placing and Maintenance. Every person in
possession of any premises in the Village where persons reside shall provide for each occupied
family unit, sufficient reusable refuse containers for accumulation of normal refuse. Every person in
possession of any premises shall cause to be deposited in the refuse containers all refuse produced in,
or brought into the premises, after it is produced.
All reusable refuse containers shall be as previously defined, and no other type of container shall be
acceptable: unsanitary, leaking or defective receptacles or receptacles without covers shall be
cleaned, repaired or replaced by the owner or occupant at their expense, as directed by the Village
Manager or the Director of Health Services, or their respective representatives. All containers shall
be cleaned as often as is necessary to maintain them in a sanitary condition.
Section 19-106 Content of Containers. It shall be the duty of every person in possession of any
premises to cause all garbage brought on or produced on the premises to be thoroughly drained of all
surplus liquid, securely wrapped in paper or packed in a covered box or carton of the dimensions that
will permit its free passage into and out of the refuse container and finally deposited, after wrapping,
in a refuse container. The solid waste contractor’ s crews will not service refuse containers to which
garbage is frozen through failure to observe these regulations or containers which are other than as
specified in this Article. All solid waste shall be securely wrapped, bound or contained in a manner
that will prevent scattering by the wind or by animals.
Ord. #11-006)
Section 19-107 Location of Solid Waste Containers. It shall be unlawful for any person to place
any reusable solid waste container at the curb or within the alley, street or walkway (except where
there is no parkway between the walkway and the street), unless it is the approved solid waste
containers supplied by the Village’ s solid waste contractor. Reusable refuse containers and approved
solid waste containers shall be permitted only in side or rear yards for temporary storage of waste and
shall be located entirely within the lot line. No single refuse container and its contents shall exceed
50 pounds for residents who have back door collection.
Ord. #11-006)
Section 19-108 Solid Waste to be Placed at the Curb. All residential solid waste, whether at the
curb or behind the front line of the residence, is governed by the following requirements:
a. Items to be placed at the curb include refuse bags, landscape waste bags, approved solid
waste containers, brush or branches securely tied in five-foot bundles, and other items placed
in disposable containers weighing not more than 50 pounds each; also, large items such as
white goods, household furniture and other items which can be handled by two people.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7 REVISED 07/06/99
Ord. #99-047)
b. Items shall be placed at the curb by the resident on the day of collection prior to 7:00 a.m.
Items shall not be placed at the curb prior to 7:00 p.m. the day preceding collection during
the months of April through October or prior to 4:00 p.m. the day preceding collection during
the months of November through March.
Ord. #99-045)
c. Empty approved solid waste containers shall be removed from the curb, by the resident, not
later than 8:00 a.m. the day after collection.
d. Items eligible to be placed at the curb shall be placed adjacent to the curb so that it can be
easily loaded into a truck in the street.
Section 19-109 Collection and Disposal. At residences of less than four family units, all solid
waste shall be disposed of by the Village’ s solid waste contractor, and shall not be collected or
disposed of in any other manner.
Section 19-110 Solid Waste Collection Fees. Fees to be charged by the Village’s solid waste
contractor shall be in accordance with the Village’s current contract for solid waste collection, which
is available at the Village Clerk’s office.
Section 19-111 No Dumping or Burying of Solid Waste. No solid waste shall be burned, dumped
or buried within the Village limits.
Section 19-112 Disposal of Solid Waste Other than by Collection.
a. Solid waste may not be burned at any time within the Village except when authorized byand
in compliance with all fire prevention regulations of this Code.
b. Garbage may be disposed of within the building where it is accumulated by grinding or by
shredding, and disposing of it through pipes leading through a catch basin to a public sanitary
sewer, provided that all garbage so disposed of in the pipes is ground or shredded enough to
allow all particles to be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the
sewers into which same is deposited, with no particle greater than ½ inch in any dimension
and all grinders used for disposal of wastes must be approved bythe Director of Building and
licensed as required by Article V of this Chapter.
Section 19-113 Licensing Requirements. One contractor will service single-family residences and
multiple-family residences of three or less units. The number of contractors servicing commercial
facilities and multiple family residences of four or more units shall be governed byChapter 14 of this
Code.
Section 19-114 Transportation Sanitation Requirements. No person shall transport solid waste
or cause it to be transported, over the streets or other public ways in the Village unless the solid
waste being transported is entirely and securely covered. Garbage shall not be transported over or
along the streets of the Village or other public property except in a leak-proof compaction type body
referred to as a " packer type" refuse body, approved by the Village Manager. The
HEALTH AND SANITATION
8
equipment shall not be permitted to remain parked anywhere in the Village limits when not in use,
but may be stored or kept when not in use in a tightly constructed and closed building or shed,
provided the building or structure shall conform with the requirements of the Zoning provisions of
this Code. Any solid waste that may have been spilled by the hauler on private premises, parkways,
streets, alleys or other public places shall be immediately cleaned up in a neat and sanitary manner.
Solid waste disposal contractors shall replace, at their own expense, any containers which may be
damaged by the carelessness of their employees.
Section 19-115 Residential Service Required. Every person in possession of any premises in the
Village, except commercial and industrial establishments and all apartments or other buildings with
four or more family units, shall, except as otherwise provided, be required to have solid waste
collected and disposed of regularly by the solid waste disposal contractor employed by the Village.
The occupancy of any premises for residential purposes shall be prima facie evidence that solid
waste is being produced and accumulated on the premises, and it shall be the duty of the designated
representative of the Village to inspect the premises and cause to be removed any and all solid waste
found, unless the premises are equipped with approved disposal facilities. Any expense to the
Village for solid waste removal shall be reimbursed by the person whose name is listed on the water
or sewer account.
All charges for solid waste disposal service shall be billed by the Village’s disposal contractor to and
be paid by the person in whose name the Village water or sewer account then appears, or the person
at the head of the family unit that receives service, and the Contractor shall assume any and all
delinquent accounts. The charges for services shall be billed and collected by the Contractor and the
Contractor shall keep an accurate record of all the family units served, including the address. The
charges may be billed in advance, payable on or before the due date. Upon advance notice that solid
waste service paid for in advance will not be required or has not been required because a residence is
unoccupied, the Contractor shall refund or adjust on a monthly pro rata basis an amount equal to the
service paid for, but not received or not to be received, provided no refunds will be allowed for
discontinuance of service for less than 30 days.
Section 19-116 Service to Industry, Business, Etc. Apartments and other buildings containing
four or more family units and commercial and industrial establishments shall have their solid waste
removed by a solid waste disposal contractor who is licensed to operate in the Village.
Section 19-117 Solid Waste from Building Contractors' Operations. Solid waste accumulated
from the operation of lot cleaning or clearing or caused by building, rebuilding or otherwise altering
a building or structure shall be removed by the person or building contractor performing the work,
except that the contractor may employ a solid waste contractor licensed under the provisions of
Chapter 14 of this Code. The contractor shall only remove solid waste generated as a result of repair
or construction. This contractor need not be the Village’s disposal contractor.
Section 19-118 Hours of Collection.
a. Residential. Collection of all solid waste in residential areas shall be conducted between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
9
b. Commercial. Commercial customers may be serviced by solid waste collectors between the
hours of 4:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except in areas adjacent to residentially zoned property, in
which case refuse shall be collected between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Section 19-119 Multi-Family Recycling Programs Required.
a. All owners of multi-family properties shall make recycling services available to all residents
residing in the property. This service will be a joint responsibility of the owner and the
scavenger for the multi-family property.
b. Participation by the individual multi-family households will not be mandatory. In addition,
there shall be no prescribed level of participation. The owners of multi-family properties
must develop and implement a recycling plan with adequate procedures and management in
order to stimulate participation.
Section 19-120 Plan Requirements and Timetables. All multi-family properties shall submit to
the Village an acceptable plan for the establishment and the administration of a recycling program
from multi-family property residents. The recycling plan shall be reviewed by the Village to
determine compliance with this Article. The Village shall notify all parties whether plans are
acceptable or unacceptable. Unacceptable plans must be revised and resubmitted to the Village
within 15 days of the date of the notice that the plan is unacceptable. Recycling services must begin
within 60 days of plan approval. The plan shall include, at a minimum, but is not limited to,
specifics concerning:
a. Siting and design of collection areas which must be convenient to residents and adequate in
number; a map of properties with exterior recycling areas showing buildings, parking areas,
lawn areas, sidewalks, and recycling areas; count of all parking spaces before and after
implementation of recycling;
b. Collection process;
c. Provision and type of containers; collection areas large enough to accommodate the recycling
containers; enlarged enclosures in the same style and color as the original enclosure;
information about number and size of recycling containers, and number of one, two, and
three bedroom units; provision of photos or advertising literature about recycling containers,
if available;
d. Data collection and reporting; data about volume of refuse generated prior to the recycling
program;
e. Method of administration;
f. Educational campaign and materials to inform residents about the availability of recycling;
the materials shall be submitted to the Village for review and approval;
g. Identification and information about the subcontractor, if applicable.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
10 REVISED 05/06/02
Alteration to approved site plans for multi-family properties for garbage/recycling areas shall be
reviewed by the appropriate Village departments for approval of all changes. Consideration for
approval shall include impacts upon required parking, landscaping, handicapped parking spaces and
other site planning issues. Site plan changes deemed to be minor in nature may be approved
administratively. Modifications that reduce the required parking or landscaping shall require
amendments through the appropriate public hearing process.
If the plan is prepared by the waste contractor, the property owner or official in charge must indicate
concurrence with the plan by signing the plan.
The Village may permit a multi-family property to participate in the Village single-family curbside
recycling program for a fee to be specified by the Village if the Village determines the plan is a
desirable method of providing multi-family recycling services to the property's residents.
Section 19-121 Recycling Collection; Specific Requirements.
a. Recycling collection areas shall be adequate in number and shall be conveniently located and
maintained within common areas in or near the buildings.
b. The area shall consist of separate containers of sufficient number and size for the purposes of
temporary storage of recyclables. Containers shall be of durable material capable of
withstanding heavy wear and tear.
c. Exterior recycling collection areas shall conform with Code requirements for facilities for the
collection and storage of refuse.
d. The owner shall maintain all recycling areas, including the containers, in a clean and sanitary
manner.
e. The owner shall offer collection of a minimum of these six materials ( no substitutions
permitted):
1. newspaper;
2. glass (clear, green and brown);
3. steel cans (also known as bi-metal or tin cans);
4. aluminum cans;
5. PET (type 1) plastic containers; and
6. HDPE (Type 2) plastic containers.
Ord. #02-035)
f. Collection of recyclables shall be by some version of source separation and separate
collection containers shall be employed. The collection of recyclables by the method of
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
11
mixed solid waste sorting or co-collection known as the "bluebag method," may be allowed
only when deemed permissible by the Health Department due to unique circumstances.
g. The minimum gallon amount of recycling capacity ( total base capacity) an owner shall
provide weekly for each multi-family property shall be based on the following formula:
7 gallons x number of studio and 1 bedroom units) + ( 8 gallons x
number of 2 bedroom units) + (9 gallons x number of 3 bedroom or
more units) = total base capacity
The weekly base capacity may be met by a combination of container sizes and number of
pick-ups, such as containers totaling half the base capacity picked up twice aweek. Capacity
per building may be shifted within the multi-family property, if necessary, so long as the total
required capacity is met.
h. The licensed scavenger shall be responsible for furnishing, maintaining and replacing all
recycling collection equipment which is deemed necessary in the recycling program. The
contractor shall be responsible for the collection, intermediate storage or transfer,
transportation, and sale of recyclables to a processor, broker or market destined for reuse of
the materials.
Section 19-122 Notice.
a. Owners must provide all residents with written notice about the recycling program, and shall
use their best efforts to gain and maintain participation in the program. This notice shall be
in the form, have the content and be distributed in a manner approved by the Village.
b. In addition to providing this notice to each dwelling unit, the notice shall also be posted in
clearly visible locations in common areas. The notice shall also be kept in reserve to be
provided to new residents as they move in.
c. The owner shall also maintain signs at collection areas identifying the materials to be
collected and designating containers for the materials. Signs must be clearly visible and, if
outside, must be weatherproof.
d. Residents shall be furnished with the phone numbers of the hauler and the contact person for
the property so that questions can be answered and problems resolved.
Section 19-123 Reporting Requirements.
a. Each scavenger shall submit an annual report to both the multi-family owner(s) or designee
and the Village that contains the following information:
1. reasonable estimates, with supporting documentation, of the total weight or volume
of refuse collected from multi-family properties;
HEALTH AND SANITATION
12 REVISED 02/20/12
2. reasonable estimates, with supporting documentation, of the total weight or volume
of recyclables collected from multi-family properties.
b. Reports shall be due no later than January 30 of each year. Reports shall follow the format
prescribed by the Village.
c. The Village shall have the right to inspect and examine the scavenger's facility and records
pertaining to the collection and disposal or processing of refuse and recyclables upon request
with reasonable notice. The Village shall also have the right to require other data or
information relative to the recycling program and conduct site inspections of the multi-family
recycling facilities as deemed necessary.
d. All the reports, data, and information, once received by the Village, shall become the
property of the Village to be used, as it shall determine without obligation to any person, firm
or corporation.
Section 19-124 Continuation of ProgramRequired. The recycling program shall be maintained in
effect regardless of any change of owner or scavenger. The owner shall notify the Village within 30
days in the event of a change in their choice of scavenger. Prior approval from the Village is
required before changing a recycling plan. Properties will be subject to inspection by the Village to
ascertain whether the recycling program complies with the plan and all applicable Village
regulations.
Ord. #12-007)
Section 19-125 Compost. All compost shall be maintained using approved composting procedures
for gardening and landscaping purposes. The Arlington Heights Park District is exempt from these
requirements.
a. All compost shall be located in a compost container as permitted in this Section, unless the
sheet composting method is being utilized.
b. No more than three compost containers shall be allowed on properties of ½ acre or less.
c. Compost containers shall be located only in the side yard or rear yard. For properties of ½
acre or less, such containers must be placed a minimum of five feet from the property line or
25 feet from neighboring dwellings. For properties in excess of ½ acre, such containers must
be located a minimum of 25 feet from neighboring dwellings. Where a side lot line is
adjacent to a street, any compost container must adhere to the setback requirement for the
principal structure.
d. Items such as, but not limited to, the following organic materials are allowed in the compost
pile: soil, grass clippings, waste sod, wood chips, shredded paper, egg shells, coffee grounds,
straw, leaves, cooked and uncooked fruits and vegetables. Small amounts of activators may
be added to facilitate the process.
e. Compost shall not contain household garbage, meat or any meat product, fatty food, bones,
animal feces, diseased plants, treated wood, manure, or non-plant materials.
f. Compost shall be maintained to prevent the harboring and breeding of animals and offensive
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13 REVISED 02/20/12
odors by frequent turning of the compost material to permit aeration.
g. Newer composting techniques or devices may be permitted if they are reviewed and
approved by the Director of Building and Health Services, with the advice of the
Environmental Commission.
Section 19-126 Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation guilty of violating any of the provisions of
this Article shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense, and their license
shall be subject to revocation.
Article II Nuisances
Section 19-201 Definitions.
a. Improper Growth of Weeds or Grasses. All weeds or grasses on vacant land over 12 inches
in height from the ground and all weeds or grasses on occupied lots over eight inches in
height from the ground.
b. Inoperable Vehicle. Any motor vehicle from which the engine, wheels or other parts have
been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven
safely under its own motor power on the streets of the Village.
c. Nuisance. Any act, which the common law classifies as a nuisance, or any act declared a
nuisance by this Code, or by a Statute of the State of Illinois.
Ord. #08-034)
d. Proper Notification. Personal service, letter sent by messenger service or certified mail. If
the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted
in a conspicuous place in or about the structure or property affected by such notice and a
copy sent by regular mail. No abatement action shall be taken bythe Village until seven days
after the notice is mailed and property posted.
Section 19-202 Unlawful to Cause a Nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a
nuisance, or to permit a nuisance to continue under his or her control, or on property under his or her
control, or to fail to abate any nuisance after notification or recognition of its existence.
Section 19-203 Nuisances. Any one or more of the following shall be deemed to be and are hereby
declared nuisances:
a. Obstructing any watercourse or source of water supply in the Village;
b. Pollution of any course, pool, or source of water supply in the Village;
c. Any stagnant pool of water;
d. Any accumulation of solid waste of any kind;
e. Any solid waste of any kind buried within the Village;
HEALTH AND SANITATION
14 REVISED 09/15/08
f. Any building or structure in a condition as to be dangerous to the public in any way;
g. Any business that is offensive;
h. Any improper growth of weeds as set forth in Section 19-209;
i. Any infestation of rats and vermin;
j. Any activity or condition that attracts wild animals, including birds and insects, in a manner
or in numbers that causes damage to other property or a hazard to the public health;
k. Any inoperable vehicle, unless within a wholly enclosed building, except for vehicles on the
premises of a place of business engaged in motor vehicle wrecking or repair.
Section 19-204 Smoke and Particulate Matter. The emission of smoke and particulate matter in
the manner and quantity as to endanger or to be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort or
welfare is declared to be a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or to
knowingly permit the emission of smoke and particulate matter from any fire, chimney, engine, oil
burner or from any other source in the Village in violation of this Section.
The burning of leaves, solid waste or the maintenance of any bonfire within the corporate limits is
declared to be a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or to knowingly permit
the burning of leaves or solid waste in any manner within the corporate limits of the Village in
violation of this Section.
Section 19-205 Dust Prevention. Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from
sources such as storage areas, yards, roads and the like shall be kept to a minimum by landscaping,
paving, oiling, fencing, cutting of weeds or other appropriate means.
Section 19-206 Odors. It shall be unlawful to cause or to knowingly permit the emission of
objectionable or hazardous odors in quantities so as to be readily detectable by an observer at any
point on the boundary line of any premises or beyond.
Section 19-207 Further Restrictions. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as limiting those
requirements of the zoning ordinance and other provisions of this Code, which regulate more strictly
the emission of smoke or particulate matter.
Ord. #08-034)
Section 19-208 Abatement of Nuisances - Village. If the person in control on the property on
which any nuisance is located fails to abate it within seven days after proper notification is given, the
Village Manager is authorized to cause the abatement of the nuisance in any reasonable manner,
including removal, impounding and disposal, in accordance with the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
However, if the nuisance poses an immediate danger to public health and safety, the Village
Manager, after consultation with representatives from the Health Department and the
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
15
Legal Department, is authorized to cause the abatement of the nuisance in any reasonable manner
without prior notice to the person in control of the property. Any reasonable expense incurred by
the Village in abating the nuisance shall be a charge against the owner, which maybe recovered in an
appropriate action at law. However, nothing in this Section shall apply to any motor vehicle that is
kept within a building when not in use, to operable historic vehicles over 25 years of age, or to motor
vehicles on the premises of a place of business engaged in the business of wrecking or junking of
motor vehicles.
In addition to all other remedies provided by law, the Village shall have a lien on the lot or plot of
real estate on which the nuisance was found, for the reasonable cost of the abatement of the nuisance.
The lien shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances except tax liens. Within 60 days after
the cost is incurred, the Village shall cause to be filed a notice of lien in the Office of the Recorder or
Registrar of Titles of Cook County. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: (1) a
description of the real estate sufficient for identification; (2) the amount of money representing the
cost and expense incurred or payable for each service; and (3) the date or dates when the cost and
expense were incurred by the Village.
Ord. #06-078)
In cases in which a property owner is in violation of Section 19-209, Growth or Accumulation –
Lots, thereby requiring the Village to cut the overgrown grass on a residential or commercial lot,
the property owner shall be charged a fee of $50 plus costs.
Section 19-209 Growth or Accumulation - Lots. It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or
occupant, or his or her agent, servant, representative or employee, having charge or control of any lot
within the Village of Arlington Heights, to permit or maintain on any lot, including the area located
between the property line and the middle of the alley adjacent to the property, and the area located
between the property line and the curb, and the area located ten feet outside the property line where
there is no curb, any improper growth of weeds or grasses.
Section 19-210 Adoption of the State of Illinois Noise Pollution Control Regulations. There is
hereby adopted by reference the State of Illinois Noise Pollution Control Regulations, as set forth in
Title 35 Environmental Protection, Subtitle H, Noise, Chapter I, Pollution Control Board, datedMay
1, 1984, as now or hereafter amended.
Article III Drugs and Narcotics
Section 19-301 Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, for the purposes of this Article, the
Village expressly adopts the definitions contained in 720 ILCS 570/102, as now or hereafter
amended.
Section 19-302 Unlawful to Possess. It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, possess, have
under his or her control, sell, prescribe, administer, dispense or compound any narcotic drug, except
as authorized in this Article. No person shall unlawfully use, or be under the influence of, narcotic
drugs.
Section 19-303 Place of Use. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a building or part
thereof, or place of any description whatsoever, owned by or under his or her control to be used for
manufacture, preparation, sale, storage, smoking or use of any narcotic drug, except as provided in
this Article.
HEALTH AND SANITATION
16
Section 19-304 Distribution by a Licensed Physician, Dentist or Veterinary Surgeon. Narcotic
drugs may be dispensed or distributed to a patient by a licensed physician, dentist or veterinary
surgeon in the course of his or her professional practice only; a physician, dentist or veterinary
surgeon may possess the same for these purposes only.
Section 19-305 Distribution by a Licensed Pharmacist. Narcotic drugs may be dispensed or
distributed by a licensed pharmacist to a patient pursuant to a written prescription issued by any
licensed physician, dentist or veterinary surgeon, and the licensed pharmacist may possess the same
for these purposes only.
Section 19-306 Records. All instances of professional distribution bylicensed physicians, dentists,
veterinary surgeons and pharmacists, shall be recorded in suitable form filed and preserved in a
manner so as to be readily accessible for inspection by any law enforcement officers of the Village.
Section 19-307 Possession by Patients. Any patient may possess and use narcotic drugs dispensed
or distributed to him or her under the provisions of this Article, and the possession and use must be
in accordance with the terms of the prescription and the prescribed treatment of a licensed physician,
dentist or veterinary surgeon.
Section 19-308 Possession by a Licensed Wholesaler or Manufacturer. Narcotic drugs may be
possessed by any person who is a licensed wholesaler or manufacturer of narcotic drugs for the
purposes of wholesale, delivery, compounding, preparation and manufacture only, and the narcotic
drugs may be resold to other persons permitted by the terms of this Article to resell, dispense or
distribute them in the course of a licensed manufacture or wholesale business, a licensed professional
practice or a licensed pharmaceutical business. Alicensed wholesaler or manufacturer mayalso be a
licensed pharmacist, maydispense or distribute narcotic drugs upon written prescription provided in
this division, but shall not consume or permit to be consumed any narcotic drug except upon written
prescription as provided in this Article.
Section 19-309 Seizure and Confiscation. All of the narcotic drugs in the possession of any
person convicted of violation of this Article shall be seized by, confiscated by and forfeited to the
Chief of Police who shall make proper disposition.
Section 19-310 Exemptions from this Article. This Article shall not apply to the administering,
distributing or dispensing of any medicinal preparation that contains in one fluid ounce, or if a solid
or semi-solid preparation in one avoirdupois ounce, not more than one grain of codeine or any of its
salts; provided, that the preparation administered, distributed or dispensed shall contain some drug of
medicinal qualities in addition to those possessed by the narcotic drug alone. The preparation shall
be administered, distributed or dispensed in good faith and not for the purpose of evading this
Article. However, no person shall administer, dispense or sell, under the exemption of this Section,
any preparation included in this Section, when he or she knows, or can by reasonable diligence
ascertain, that the administering, dispensing or selling will provide the person to whom or forwhom
use the preparation is administered, dispensed or sold within any 48 consecutive hours, with more
than four grains of codeine or any of its salts.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
19-17 REVISED 07/07/14
Provisions of this Article restricting the possession or control of narcotic drugs shall not apply to
common carriers or warehousemen engaged in lawfully transporting or storing narcotic drugs, to any
employee of the common carriers or warehousemen within the scope of employment, to public
officers or employees in the performance of official duties requiring possession or control of narcotic
drugs, or to persons aiding officers or employees in the performance of the duties.
Ord. #11-034)
Article IV Swimming Pools
Section 19-401 Adoption of Minimum Sanitary Requirements for the Design and Operation of
Swimming Pools and Bathing Beaches. There is hereby adopted by reference the Illinois
Department of Public Health’ s Minimum Sanitary Requirements for the Design and Operation of
Swimming Pools and Bathing Beaches.
Section 19-402 Safety Precautions. A pool attendant shall be present any time an outdoor
swimming pool is in use. The attendant shall enforce all applicable regulations pertaining to
minimum sanitary requirements and operation of swimming pools.
Ord. #06-061)
Article V Prohibiting Smoking in Certain Places
Section 19-501 Title. This Ordinance shall be known as the Village of Arlington Heights Clean
Indoor Air Ordinance and shall be in addition to and not be limited by the provisions of any state or
federal legislation, it being the intent of the President and Board of Trustees to enforce the most
restrictive regulations available to curb secondhand smoke.
Ord. #14-031)
Section 19-502 Definitions. The following words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the
following meanings:
a. Alternative Nicotine Product. A product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco
that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking,
absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing or by any other means. This does not
include tobacco products as that term is defined in this Section or any product approved by
the United States Food and Drug Administration as a non-tobacco product for sale as a
tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medicinal purposes.
b. Enclosed Area. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or semi-enclosed with
i) solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways) which extend from floor to the ceiling, or
ii) solid walls with half wall partitions and no windows (exclusive of doorways) without
limitation to lobbies and corridors.
c. Place of Employment. Any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer
where one or more employees are required or permitted by an employer to work in the course
of their employment and includes without limitation, work areas, private offices,
auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, cafeterias, elevators, employee
lounges, stairs, hallways, restrooms, medical facilities, private clubs, and the interior of a
vehicle of public conveyance. Aprivate residence is not a “ place of employment” unless the
dwelling is also used partially or exclusively as a day care facility for children or adults, a
HEALTH AND SANITATION
19-18 REVISED 07/07/14
health care facility or a home based business of any kind open to the public provided that
rooms in nursing homes or long-term care facilities occupied by one or more persons who
have requested in writing a room where smoking is permitted shall be considered private
dwelling units.
d. Public Place. Any area that is open to and used by the general public, or any area to which
the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including without limitations:
1. Vehicles of public conveyance;
2. Common or public areas (including without limitation lobbies, hallways, reception
areas, public restrooms, storage, laundry and elevators) of apartment buildings,
condominiums, dormitory buildings, nursing home care facilities and other multiple
family residential structures;
3. Common or public areas (including without limitation lobbies, hallways, reception
areas, public restrooms, and elevators) or any building or structure that is accessible
to the public including without limitation office, commercial and industrial buildings,
banks and financial institutions, education institutions, health care facilities such as
hospitals, clinics and doctor’ s offices, museums, libraries, restaurants, polling places,
government and Village-owned buildings, food stores, cafeterias, shopping malls,
sports arenas, theaters, auditoriums, public transportation facilities, hotels, motels,
and retail and service establishments;
4. Rooms, chambers, halls, or other locations within which meetings, hearings, or
gatherings are held, to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted,
including specifically, but without limitation, any enclosed area under the control of
the Village of Arlington Heights where there is, in progress, any public meeting.
Provided, however, that “Public Place” shall not include hotel or motel rooms designated as
smoking” provided that no more than 20% of the available rooms for rent in any single
building shall be designated as “ smoking rooms”.
e. Secondhand smoke or involuntary smoking. Amixture of the smoke given off bythe burning
ends of a cigarette, pipe, cigar, bidis, and kreteks (sidestream smoke) and the smoke emitted
at the mouthpiece and exhaled from the lungs of smokers (mainstream smoke) or from any
alternative nicotine product.
f. Smoking. Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed,
hookah or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any form or any alternative
nicotine product
Section 19-503 Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places. Smoking shall be prohibited in all
enclosed public places and places of employment within the Village of Arlington Heights. The
prohibition shall also extend to any enclosed or semi- enclosed sports arena or recreational area,
including sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller or
ice rink, bowling alley, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble. It
shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or lessee in control of the public place to permit smoking
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
19-19 REVISED 02/21/11
in any such public place.
Section 19-504 Prohibition within Distance of Public Places. Smoking is prohibited within 15
feet of any entrance to an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited and also within 15 feet of any
outdoor eating establishment or facility.
Section 19-505 Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, the following
areas shall be exempted from its provision provided smoking is not limited or prohibited in such
areas under the Illinois Clean Indoor Air Act or federal legislation:
a. Smoking areas incidental to the sale of tobacco in businesses where smoking is confined to
the premises by water pipe or other smoking devices, provided, however, that said smoking
shall take place wholly within such enclosed premises.
b. A private residence as hereinabove defined.
c. Hotel and motel sleeping rooms subject to restrictions as hereinabove set forth.
d. Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities occupied by
one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed or
to remain as the case may be in a room where smoking is permitted.
e. Smoking by a cast member as part of a performance in a theatrical production.
f. During business hours when wagers are accepted, any facility or property owned, leased or
otherwise operated by a person or entity licensed and regulated by the Illinois State Racing
Board pursuant to the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975, 230 ILCS 5/1 et seq. (“ Act”), which
has been approved pursuant to that Act as part of the licensed person’s or entity’s place, track
or enclosure for conducting horse race meetings, or which has been approved pursuant to that
Act to simulcast horse racing and conduct pari-mutuel wagering and is contiguous to the
place, track or enclosure at which horse race meetings take place.
Section 19-506 Posting of Signs. Every public place and place of employment where smoking is
prohibited by this Ordinance shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign indicating “NO
SMOKING”. Such “NOSMOKING” sign shall have a white field with the words “NOSMOKING”
printed in red letters four inches high with a one-half inch face or shall bear the international “NO
SMOKING” symbol which consists of a pictorial representation of a cigarette enclosed in a circle
with a bar across it. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or obscure any sign posted
pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance. The operator, manager, or other person having control
of an area where smoking is prohibited shall remove all ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia
intended for use where smoking is prohibited.
Section 19-507 Violations and Penalties. Any person who smokes in an area where smoking is
prohibited by this Ordinance shall be punished of a fine of not more than $100. Any person who
owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment who fails to
comply with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be fined not exceeding $100 for the first violation
and $500 for each subsequent offense within one year of the first violation. Each day on which a
violation of this Ordinance occurs shall be considered a separate offense. The Village Manager is
HEALTH AND SANITATION
19-20 REVISED 02/21/11
hereby further authorized to seek an injunction if he determines intentional and repeated violations of
this Ordinance by the owner, manager or person in control of a public place or place of employment
and may commence revocation proceedings for any license issued to a public place subject to
licensing by the Village.
Ord. #11-006)
Article VI Adoption of Illinois Department of Public Health
Private Sewage Disposal Code
Section 19-601 Adoption of Private Sewage Disposal Code. There is hereby adopted byreference
the Illinois Department of Public Health Private Sewage Disposal Code, as now or hereafter
amended.
Ord. #11-006)
Article VII Penalties
Section 19-701 Penalty.
a. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of Section 19-203(k)
shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each offense; provided, however, that
any person charged with such a violation may, within the time set forth below after the date
of the citation alleging the violation, settle and compromise the charge by paying to the
Village the penalty set forth below:
Within ten days $ 25
After ten days but within 21 days $ 50
In each case in which a compromise payment is made, the Village shall waive further
prosecution of the alleged violation. After 21 days from the date of the citation alleging the
violation, any person who has not settled and compromised the charge shall be given a notice
of date for a court appearance.
b. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any other provisions of this Chapter shall be
fined not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each offense and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during which the violation occurs or is permitted to continue.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 10/05/15
CHAPTER 20 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
Article I General Provisions
Section 20-101 Definitions
Section 20-102 Supervision
Section 20-103 Construction; Permit Required
Section 20-104 Repair and Maintenance
Section 20-105 Number of Driveways
Section 20-106 Permits for Construction and Excavations
Section 20-107 Duty to Install Sidewalks
Section 20-108 Construction Specifications - Roads
Section 20-109 Construction Specifications - Sidewalks
Section 20-110 Street Occupation Permit for Building Operations
Section 20-111 Village Grade Elevations
Section 20-112 Street Names and Signs
Section 20-113 Lot or House Street Numbers
Section 20-114 Mailboxes
Section 20-115 Parkway Maintenance
Section 20-116 Plats Requiring Village Board Approval
Section 20-117 Penalty
Article II Construction of Utility Facilities in the Public Rights-Of-Way
Section 20-201 Purpose and Scope
Section 20-202 Definitions
Section 20-203 Annual Registration Required
Section 20-204 Permit Required; Applications and Fees
Section 20-205 Action on Permit Applications
Section 20-206 Effect of Permit
Section 20-207 Revised Permit Drawings
Section 20-208 Insurance
Section 20-209 Indemnification
Section 20-210 Security
Section 20-211 Permit Suspension and Revocation
Section 20-212 Change of Ownership or Owner’ s Identity or Legal Status
Section 20-213 General Construction Standards
Section 20-214 Traffic Control
Section 20-215 Location of Facilities
Section 20-216 Construction Methods and Materials
Section 20-217 Vegetation Control
Section 20-218 Removal, Relocation, or Modifications of Utility Facilities
Section 20-219 Clean-up and Restoration
Section 20-220 Maintenance and Emergency Maintenance
Section 20-221 Variances
Section 20-222 Penalties
Section 20-223 Enforcement
Section 20-224 Severability
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-2 REVISED 08/06/07
Article III Prohibited Street Uses
Section 20-301 Obstructions
Section 20-302 Drainage
Section 20-303 Stairways and Hatchways
Section 20-304 Encroachments
Section 20-305 Deposits on Roadways, Parkways and Sidewalks
Section 20-306 Removal of Dirt and Construction Debris
Section 20-307 Private Use
Section 20-308 Littering
Section 20-309 Congregating or Assembling on Streets
Section 20-310 Sports and Exhibitions Causing Obstructions
Section 20-311 Injury to Parkways
Section 20-312 Utility Lines, Wires and Poles
Section 20-313 Snow Removal
Article IV Excavations and Foundations
Section 20-401 Permit Required
Section 20-402 Exemptions
Section 20-403 Applications
Section 20-404 Deposit
Section 20-405 Time Limit
Section 20-406 Fees
Section 20-407 Issuance of Permit
Section 20-408 Manner of Excavating or Foundations
Section 20-409 Tunneling, Boring and Open Trenches
Section 20-410 Sidewalks
Section 20-411 Backfilling
Section 20-412 Restoring Surface
Section 20-413 Utility Locations and Conflicts
Article V Barricades
Section 20-501 Barricades Required
Section 20-502 Night Lights Required
Section 20-503 Tampering with Barricades or Lights
Article VI Trees and Shrubs
Section 20-601 Definitions
Section 20-602 Injury and Removal
Section 20-603 Planting
Section 20-604 Dangerous Trees
Section 20-605 Wires
Section 20-606 Gas Mains
Section 20-607 Excavations
Section 20-608 Landscaping - Subdivision
Section 20-609 Landscaping - New Construction
Section 20-610 Seeding and Sodding
Section 20-611 Tree Planting
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-3 REVISED 08/06/07
Section 20-612 Trees- Permitted Species
Section 20-613 Planting - Time Limit
Section 20-614 Landscaping - Residential Lots
Section 20-615 Infected Trees Declared a Nuisance
Section 20-616 Certain Dead Trees Declared a Nuisance
Section 20-617 Disposition of Trees
Section 20-618 Right of Director of Public Works to Enter Premises and Inspect
Elm/Elmwood Trees
Section 20-619 Notice to Owner of Infected Elm/Elmwood or Ash/Ashwood Tree to
Comply with Article
Section 20-620 Service of Notice
Section 20-621 Infected Elm/Elmwood Trees Belonging to Village
Section 20-622 Insects Declared a Nuisance
Section 20-623 Right of Director of Public Works to Enter Premises and Inspect
Trees for Certain Insects
Section 20-624 Notice to Owner of Insect Infected Tree to Comply with Article;
Failure to Comply
Section 20-625 Insect Infected Trees Belonging to Village
Article VII Penalties
Section 20-701 Penalties
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-4 REVISED 10/05/15
Article I General Provisions
Ord. #15-037)
Section 20-101 Definitions. Whenever used in this Chapter, the following terms and words shall
have the meanings set opposite them:
a. Avenue or Street. The street right-of-way, whether public or private, and not just as the area
of paving or other improvement on the street right-of-way unless the paving and
improvement coincides with the boundaries of the right-of-way.
b. Cul-de-sac. A street having one open end and being terminated by a vehicle turn-around at
the other end.
c. Culvert. A conduit below a driveway apron adjacent to streets with rural or unimproved
cross-sections used for conveyance of storm water between open ditches or pipes, usually
made of galvanized steel or plastic and generally open on both ends. A culvert may be
connected to pipes in those locations where the ditches have been filled.
d. Driveway. A private motor vehicle access way between the roadway and a parking area
within a lot.
e. Local Street. A street intended primarily to provide access to adjacent property and not
intended to accommodate through traffic.
f. Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements. A document on file with the
Director of Engineering which establishes design parameters for engineering and
construction in the Village.
g. Parkway. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
h. Private Drive. Aprivate roadway providing access from a street to two or more dwellings on
the same lot.
i. Private Roadway. The paved area, exclusive of sidewalks, driveways or related uses, on
private property used or intended to be used for circulation, passage or travel of motor
vehicles from a street to two or more adjacent parcels.
j. Road or Roadway. The paved area existing on the street right-of-way or private roadway,
exclusive of sidewalks, driveways or related uses.
Section 20-102 Supervision.
a. Construction or reconstruction of streets, alleys, driveways and sidewalks shall be under the
supervision of the Director of Engineering and the Director shall also have the authority to
enforce all ordinance provisions relating to such places.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-5 REVISED 10/05/15
b. Any repair work within the public right-of-way, whether done by the Village or the abutting
owner, shall be under the supervision of the Director of Public Works and the Director shall
also have the authority to enforce all ordinance provisions relating to such places.
Section 20-103 Construction; Permit Required. It shall be unlawful to repair, construct,
reconstruct or lay any pavement on any public road, sidewalk, alley, driveway or other public wayor
area, without a permit. All work shall be performed in compliance with all applicable provisions of
this Chapter, including construction specifications and safety procedures provided.
Ord. #15-037)
Section 20-104 Driveways – Materials, Repair and Maintenance. It shall be the duty of the
person, firm or corporation maintaining a driveway to keep it in good repair and maintenance and
free from obstructions and openings where it crosses sidewalks and other public places. In areas
where there is no curb, brick pavers and concrete are not permitted within two feet of the roadway
pavement and this two foot area must be asphalt.
Section 20-105 Number of Driveways. No more than one driveway shall be permitted on any
single family lot; however, the Director of Engineering may permit two driveways on corner lots
and/or a circular driveway having two points of access on a public street if the installation of the
driveway will not substantially interfere with the flow of vehicular traffic in the street fronting on the
lot, will not cause a hazardous traffic condition to result and will not otherwise impair the public
safety or alter the character of the neighborhood.
Section 20-106 Permits for Construction and Excavations.
a. Application for any permit required under the provisions of Section 20-103 shall be filed
with the Director of Building by the person, firm or corporation responsible for performing
the work, and shall contain a description of the location and extent of the proposed
construction, reconstruction or repair, the name of the person doing the actual work, and such
other information as the Director of Public Works and the Director of Engineering find
necessary.
b. When a driveway crosses the curb and parkway of a street, a $ 200 cash deposit must
accompany the application for a driveway permit. If, after the driveway construction is
completed and upon inspection by the Director of Engineering, it appears that no public
facilities have been damaged by the construction of the driveway, the deposit shall be
returned to the applicant, without interest. If any damage has been done, the Village shall
retain the deposit until the applicant has repaired the damage to the satisfaction of the
Director of Engineering, or, if the applicant does not repair the damage within 30 days from
its discovery, or, regardless of this 30-day period, if the Village Manager determines that the
damage constitutes a hazard, then the Director of Engineering shall cause the damage to be
repaired and the cost of repair shall be deducted from the deposit and the difference, if any,
shall be refunded to the applicant, without interest.
c. Submission and review of plans.
1. All applications for permits to extend existing streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, water
mains, or sewer mains, or to construct new streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, water
mains, or sewer mains, as part of a subdivision development or otherwise, shall be
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-6 REVISED 05/01/07
accompanied by detailed plans drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 40
feet on a durable medium made by some process that will not fade or obliterate.
These plans shall also show all distances and dimensions in an accurate manner, with
elevations based on U.S.G.S. datum, be explicit and complete, show all lot lines, and
set forth all sewer facilities, drain and water mains where pertinent. The plans shall
be signed and sealed by a Registered Professional Engineer in the State of Illinois.
2. The Director of Building shall refer the plans to the Director of Engineering and the
Director of Public Works for inspection, review and approval, and no permit shall be
issued without obtaining such approval.
3. The applicant shall pay a fee for the plan inspection and review by the Director of
Engineering, which shall also be considered as permit fees. For purposes of
computing the fee, the Director of Engineering shall review the developer's estimate
of cost of construction of the items listed in paragraph 1 plus all site work. The fees
shall be equal to 3% of the approved Engineer's Estimate of Cost and shall be
collected prior to approval of the final engineering plans.
4. Upon payment of the fee, the Director of Engineering shall promptly inspect and
review the plans. If the plans conform to all applicable provisions of this Code, the
plans shall be approved and returned to the Director of Building.
Ord. #03-078, #06-078)
d. The fee for permits other than for items set forth in paragraph c.1 for Engineering plan
review and inspection fee shall be $50.
e. The Director of Building shall act on applications for permits within a reasonable time and
shall issue them only when all provisions of this Code are satisfied. All fees shall be paid to
the Finance Department before the issuance of any permits.
Section 20-107 Duty to Install Sidewalks.
Ord. #97-045)
a. Before a building permit is issued for structures on a lot or tract having no abutting
sidewalks, the owner of the lot or tract shall agree to install sidewalks on the side of all
streets abutting the lot or tract, including, for corner lots, sidewalk extensions up to the curb
line at the nearest street intersection or edge of pavement. These provisions shall not apply
where the Director of Building finds that:
1. 80% of all lots, any part of which lies within a distance of 600 feet from the nearest
boundary of the premises in question, are improved with buildings or other
structures; and
2. The general pattern of development in the area does not include sidewalks along
street frontage.
3. The street abutting the development has not been designated bythe Board of Trustees
as a thoroughfare that requires the installation of public sidewalk.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-7
b. The applicant for a building permit shall deposit with the Village cash equal to $15 per lineal
foot of required sidewalk to ensure the construction of the sidewalk.
c. If the lot or tract is located in an area where sidewalks are greater in width than the
specifications provided in Section 20-109, then the new sidewalk shall be constructed to
conform with the greater width, and the required deposit shall be increased in proportion to
the greater width.
d. If the sidewalks are constructed by the owner in accordance with the requirements of this
Code, the deposit shall be returned upon completion of construction and acceptance by the
Director of Engineering, without interest. If the sidewalks are not so constructed within 30
days from the completion of the building construction, the Director of Engineering shall have
the right to construct the sidewalks and apply the deposit to the cost.
e. In instances where the sidewalks cannot be constructed within 30 days of the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for the building construction because of the season, or for other
reasons making it impractical to build the sidewalk at the time, the construction of the
sidewalk may be postponed to a future date agreed upon bythe owner of the premises and the
Director of Engineering.
Section 20-108 Construction Specifications - Roads.
a. All new streets, including private streets, within the corporate limits of the Village shall be
improved with roadway paving and bordered by portland cement concrete curbs, in
accordance with dimensions included in the Arlington Heights Thoroughfare Policy Plan,
adopted by the Village Board of Trustees on July 18, 1988. The width of frontage drives
shall be determined by the Director of Engineering.
b. All public and private street construction, including streetlights, sidewalks and parkways,
shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the Director of Engineering.
c. The longitudinal gradient of streets shall not be in excess of four percent nor have a
minimum grade of less than 5/10 of one percent for all new construction. In built-up areas,
the maximum longitudinal gradient shall not be in excess of six percent nor have a minimum
grade of less than 4/10 of one percent.
d. Roadway pavement shall be constructed of the following materials or in accordance with the
specifications of the Director of Engineering:
1. Major arterials, secondary arterials and all streets in manufacturing zoning districts
and adjoining frontage drives:
flexible pavement 3" bituminous concrete surface*
10" bituminous aggregate mixture base course
4" granular sub-base
rigid pavement 10" Portland cement concrete with joints at
15' maximum spacing
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-8
4" granular sub-base
composite pavement 3" bituminous concrete surface*
7" Portland cement concrete base course
4" granular sub-base
2. Central business district streets and those streets adjoining business, officetransitional,
institutional, and office-research zoning districts and adjoining frontage
drives:
flexible pavement 3" bituminous concrete surface*
9" bituminous aggregate mixture base course
rigid pavement 8" Portland cement concrete with joints at
15' maximum spacing
4" granular sub-base
composite pavement 3" bituminous concrete surface*
6" Portland cement concrete base course
4" granular sub-base
3. Collector streets, sub-collector streets and those streets adjoining multi-family zoning
districts:
flexible pavement 3" bituminous concrete surface*
7" bituminous aggregate mixture base course
4" granular sub-base
rigid pavement 7" Portland cement concrete with joints at
15' maximum spacing
4" granular sub-base
composite pavement 3" bituminous concrete surface*
6" Portland cement concrete base course
4" granular sub-base
4. Local streets:
flexible pavement 3" bituminous concrete surface*
6" bituminous aggregate mixture base course
4" granular sub-base
rigid pavement 6" Portland cement concrete with joints at
15' maximum spacing
4" granular sub-base
The surface shall consist of a minimum of 1½ bituminous surface course and 1½ of
bituminous binder, the class and type to be determined by the Director of Engineering.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-9 REVISED 04/28/97
e. Roadway crowns shall meet the standard specifications of the Director of Engineering.
f. Where the gradient of the street or other conditions warrant installation of vertical-type curb
or other special design of improvements such as double inlets, the Director of Engineering is
authorized to require that design.
g. Curbs, gutters and drainage shall be provided in accordance with standard specifications of
the Director of Engineering and on file in that office. Such construction shall be subject to
inspection and approval of the Director of Engineering.
Ord. #97-022)
h. All repairs, maintenance or reconstructions of existing roads shall conform to the same
specifications provided in this Code for new roads to the extent reasonably consistent with
particular circumstances, as approved by the Director of Engineering, except for existing
roads in developed residential areas that do not currently meet the specifications provided in
this Code for new roads.
Ord. #97-022)
i. Additional improvements to roads in developed residential areas that do not currently meet
the specifications provided in the Code for new roads shall be required only if it is
determined by the Board of Trustees to:
1. be necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public;
2. addresses the concerns in a cost-effective manner;
3. preserve the character of the area; and
4. take into consideration the preferences of the residents in the area.
j. The perimeter of all parking areas shall be protected in accordance with prescribed
engineering standards.
k. Roadway medians shall satisfy the Director of Engineering.
l. Curves. The minimum centerline radius for major arterial streets shall be 830 feet, 500 feet
for secondary arterial streets, 400 feet for collector streets, 350 feet for sub-collector streets,
and 175 feet for local streets. In built-up areas, the minimum centerline radius shall be 300
feet for collector streets, 250 feet for sub-collector streets and 175 feet for local streets.
Section 20-109 Construction Specifications - Sidewalks. All sidewalks shall be constructed of
Portland cement concrete or other hard surface as approved by the Director of Engineering. All
sidewalks, to the extent possible, shall be laid one foot from the property line abutting lots and along
such line as extended at intersections. Such sidewalks shall, to the extent possible, be a minimum of
four feet from the roadway curb, five feet in width and not less than five inches in thickness and not
less than six inches in thickness where they intersect a driveway.
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-10 REVISED 05/01/07
Section 20-110 Street Occupation Permit for Building Operations.
a. It shall be unlawful to deposit or store any building materials, tools, apparatus or structure
designed or intended to be used in the erection, construction, alteration or repair of buildings
on any street, including parkway, roadway or sidewalk, without obtaining a street occupation
permit from the Director of Public Works. Unless a street occupation permit is obtained, all
building materials, tools, apparatus or structure, when first delivered, shall be placed entirely
within the boundary lines of the premises concerned, and shall so remain until the completion
of the building erection, construction, alteration or repair, or until removed from the
premises.
b. Applications for street occupation permits for building operations shall be made to the
Director of Public Works and shall describe the location of the street, including parkway,
roadway or sidewalk proposed to be occupied, the specific use to be made of same, and the
length of time for the intended occupation.
c. The applicant shall also deposit with the application a cash deposit in the amount of $1 for
each front foot of the property on which the building operations are carried on, provided that
a minimum deposit in the amount of $200 shall be required. If the street area, including
roadway, parkway and sidewalk for which the occupation permit was issued, is restored to its
original condition upon the termination of the permit, the Finance Director shall refund the
deposit in full, without interest. However, if the area is damaged and not so restored, then
the Director of Public Works shall restore the area to its original condition and deduct the
cost of the restoration from said deposit, returning the balance therefrom, if any.
Ord. #02-018, #06-078)
d. There shall be a $25 fee per day that the street is closed or reduced and unavailable for public
use, for a street occupation permit.
e. The Director of Public Works shall issue the street occupation permit when the provisions of
this Section are met, the safety of the public will be secured, and it would be an unreasonable
hardship on the applicant to require all the building materials, tools, apparatus or structure to
be contained within the boundaries of the premises.
f. Street occupation permits shall be valid for a period of 30 days or at an earlier date when the
street space is no longer required. Additional permits may be issued until the completion of
building operations for which issued. Upon the termination of the permit, all material and
equipment shall be removed and the area so occupied shall be restored to its original
condition.
g. The occupation of a roadway for storage of building materials shall never extend farther than
allowed in the permit or more than 1/3 across the roadway.
h. Street occupation permits shall not be issued for areas other than those fronting the premises
concerned without the written consent of the owners, tenants or occupants of properties
adjoining the site.
i. During building operations where sidewalks previously existed, a sidewalk of not less than
five feet in width, or a clean, hard, paved roadway of equal width, with adequate guard
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-11
railings, shall at all times be kept open, clean and unobstructed for use as a passageway in
front of the premises, unless complete closure is approved by the Director of Public Works.
j. Any person issued a street occupation permit shall, at all times during the life of the permit,
maintain that portion of the street, including parkway and sidewalk, in a safe condition and
clear of all rubbish, dirt or snow. Gutters or other waterways shall be kept free at all times.
Barricades shall be provided in accordance with Article IV of this chapter.
k. If any person, firm or corporation places any material on a street, roadway, or other public
place, or in a sewer, without a permit, the Village may remove the material and charge the
offender with the reasonable cost of removal. Nothing in this section shall prevent the
enforcement of this Section by appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction without
first allowing the offender to cure the offense, nor shall the Village's action in removing the
offensive material bar any enforcement procedures otherwise available to the Village.
Section 20-111 Village Grade Elevations. All elevations and grades for public or local
improvements, or required for subdivision plats, or otherwise, shall be given in terms of United
States Geodetic Survey datum. Specific references shall be made to applicable United States
Government Bench Marks located throughout the Village.
Section 20-112 Street Names and Signs.
a. The several streets and avenues in the Village shall be known and designated by the names
adopted by the several ordinances now in force, as shown on the official Village Street Map,
together with all its amendments and revisions.
b. Names of all new streets and avenues shall not duplicate existing or platted street or avenue
names, unless a new street or avenue is a continuation of or in alignment with existing or
platted streets or avenues, in which case they shall have the same name of the existing or
platted street or avenue they are in alignment with. All new streets or avenues shall be
named in the following manner: streets generally bearing north and south shall be named as
Avenues; and streets generally bearing east and west shall be named as Streets.
c. All street signs shall be of the location, type and size approved by the Director of Public
Works, giving due regard to the prevailing type, size and pattern of location used throughout
the Village. Manufacture and installation of the signs shall be done by the Village, but the
developer of any property concerned shall pay for the signs at the Village's cost.
d. All street names on final plats of subdivision shall be subject to the prior approval of the
Director of Building before final approval by the Village Board.
e. Proposals to change street names will be submitted to the Board of Trustees for approval.
Section 20-113 Lot or House Street Numbers.
a. All lots or houses located on the north and south streets or streets running in a generally
northerly and southerly direction shall be assigned street numbers progressing from the north
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-12 REVISED 10/05/15
line of Campbell Street, as a base line beginning with the number one at the base line and
increasing towards the south, and towards the north, as the case may be.
b. All lots or houses located on the east and west streets or streets running in a generally
easterly and westerly direction shall be assigned street numbers progressing from the west
line of Dunton Avenue, as a base line beginning with the number one at the base line and
increasing towards the east, and towards the west, as the case may be.
c. There shall be assigned 800 numbers to each mile or 100 numbers to each 1/8 of a mile on all
streets. The even numbers on the north and south streets, or streets running in a generally
northerly and southerly direction, shall be on the westerly side of such streets, and the odd
numbers on the north and south streets, or streets running in a generally northerly and
southerly direction, shall be on the easterly side of such streets. The even numbers on the
east and west streets, or streets running in a generally easterly and westerly direction, shall be
on the northerly side of such streets, and the odd numbers on the east and west streets, or
streets running in a generally easterly and westerly direction, shall be on the southerly side of
such streets
d. The Director of Building shall assign or cause to be assigned to each lot or part of a lot,
residence, apartment, or place of business, an applicable street number.
Section 20-114 Mailboxes. Permits shall not be required for the installation in public rights-of-way
of mailboxes and supporting structures meeting the requirements of the United States Postal Service
and subject to the following conditions:
a. The installation shall not conflict with existing or proposed public and private utilities and
shall comply with provisions of Section 20-413.
b. The face of the mailbox shall not be closer than 12 inches from the back of curb or edge of
pavement if there is no curb.
c. The supporting post shall be no closer than 18 inches from the back of curb or edge of
pavement if there is no curb; shall be constructed of materials having sufficient strength to
withstand forces applied during normal roadway snowplowing operations; and shall meet the
frangibility requirements for single post signs as published by the Illinois Department of
Transportation.
d. The owner shall be responsible for all costs of installing and maintaining the mailbox.
e. Noncomplying mailboxes shall be removed within 30 days after receipt of notice from the
Village.
Ord. #15-037)
Section 20-115 Parkway Maintenance. All parkways located in the front or side yard of any
property shall be maintained by the property owner. This includes private driveway approaches, the
flare from the pavement edge extended for a private driveway approach, and service walks from curb
or pavement edge to the public sidewalk and/or the public sidewalk to the building. Maintenance
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-13 REVISED 11/05/07
a. Mowing of grass or ground cover,
b. Keeping mailboxes and support structures in good condition,
c. Keeping the culvert opening free of debris, and
d. Replacement or repair of culvert upon failure of the culvert.
Ord. #07-019)
Section 20-116 Plats Requiring Village Board Approval.
The following shall be required for all plats requiring Village Board approval and recording at theCook
County Recorder’s Office:
1. The size of the plat shall not exceed 24” x 36”;
2. The plat shall be submitted on a type of material accepted by the Cook County Recorder’ s
Office;
3. A copy of the plat shall be provided on disk and submitted to the Village along with the
original plat;
4. The parcel index numbers of all lots contained within the plat shall be provided on the plat.
Section 20-117 Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Chapter,
where no other penalty is specifically provided, shall be fined not less than five dollars nor more than
750 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or in
which a violation occurs or continues.
Ord. #07-047, # 07-066)
Article II
Construction of Utility Facilities in the Rights-of-Way
Section 20-201 Purpose and Scope.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to establish policies and procedures for constructing
facilities on rights-of-way within the Village’ s jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit
consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village
rights-of-way and the Village as a whole.
b. Intent. In enacting this Article, the Village intends to exercise its authority over the rights-ofway
in the Village and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by
establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including
without limitation:
1. prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other
public ways and places;
2. prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-14 REVISED 11/05/07
hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the Village’s utilities and of
other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property;
4. protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the
installation of utility facilities;
5. protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and materials that
increase impermeable surfaces;
6. preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that characterize the
Village’ s residential neighborhoods;
8. prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and
9. assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility
facilities locations.
c. Facilities Subject to this Article. This Article applies to all facilities on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A
facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Article may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except
as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
d. Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements. The Village, in its discretion and as limited by
law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the
privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the
Village rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement
may request that the Village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the Village
may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this Article.
e. Effect of Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements.
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers. In the event that a utility other
than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement
with the Village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and
control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension
thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency
between, the provisions of this Article and the provisions of any franchise, license or
similar agreement between the Village and any telecommunications provider, the
provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control
during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
f. Conflicts with Other Articles. This Article supersedes all Articles or parts of Articles adopted
prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-15 REVISED 11/05/07
g. Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable federal or State laws or
regulations conflict with the requirements of this Article, the utility shall comply with the
requirements of this Article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or
State laws or regulations.
h. Sound Engineering Judgment. The Village shall use sound engineering judgment when
administering this Article and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements
expressed in this Article when the Village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed
to limit the ability of the Village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare.
Section 20-202 Definitions. As used in this Article and unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section. Any
term not defined in this Section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30,
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
1. AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
2. ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
3. Applicant. A person applying for a permit under this Article.
4. ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
5. Backfill. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
6. Bore or Boring. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or
electrical conductor.
7. Cable operator. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5).
8. Cable service. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).
9. Cable system. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7).
10. Carrier Pipe. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
11. Casing. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes,
electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
12. Clear Zone. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for
safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable
slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic
volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in theAASHTO
Roadside Design Guide.
13. Coating. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against
external corrosion.
14. Code. The Municipal Code of the Village of Arlington Heights.
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-16 REVISED 11/05/07
15. Conductor. Wire carrying electrical current.
16. Conduit. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
17. Construction or Construct. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration,
enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities.
18. Cover. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
19. Crossing Facility. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.
20. Director of Public Works. The Village Director of Public Works or his or her designee.
21. Disrupt the Right-of-Way. For the purposes of this Article, anywork that obstructs the rightof-
way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use.
Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting;
placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures;
damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the
parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of
traffic on a highway.
22. Emergency. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public
using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health
and safety of the general public served by the utility.
23. Encasement. Provision of a protective casing.
24. Engineer. The Director of Engineering or his or her designee.
25. Equipment. Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate
construction of facilities.
26. Excavation. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare bydigging.
27. Extra Heavy Pipe. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
28. Facility. All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track
and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures,
cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto)
located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this
Article. For purposes of this Article, the term “facility” shall not include any facility owned
or operated by the Village.
29. Freestanding Facility. Afacility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an
antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
30. Frontage Road. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway
where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
31. Hazardous Materials. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form,
concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the Director of Public
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-17 REVISED 11/05/07
Works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or
property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons,
etiology ( biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be
hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
32. Highway Code. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from
time to time.
33. Highway. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban
roads or streets. “ Highway” includes all highway land and improvements, including
roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails,
protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
34. Holder. Aperson or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video
service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS
5/21-401.
35. IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.
36. ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.
37. Jacking. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without
boring.
38. Jetting. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead
of the pipe.
39. Joint Use. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or more utilities.
40. J.U.L.I.E.. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility notification
program.
41. Major Intersection. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
42. Occupancy. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
43. Parallel Facility. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a
right-of-way.
44. Parkway. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
45. Pavement Cut. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the
construction of a facility.
46. Permittee. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to Sections 20-204 and 20-
205 of this Article.
47. Practicable. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply
convenient.
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-18 REVISED 11/05/07
48. Pressure. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in
pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
49. Petroleum Products Pipelines. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products
including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
50. Prompt. That which is done within a period of time specified by the Village. If no time
period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.
51. Public Entity. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local,
state or federal level.
52. Restoration. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the
construction of a facility.
53. Right-of-Way or Rights-of-Way. Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or
commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility
easements, in which the Village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit
the location of facilities other than those of the Village. “Right-of-way” or "Rights-of-way"
shall not include any real or personal Village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two sentences and shall not include Village buildings, fixtures and other structures
or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.
54. Roadway. That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
55. Sale of Telecommunications at Retail. The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration,
other than between a parent corporation and its whollyowned subsidiaries or between wholly
owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such
corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
56. Security Fund. That amount of security required pursuant to Section 20-210.
57. Shoulder. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the
pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow
removed from the pavement.
58. Sound Engineering Judgment. Adecision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering
principles, practices and experience.
59. Telecommunications. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services,
telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services,
mobile radio services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way
radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or
similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. “Private line” means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service
for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-19 REVISED 11/05/07
communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations
to one or more other specified locations. “ Telecommunications” shall not include value
added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form,
content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
Telecommunications” shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by
such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end
communications. “ Telecommunications” shall not include the provision of cable services
through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C.
Sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming
services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village through an open video
system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R.
76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
60. Telecommunications Provider. Means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls
facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in
any form.
61. Telecommunications Retailer. Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
62. Trench. Arelatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
63. Utility. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this Article.
64. Vent. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an
underground casing.
65. Video Service. That term as defined in Section 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable and Video
Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201(v).
66. Village. The Village of Arlington Heights.
67. Water Lines. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
68. Wet Boring. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to
provide a sluice for the excavated material.
Section 20-203 Annual Registration Required. Every utility that occupies right-of-waywithin the
Village shall register on January 1 of each year with the Director of Public Works, providing the
utility’s name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or
more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving
the utility’s facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in Section 20-208 of this Article, in the form of a Certificate of
Insurance.
Section 20-204 Permit Required; Applications and Fees.
a. Permit Required. No person shall construct (as defined in this Article) any facility on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within any Village right-of-way which (1) changes the
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-20 REVISED 11/05/07
location of the facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this
Article), or (4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application
with the Director of Public Works and obtaining a permit from the Village therefor, except as
otherwise provided in this Article. No permit shall be required for installation and
maintenance of service connections to customers’ premises where there will be no disruption
of the right-of-way.
b. Permit Application. All applications for permits pursuant to this Article shall be filed on a
form provided by the Village and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the
Village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application
materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
proprietary” or “confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
c. Minimum General Application Requirements. The application shall be made bythe utility or
its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
1. The utility’s name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant’ s name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy
numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of
all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the
application;
4. Ageneral description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility
and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such
description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be
performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted
by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the Village:
a) A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and
devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property
and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic;
and
b) An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential
emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The
intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
Section unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
6. Drawings submitted should be drawn to a minimum scale of 1”= 20’, or larger detail
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-21 REVISED 11/05/07
if necessary, (drawing to include existing surface features such as trees, sidewalks,
curbing and pavement, drive aprons, utility vaults and manholes, fire hydrants and
surface valves, etc.), to adequately convey to the Director of Public Works the
proposed location with respect to adjacent right-of-way, sidewalks, pavements, and
other existing surface features, so that the Director of Public Works can consult
Village records and make a “ best determination” of the proposed work upon buried
Village utilities.
7. Evidence of insurance as required in Section 20-208 of this Article;
8. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in Section 20-210 of this Article;
9. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this Article (See Section
20-221); and
10. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the Village.
d. Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types of Utilities. In addition to the
requirements of Subsection c) of this Section, the permit application shall include the
following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit
application:
1. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications,
telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas distribution
system, evidence that any “Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity” or other
regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the
applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional
authority;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction
class, and operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water
Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District [other local or
state entities with jurisdiction], have been satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum
products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be
followed.
e. Applicant’ s Duty to Update Information. Throughout the entire permit application review
period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information
contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the Village
within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment.
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-22 REVISED 11/05/07
Section 20-205 Action on Permit Applications.
a. Village Review of Permit Applications. Completed permit applications, containing all
required documentation, shall be examined by the Director of Public Works within a
reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of
applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Director of Public Works shall
reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Director of Public
Works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this Article and
applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Director of Public Works shall
issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the
applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, that the
construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements
of this Article.
b. Additional Village Review of Applications of Telecommunications Retailers.
1. Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village that it intends to commence work
governed by this Article for facilities for the provision of telecommunications
services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation
sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be
provided by the telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than ten days prior
to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days
prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Director of Public
Works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be
placed, used and constructed.
2. In the event that the Director of Public Works fails to provide such specification of
location to the telecommunications retailer within either (i) ten days after service of
notice to the Village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not
involving excavation for new construction or (ii) 25 days after service of notice by
the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer maycommence work without obtaining
a permit under this Article.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a permit is required
for work pursuant to Section 20-204 of this Article the telecommunications retailer
shall submit to the Village an application for a permit and any and all plans,
specifications and documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed.
Such application shall be subject to the requirements of Subsection a. of this Section.
c. Additional Village Review of Applications of Holders of State Authorization Under the
Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a utility that is a holder of a
State-issued authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be
deemed granted 45 days after submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted upon by the
Village, provided the holder has complied with applicable Village codes, ordinances, and
regulations.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-23 REVISED 11/05/07
Section 20-206 Effect of Permit.
a. Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest Created. Apermit from the Village
authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this Article on
Village rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee
to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
b. Duration. No permit issued under this Chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six
months unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently
pursued to completion.
c. Pre-construction meeting required. At the request of the Director of Public Works, the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the
permit shall attend a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction meeting shall be held at
a date, time and place designated by the Village with such Village representatives in
attendance as the Village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of
reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the
areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other
utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by
adjacent property owners.
d. Compliance with All Laws Required. The issuance of a permit by the Village does not
excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the Village and applicable
statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
Section 20-207 Revised Permit Drawings. All work shall be installed per the approved permit
drawing and specs. If field conditions require any deviation from the approved installation location,
permittee shall notify the Director of Public Works for approval, prior to installation in any location
other than that approved on the permit. In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate
in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications
submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to
the Village within 90 days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans
shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations
approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this
Article, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with Section 20-221 of this Article.
If the Village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility
from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised
drawings or plans therefor.
Section 20-208 Insurance.
a. Required Coverages and Limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-ofway
shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as
named insured and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in paragraphs 1. and 2.
below:
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-24 REVISED 11/05/07
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion,
collapse, and underground hazard ( commonly referred to as “ X,” “ C,” and “ U”
coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
a) $ 5,000,000 for bodily injury or death to each person;
b) $ 5,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
c) $ 5,000,000 for all other types of liability;
2. Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined
single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property damage for each accident;
3. Worker’ s compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer’ s liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per employee
and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors
performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this
Section.
b. Excess or Umbrella Policies. The coverages required by this Section may be in any
combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must
provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when
any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the
excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
c. Copies Required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this
Section to the Village within ten days following receipt of a written request therefor from the
Village.
d. Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages. The insurance policies required by this
Section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the Village,
by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written
notice addressed to the Village Manager of such intent to cancel or not to
renew.”
Within ten days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no event later than ten days
prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of
replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section.
e. Self-Insurance. Autility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit
requirements required by Subsection a) of this Section. A utility that self-insures is not
required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming
of additional insureds under Subsection a), or the requirements of Subsections b), c) and d)
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-25 REVISED 11/05/07
of this Section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence
sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit
requirements required under Subsection a) of this Section, such as evidence that the utility is
a “ private self insurer” under the Workers Compensation Act.
f. Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Utility’s Liability. The legal liability of the utility
to the Village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance
policies or self-insurance required by this Section shall not be limited by such insurance
policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
g. Insurance Companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this Section shall be effected
under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with
the licensee in the State of Illinois. [All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be
rated "A-" or better and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company.]
Section 20-209 Indemnification. By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a
utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the Village and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against
any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including
reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to
arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or
misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in
the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service
over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this
Article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility’s
indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of
this Article by the Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.
Section 20-210 Security.
a. Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in an amount as set
forth in this Section. The Security Fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with
this Section at the permittee’ s sole cost and expense until the completion of the work
authorized under the permit. The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this Article;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned by the
permittee’ s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and
other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this Article; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that
the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by
permittee in violation of this Article including, without limitation, any damage to
public property or restoration work the permittee is required by this Article to
perform that the Village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence
solely of the permittee’ s failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due
the Village from the permittee pursuant to this Article or any other applicable law.
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-26 REVISED 11/05/07
b. Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village in the form, at the
permittee’ s election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the Village, or an
unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of
credit provided pursuant to this Subsection shall, at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the Village and the
permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the Village of any
amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the Village and within the State of Illinois at
which it can be drawn.
c. Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to provide for the
reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that
existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the Director of Public
Works, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the Village estimates are
likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple
locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one
location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be
undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the
Director of Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to
post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction
under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall be equal to
the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this Subsection c.
for any single phase.
d. Withdrawals. The Village, upon 14 days’ advance written notice clearly stating the reason
for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this Subsection, may withdraw an
amount from the Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village
for such amount within the 14-day notice period. Withdrawals maybe made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the
Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance
by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this Article that the Village determines can be
remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
e. Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the Village that any
amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security
Fund to the amount specified in Subsection c. of this Section.
f. Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-27 REVISED 11/05/07
Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the Village, upon written request for said
withdrawal to the Village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security
Fund below the minimum balance required in Subsection c. of this Section.
g. Closing and Return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work authorized under the
permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the Security Fund, or such portion
thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets
necessary to compensate the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any
provisions of this Article or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the
permit, the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property
of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred
by the Village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said
costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
h. Rights Not Limited. The rights reserved to the Village with respect to the Security Fund are
in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether reserved by this Article or otherwise
authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security
Fund shall affect any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights
which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
Section 20-211 Permit Suspension and Revocation.
a. Village Right to Revoke Permit. The Village may revoke or suspend a permit issued
pursuant to this Article for one or more of the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit
application;
2. Non-compliance with this Article;
3. Permittee’ s physical presence or presence of permittee’ s facilities on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent
threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee’ s failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the
permit and approved plans.
b. Notice of Revocation or Suspension. The Village shall send written notice of its intent to
revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Article stating the reason or reasons for
the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this Section 20-
211.
c. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation or Suspension. Upon receipt
of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the Village, the permittee shall have the
following options:
1. Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation
or suspension;
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-28 REVISED 11/05/07
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the deficiencies stated in the
written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the Village within five
working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across,
or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the
Village providing written proof of such removal to the Village within ten days after
receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in
this Subsection.
d. Stop Work Order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the
Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for
revocation set forth within Subsection a. of this Section.
e. Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply. If the permittee fails to comply with the
provisions of Subsection c. of this Section, the Village or its designee may, at the option of
the Village: ( 1) correct the deficiencies; ( 2) upon not less than 20 days notice to the
permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than 30 days notice
to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of
the Village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village for all costs of removal.
Section 20-212 Change of Ownership or Owner’s Identity or Legal Status.
a. Notification of Change. A utility shall notify the Village no less than 30 days prior to the
transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility.
The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges
enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this Article, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-ofway.
b. Amended Permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show
current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its
name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the
terms and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on
the Village’s right-of-way.
c. Insurance and Bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to
reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
Section 20-213 General Construction Standards.
a. Standards and Principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with
applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and
accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where
applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as
amended from time to time:
1. Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-29 REVISED 11/05/07
2. Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
3. Highway Design Manual;
4. Highway Standards Manual;
5. Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
6. Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code § 545);
7. Flagger’ s Handbook; and
8. Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
b. Interpretation of Municipal Standards and Principles. If a discrepancy exists between or
among differing principles and standards required by this Article, the Director of Public
Works shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles
apply and such decision shall be final. If requested, the Director of Public Works shall state
which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future.
Section 20-214 Traffic Control.
a. Minimum Requirements. The Village’ s minimum requirements for traffic protection are
contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code.
b. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, and Flaggers. The utility is responsible for providing
and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting
applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s
workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way.
c. Interference with Traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference
with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
d. Notice When Access is Blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning work that will partially
or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the
resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such
work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to Section 20-
220 of this Article, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the
circumstances.
e. Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic
protection requirements that are brought to the utility’s attention by the Village.
20-215 Location of Facilities.
a. General Requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of
utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location
requirements of this Subsection.
1. No Interference with Village Facilities. No utility facilities shall be placed in any
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-30 REVISED 11/05/07
location if the Director of Public Works determines that the proposed location will
require the relocation or displacement of any of the Village’s utility facilities or will
otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the Village’s utility
facilities.
2. Minimum Interference and Impact. The proposed location shall cause only the
minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and shall cause only
the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way.
3. No Interference with Travel. No utility facility shall be placed in any location that
interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
4. No Limitations on Visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as
to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
5. Size of Utility Facilities. The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by
the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
b. Facilities Located Within Highways.
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be located within the
right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
a) Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly
parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit;
b) Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb
with a minimum distance of three feet from the back of the curb, where
available;
c) Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as
practicable with minimum distance of four feet outside the outer shoulder line
of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d) No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e) Ground mounted appurtenances should be located to minimize sight distance
disturbances, minimum of 2 feet from the edge of a sidewalk, minimum of 3’
from the back of curb.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities. An underground parallel facility may be located
within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
a) The facility is located no less than six feet from the right-of-way line, unless
otherwise directed by the Director of Public Works from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
b) A new facility may be located under the sidewalk or roadway portion of the
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-31 REVISED 11/05/07
right-of-way only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with
sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing
conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
c) Proposed facilities shall be installed with a minimum of 3’ horizontal
clearance for existing or proposed Village Utilities, unless approved by the
Director of Public Works.
c. Facilities Crossing Highways.
1. No Future Disruption. The construction and design of crossing facilities installed
between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways may require the
incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to
avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of
such crossing facilities.
2. 90 Degree Crossing Required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a 90
degree angle to the centerline as practicable or as directed by the Director of Public
Works.
3. Overhead Power or Communication Facility. An overhead power or communication
facility may cross a highway only if: it has a minimum vertical line clearance as
required by ICC’s rules entitled, “ Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines” (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305); poles are located within one foot of
the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and overhead
crossings at major intersections are avoided.
4. Underground Power or Communication Facility. An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a) The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum
maintenance-free service life; and
b) Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in
the initial installation.
5. Markers. If markers are desired, only flash mounted markers will be allowed. The
Village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-wayline where an
underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway.
Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone
number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations.
49 C.F.R. §192.707 (1989)).
d. Facilities to be Located Within Particular Rights-of-Way. The Village may require that
facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within
particular highways.
e. Freestanding Facilities.
1. The Village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-32 REVISED 10/05/15
within a right-of-way.
2. The Village may require any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be
screened from view.
f. Facilities Installed Above Ground. Above ground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design
and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area
being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are
not limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical
configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
g. Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures.
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where
the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are
not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground,
underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are
completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting
commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those
under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
2. Autility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge
or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate
routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge
or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations:
a) The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and
an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of
damage to or failure of the facility;
b) The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in
the transportation system;
c) The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative
practicability;
d) The proposed method of attachment;
e) The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f) The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g) The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-33 REVISED 11/05/07
h) The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk
involved.
h. Appearance Standards.
1. The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order
to preserve visual quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive
removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to
adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality
of the lands being traversed.
Section 20-216 Construction Methods and Materials.
a. Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Construction Methods.
1. Boring or Jacking.
a) Pits and Shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the
Director of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or
jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked
and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported,
braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral
loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
b) Wet Boring or Jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the
roadway.
c) Borings with Diameters Greater Than Six Inches. Borings over six inches in
diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the
diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following
pipe by more than one inch.
d) Borings with Diameters Six Inches or Less. Borings of six inches or less in
diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or auger
and following pipe method.
e) Tree Preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any tree
designated by the Village to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or
around the root system.
2. Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-ofway
shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of Section 603 of IDOT’s
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.”
a) Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-34 REVISED 11/05/07
consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half of any
intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is
obtained from the Director of Public Works.
b) Open Trench and Excavated Material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the
excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as
added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the
paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for
windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway,
excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location.
c) Drip Line of Trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree
designated by the Village to be preserved.
3. Backfilling.
a) Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall
be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials
in accordance with IDOT’s “ Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.” When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for
backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
b) For a period of three years from the date construction of a facility is
completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Director of Public Works, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility,
place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement,
sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the
Director of Public Works.
4. Pavement Cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on
a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the
limitation set forth in this paragraph 4. is permitted under Section 20-221, the
following requirements shall apply:
a) Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon
as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Director of Public Works.
b) Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as
practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village.
c) All saw cuts shall be full depth.
5. Encasement.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-35 REVISED 11/05/07
a) Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any
other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either byone-piece
fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the Village.
b) The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot of the
right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be located in the area
established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
c) In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished
between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved jointed pipe is
used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior
to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints
are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
d) In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e) In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations
of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: (1) extra heavy
pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and (2) cathodic
protection of the pipe is provided;
f) If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the
facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the
right-of-way.
6. Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities. Cover shall be provided and maintained
at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type
of facility:
TYPE OF FACILITY MINIMUM COVER
Electric Lines
Communication, Cable or Video Service Lines
30 Inches
18 to 24 Inches (as determined by Village)
Gas or Petroleum Products 30 Inches
Water Line Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or Drainage
Line
Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection
b. Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Facilities.
1. Electric Power or Communication Lines.
a) Code Compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within
Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 ( formerly
General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled “Rules for
Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines,” and the National
Electrical Safety Code.
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-36 REVISED 11/05/07
b) Overhead Facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities shall use
single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be
used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so
guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no
feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for
maximum visibility.
c) Underground Facilities. (1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing,
provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize
damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. (2) If a crossing is
installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking
or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: (a) the crossing is
installed by the use of “ moles,” “ whip augers,” or other approved method
which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or (b) the
installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to
roadway construction. (3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the
National Electrical Safety Code.
d) Burial of Drops. All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of
the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snowdrops,
shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless
otherwise permitted by the Village. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all
temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after
placement.
2. Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or Communication Lines.
Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be
installed by:
a) the use of “ moles,” “ whip augers,” or other approved methods which
compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
b) jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or
toes of slopes of the highway;
c) open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of
slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
d) tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by
other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service. Gas pipelines within rights-of-wayshall
be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village approved manner and in
conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations,
Department of Transportation, Part 192 – Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by
Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards ( 49 CFR §192), IDOT’s “ Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,” and all other applicable laws,
rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-37 REVISED 11/05/07
shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping.
Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines or Drainage Lines.
Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rightsof-
way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current “ Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.”
c. Materials.
1. General Standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way
shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the
applicable portions of IDOT’s “ Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction,” the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the
standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate
industry.
2. Material Storage on Right-of-Way. No material shall be stored on the right-of-way
without the prior written approval of the Director of Public Works. When such
storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall
be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to
minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-waymaintenance or damage
to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way,
prior approval must be obtained from the Village.
3. Hazardous Materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the Village shall identify
any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities
or removal of any existing facilities.
d. Operational Restrictions.
1. Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the Village, be
required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or
the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be
discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in
extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the Director of Public Works when emergency
work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction are those set
forth in Chapter 23 of this Code.
e. Location of Existing Facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the Village
shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of existing above-ground and
underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities.
When notified of an excavation or when requested by the Village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility
shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding
weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage
Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.)
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-38 REVISED 11/05/07
Section 20-217 Vegetation Control.
a. Electric Utilities – Compliance with State Laws and Regulations. An electric utility shall
conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance
with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or
other agreement with the Village as permitted by law.
b. Other Utilities – Tree Trimming Permit Required. Tree trimming that is done by any other
utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable
Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal
maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in
addition to any other permit required under this Article.
1. Application for Tree Trimming Permit. Applications for tree trimming permits shall
include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with
supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming
permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will
be expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage to Trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees
will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit
and for assessment of damages. The Village will require compensation for trees
extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula
developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for
determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees.
The Village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical
pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
c. Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance. The Village may require that special
measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required
measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
d. Chemical Use.
1. Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall spray, inject or pour
any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the Village for any
purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.
2. Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-ofway
unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works
that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control.
Section 20-218 Removal, Relocation, or Modifications of Utility Facilities.
a. Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the Village, a utility shall, at its own
expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate
authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Village
improvement in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-39 REVISED 11/05/07
b. Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within 30 days following written notice from the
Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related
appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of
such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’ s license or franchise, unless
otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or
franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit
in violation of this Article; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the
permittee’ s license or franchise.
c. Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The Village retains the right and privilege
to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the Village, as the Village
may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or
safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the
utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known,
after cutting or removing a facility.
d. Abandonment of Facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the
Village, the utility shall notify the Village within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice
the Village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Director of
Public Works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare. In the event that the Village does not direct the utility that abandoned the
facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the Village, the abandoning utility
shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by
another utility or person.
Section 20-219 Clean-up and Restoration. The utility shall remove all excess material and restore
all turf and terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-way are
disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the
satisfaction of the Village. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of
roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Director of Public
Works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding,
resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-wayto a condition substantially equivalent
to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. Turf restoration shall be performed
with locally grown dirt sod in all areas, except as designated by the Director of Public Works for soil
and seed restoration, or mulch restoration. Turf restoration shall not be placed in the months of July
or August, except as permitted by the Director of Public Works. The time period provided in this
Section may be extended by the Director of Public Works for good cause shown.
Section 20-220 Maintenance and Emergency Maintenance.
a. General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-wayare to
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-40 REVISED 11/05/07
be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the Village and at the utility’s
expense.
b. Emergency Maintenance Procedures. Emergencies mayjustify non-compliance with normal
procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the
utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the
highway or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights,
barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature
of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment
required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on
the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of
access to the facility is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the Director of Public
Works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as
to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be
required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to
interfere with the free movement of traffic, the Village police shall be notified
immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly
as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public.
c. Emergency Repairs. The utility must file in writing with the Village a description of the
repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after an emergency repair.
Section 20-221 Variances.
a. Request for Variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of
this Article must do so in writing to the Director of Public Works as a part of the permit
application. The request shall identify each provision of this Article from which a variance is
requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
b. Authority to Grant Variances. The Director of Public Works shall decide whether a variance
is authorized for each provision of this Article identified in the variance request on an
individual basis.
c. Conditions for Granting of Variance. The Director of Public Works may authorize a
variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or
an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement
of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the
provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with
the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the
requested approach.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-41 REVISED 11/05/07
d) Additional Conditions for Granting of a Variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance,
the Director of Public Works may require the utility requesting the variance to meet
reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this
Article but which carry out the purposes of this Article.
e) Right to Appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination,
including denial of a variance, made by the Director of Public Works under the provisions of
this Chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Village Manager. The application for appeal
shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within 30 days after the date of such order,
requirement, decision or determination.
Section 20-222 Penalties. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty
provisions of this Code. There may be times when the Village will incur delay or other costs,
including third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit
and this Article. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the Village’s costs of damages and its costs of
installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the
permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost
apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs
apportioned to it.
Section 20-223 Enforcement. Nothing in this Article shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this Article.
Section 20-224 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
Article III Prohibited Street Uses
Section 20-301 Obstructions. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause,
create or maintain any obstruction of any street, roadway, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except
as may be specifically authorized by ordinance or allowed under permit issued by the Director of
Public Works.
Section 20-302 Drainage. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to stop, damage
or obstruct the passage of water in any street, gutter or public sewer, culvert, or drain in any street,
alley, public place or on private property.
Section 20-303 Stairways and Hatchways. It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any
opening, hatchway or stairway in any public street, alley or sidewalk without first having obtained a
permit.
All lawfully maintained openings, hatchways and stairways shall be guarded by a suitably strong
cover or railing as prescribed and approved by the Director of Public Works. If the opening,
hatchway or stairway interferes with the construction of subsequent public improvements, the
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-42
opening, hatchway or stairway shall be moved and relocated by the permittee at the permittee's own
expense.
Section 20-304 Encroachments. It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any fence, building or
structure which encroaches upon any public street, alley or other public place, except as may be
otherwise specifically permitted under the provisions of this Code.
Section 20-305 Deposits on Roadways, Parkways and Sidewalks. It shall be unlawful to deposit
on any street, alley, sidewalk or parkway any material, which may be harmful to the pavement or
surface, or any material such as waste material or glass or other articles, which may do injury to any
person, animal or property. Merchandise or other articles maybe deposited on sidewalks preparatory
to delivery, provided that the usable width of the sidewalk is not reduced to less than five feet; and
provided that no article shall remain on the walk for more than ½ hour.
Section 20-306 Removal of Dirt and Construction Debris.
a. Streets used by vehicles exiting from property on which construction, excavation, grading or
similar operations are being conducted shall be kept free of dust, dirt, mud, stones and other
debris from the site. The owner of the property and the person, firm or corporation
conducting operations on the property shall take all reasonable measures to prevent deposit
of debris on the streets and shall cause any the debris to be removed from the streets
adjoining the construction site. At a minimum, streets shall be cleaned of debris at least two
times during each day's operations and at the end of the day. Streets shall be cleaned at
additional times as required to keep the streets safe for use or upon notice given by an agent
of the Village to the supervisor of the operations conducted on the site.
b. If any the person, firm or corporation fails to remove dust, dirt, mud, stones or other debris
from a street within two hours after notice by the Village, the Village may remove the
material and charge the owner of the property or the responsible party if other than the owner
on which the operations are being conducted with the reasonable cost of removal plus the
established emergency mobilization fee. The Village's action in removing the material shall
not bar any enforcement procedures otherwise available to the Village.
Section 20-307 Private Use. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any
street, roadway, sidewalk or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for
sale or to write or mark any sign or advertisement on any place, unless approved in writing by the
Village.
Section 20-308 Littering. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to throw, drop,
deposit or cause to be thrown, dropped or deposited, upon or in any street, roadway, alley, sidewalk,
drain, sewer or other public place, any kind of dirt, rubbish, waste, article, thing or substance
whatsoever, either liquid or solid; rind or peel of any fruit; glass bottles, nails, tacks, wire, crockery,
cans or other sharp or cutting substances.
Section 20-309 Congregating or Assembling on Streets. No person shall, at any time, congregate
or assemble in or upon any street, alley or other public place in the a manner as to obstruct or
interfere with the passage of vehicles or persons along roadways, alleys and sidewalks, or in the a
manner as to disturb or threaten the public peace.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-43 REVISED 03/04/02
Section 20-310 Sports and Exhibitions Causing Obstructions. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation, by means of any sport, game, amusement or other exhibition, or by
exhortation, or otherwise to induce or attempt to induce the congregating or assembling of persons in
any public street or alley, so that the passage of vehicles and persons along roadways, alleys and
sidewalks is obstructed or interfered with, or which threatens or disturbs the public peace.
Section 20-311 Injury to Parkways. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
injure, disturb or damage any parkway, without a permit issued pursuant to this Code. When injury,
disturbance or damage occurs pursuant or incidental to work carried on under a permit, immediately
upon completion of the work the parkway shall be restored to its original condition.
Section 20-312 Utility Lines, Wires and Poles. No utility lines, conduit lines or tile shall be laid or
buried in any street, alley or other public place without a permit. It shall be unlawful to erect any
poles or wires, including electric, communications poles and wires, or to maintain the poles and
wires on or over any street, alley or other public place without a permit.
Section 20-313 Snow Removal. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation and/or any
agent of any person, firm or corporation to:
a. Plow or otherwise remove accumulated snow from a private parking lot and deposit it on a
Village street, sidewalk or right-of-way.
b. Plow snow from a private driveway and deposit it on a Village street in a manner so as to
decrease the driveable width of the street.
c. Obstruct, harass, prevent, impede or otherwise interfere with any employee or contracted
agent of the Village engaged in snow removal service or obstruct, cause damage to or
otherwise interfere with any vehicle used in conjunction with Village snow removal services.
Ord. #02-018)
Article IV Excavations and Foundations
Section 20-401 Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to tunnel
under or make any excavation in any street, roadway, alley, sidewalk or other public place without
first obtaining a permit from the Director of Public Works as provided in this Article.
Section 20-402 Exemptions. The provisions of this Article relating to the securing of permits shall
not apply to officers or employees of the Village engaged in doing Village work; nor to persons,
firms or corporations doing work for the Village under contract with the Village.
The provisions of Sections 20-401 and 20-403 shall not apply to work done under a permit issued by
the Village where the work is incidental to or part of building construction, plumbing, water or sewer
activities, provided that the bond requirements of Section 20-404 and the deposit requirements of
Section 20-405 have been satisfied.
Ord. #02-018)
Section 20-403 Applications. Applications for excavation permits shall be made to the Director of
Building, and shall describe the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size, the purpose,
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-44 REVISED 05/01/07
and the person, firm or corporation doing the actual work, and the name of the person, firm or
corporation for whom the work is being done, and shall contain a covenant that the applicant will
comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done.
Ord. #02-018, #06-078)
Section 20-404 Deposit.
a. An application for a permit shall be accompanied by a cash deposit in the amount of $350, to
be held by the Village Treasurer.
b. If any defect in the work, which would create a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic,
becomes apparent to the Director of Public Works, he or she shall notify the permittee in
writing of the defect. If the defect is not corrected within 12 hours from the receipt of the
notice, the Director of Public Works shall cause the correction of the defect and deduct the
cost of the correction from the cash deposit made pursuant to subsection a. above.
c. If, after the completion of the excavation, tunnel or foundation, upon inspection by the
Director of Public Works, it appears that the surface of the ground, pavement or other Village
facilities has not been damaged, the Finance Director shall return the cash deposit to the
applicant. If any damage has been done to the surface of the ground, pavement, or other
Village facilities, the Finance Director shall retain the deposit until the damage has been
repaired by the applicant to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, or if the
applicant does not repair the damage within 30 days after its discovery, the Director of Public
Works shall cause any necessary restoration of the surface of the ground, relaying of
pavement or repairing other Village facilities, and the cost of the repair shall be deducted
from the deposit and the difference, if any, between the cost of the repair and the deposit
shall be refunded to the applicant.
Section 20-405 Time Limit. Each application shall include the estimated length of time from the
commencement of the work until the restoration of the surface of the ground or pavement. Failure to
comply with this time limitation shall be unlawful, unless an extension of time is granted by the
Village.
Ord. #06-078)
Section 20-406 Fees. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the applicant shall pay a fee to the Village.
This fee shall be computed at the rate of $1.15 for each square foot of surface area that the proposed
excavation will cover as estimated by the applicant and approved by the Director of Public Works or
the Director of Engineering, or in the case of tunnels, at the rate of one dollar for each lineal foot.
Section 20-407 Issuance of Permit. The Director of Building shall act upon applications for
permits within a reasonable time and shall issue them only where all applicable provisions of this
Code are satisfied.
Ord. #02-018)
Section 20-408 Manner of Excavating or Foundations. It shall be unlawful to make any
excavation, tunnel or foundation, in any way contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit.
Proper bracing and shoring shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground, and
excavations shall not be greater in area below ground level than the area of the opening at the
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-45 REVISED 03/04/02
surface. The permittee shall comply with all State and Federal regulations relating to trench
excavation and safety and all confined space entry regulations.
All pipes, cables, conduits and facilities shall be protected from damage while making the
excavations or tunnels, and notice shall be given to the persons maintaining any pipes, cables,
conduits and facilities, or to the Director of Public Works or officer responsible for their care, when
pipes, cables, conduits or facilities are or may be endangered or affected by the excavation or tunnel.
This notice must be given prior to the time that the pipes, cables, conduits or facilities are disturbed.
No damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub or to roots unless the Village has given prior
approval to the specific work to be done.
Section 20-409 Tunneling, Boring and Open Trenches. Tunneling and boring shall be permitted
under roadway pavement or curbs or beneath alleys only with the approval of the Village. All
tunnels and trenches shall be kept open until the piping has been inspected, tested and approved.
Section 20-410 Sidewalks. If any sidewalk is blocked by any excavation or tunnel, a temporary
sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenience of users.
Ord. #02-018)
Section 20-411 Backfilling. All excavations, tunnels or foundations, shall be backfilled in a
professional manner, utilizing recognized techniques. Where specifically provided, all backfilling
shall conform to the particular requirements set forth in the Manual of Practice.
Section 20-412 Restoring Surface. Any person, firm or corporation making any excavation or
tunnel in or under any street, roadway, alley, sidewalk or other public place shall restore the surface
to its original condition, in accordance with the Manual of Practice.
Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a roadway, alley, sidewalk or other public place shall
be repaired and the surface relaid by the applicant in compliance with the Manual of Practice, and
subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works; and if the restoration work is not done
within ten days after restoration is possible, the Village may restore the surface and charge the cost
the permittee.
Section 20-413 Utility Locations and Conflicts. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to
have all public and private utilities field located prior to excavating, placing pipe or cable, driving
posts or otherwise disturbing any portion of a public right-of-way, alley or utility easement. The
Director of Public Works or the utility owner shall be advised of all conflicts with existing utilities,
and shall determine how all permitted installations are to be accommodated. It shall be the
responsibility of the permittee to pay for all costs associated with relocating existing public and
private utilities to accommodate the permitted work.
Article V Barricades
Section 20-501 Barricades Required. Any person, firm or corporation issued a building or street
occupation permit, or laying or repairing any pavement, curb or sidewalk in any street or doing
plumbing, water or sewer work in any street or public place, or otherwise excavating or creating
hazards in a street or public place under a permit issued by the Village, shall erect and maintain
suitable fences, railings or barricades to guard all excavations, embankments or obstructions along
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-46
the street, including sidewalks, as deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works or the Director
of Engineering for the adequate protection of the public using the street and sidewalk. All barricades
shall meet standards established by IDOT.
Section 20-502 Night Lights Required. All fencing, railing and barricading required under the
provisions of Section 20-401 shall be equipped and maintained with adequate lighting, consisting of
warning lights of orange color, from dusk until dawn. These lights shall be placed at each end of the
fencing, railing or barricading, and also along the sides at intervals not to exceed 25 feet. The
Director of Public Works may require additional lighting if deemed necessary for the public safety.
Section 20-503 Tampering with Barricades or Lights. No person, firm or corporation shall,
without legal cause, remove, extinguish, diminish or disturb warning lights, fences, railings or
barricades required to be erected and maintained pursuant to the provisions of this Article.
Article VI Trees and Shrubs
Section 20-601 Definitions. The words "trees", " shrubs" or "grass" when used in this Article shall
refer to trees, shrubs, or grass in a street, unless the context clearly indicates another meaning.
Section 20-602 Injury and Removal.
a. It shall be unlawful to damage or remove any tree or shrub located in any public street or
parkway without having secured a permit from the Department of Public Works.
b. The fee for each removal permit shall be $20, plus the value of the tree being removed, as
determined by the “ Guide for Establishing Values of Trees and Other Plants” by the
International Society of Arborculture.
c. Any person who shall unlawfully damage or remove any tree or shrub located in any public
street or parkway shall be liable to the Village for the replacement value as determined by
using the “ Guide for Establishing Values of Trees and Other Plants” by the International
Society of Arborculture and/or a certified arborist as determined bythe Village, as well as the
costs to remove the tree and all other costs associated with repairing the parkway.
d. Upon application for a building permit as set forth in Section 23-102 of the Municipal Code
of the Village of Arlington Heights, the Director of Building shall ask the Department of
Public Works to issue in writing to the applicant, a certified value of any tree or other foliage
located in any public street, parkway or other public place which is adjacent to or accessible
to the property subject to the building permit. The applicant shall be required to furnish a
bond or letter of credit in the amount of 20% of the value of the tree or foliage to assure
replacement or repair of any lost, destroyed or damaged tree or foliage occurring within one
year of issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
In addition, it shall be the duty of each applicant to provide adequate safeguards to the trees
and foliage of the Village during the period of the permit. In the event of loss, damage or
destruction of trees or foliage which are the property of the Village or the parkway, no
occupancy permit shall be issued until reimbursement in full is received by the Village of
Arlington Heights.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-47
e. Prior to construction on any site, the Department of Public Works shall examine the site and
determine the number of existing trees located in any public street or parkway. Any and all
trees lost, damaged, or destroyed shall be replaced bythe permit holder. Anytrees, which are
required by the Department of Public Works but cannot be placed on the sites in question,
shall be placed in public areas at the direction of the Department of Public Works. Tree
value shall be determined by using the “ Guide for Establishing Values of Trees and Other
Plants” by the International Society of Arboriculture and/or a certified arborist as determined
by the Village.
Section 20-603 Planting. It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or shrub in any street or other public
place without first having secured a permit, provided that, if planting is pursuant to the provisions of
Sections 20-609 of this Article, no further permit shall be required. Applications for the permit shall
be made to the Director of Public Works who shall issue a permit if the proposed planting is
compatible with existing trees in the immediate area and meets the requirements of Sections 20-611
and 20-612 of this Article.
Section 20-604 Dangerous Trees. Any tree, limb or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk or
roadway in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel shall be trimmed by the owner
of the abutting premises on which the tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall be eliminated.
Section 20-605 Wires. It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or rope to any tree within a public
right-of-way or alley without the permission of the Director of Public Works. Any person, firm or
corporation given the right to maintain poles or wires in streets or alleys shall, in the absence of a
provision in a franchise agreement concerning the subject, keep the wires and poles free and away
from any trees or shrubs so far as may be possible, and shall keep all trees and shrubs properly
trimmed, so that no injury can occur through contact between trees or shrubs and poles or wires.
Trimming shall be under the supervision of the Director of Public Works.
Section 20-606 Gas Mains. Any person, firm or corporation maintaining any gas pipes and mains
shall keep the pipes and mains free from leaks so that no injury shall be done to any tree or shrub,
unless exempted from this duty by the terms of any relevant franchise agreement.
Section 20-607 Excavations. In making permitted excavations in any street, proper care shall be
taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub, wherever possible. All roots and branches
damaged during excavation or any other operations shall be properly repaired by a certified arborist
and shall be done under the supervision of the Director of Public Works.
Section 20-608 Landscaping - Subdivision. All construction and development subject to the
provisions of Chapter 29, and particularly to Section 29-501(i), shall provide planting and seeding in
accordance with the requirements of Sections 20-610 through 20-614.
Section 20-609 Landscaping - New Construction. All new construction and development, not
subject to the landscaping requirements of Section 20-608, shall, as a condition of any building
permit issued, be subject to the provisions of Sections 20-610 through 20-614 of this Article.
Section 20-610 Seeding and Sodding. All parkways shall be graded and seeded or sodded in a
manner approved by the Forestry Division of the Department of Public Works.
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-48 REVISED 01/22/13
Section 20-611 Tree Planting.
a. Trees shall be planted in the parkway area as specified by the Department of Public Works
and shall be spaced not less than 40 feet nor more than 60 feet apart.
b. All construction and development subject to Sections 20-608 and 20-609 shall be subject to a
tree-planting fee to guarantee the costs of planting trees in an amount equal to the local
market cost of the trees. The amount of the tree-planting fee shall be determined by the
Department of Public Works and shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
Ord. #12-015, #13-003)
Section 20-612 Trees - Permitted Species. Trees required to be planted pursuant to Section 20-611
of this Article shall be of the following species (Ash trees are specifically prohibited):
a. Alnus (Alder)
b. Beeches (Fagus)
c. Catalpas (Catalpa)
d. Cypress (Taxodium)
e. Elms (Ulmus)
f. Gingkos (Kingko)
g. Hackberry (Celtis Occidentalis)
h. Hazels (Corylus)
i. Hickorys (Carya)
j. Hophornbeam (Ostrya)
k. Hornbeams (Carpinus)
l. Horsechestnut & Buckeyes (Aesculus)
m. Katsura (Cercidiphyllum japonicum)
n. Kentucky coffeetree (Gynocladus dioicus)
o. Larches (Larix)
p. Linden (Tilia)
q. Maples (Acer)
r. Oaks (Quercus)
s. Sycamores (Platanus)
t. Thornless Honey Locust (Gleditsia Triacanthos Inermis)
u. Tree Form Birch (Betula)
v. Tree Form Crabapples (Malus)
w. Tree Form Dogwoods (Cornus)
x. Tree Form Hawthorne (Crataegus)
y. Tree Form Lilacs (Syringa)
z. Tree Form Pears (Pyrus Calleryana)
aa. Tree Form Serviceberrys (Amelanchier)
All trees to be planted in parkways shall be of a diameter not less than 2½ inches as measured six
inches above grade level unless otherwise permitted by the Director of Public Works.
Section 20-613 Planting - Time Limit. Trees that are required to be planted in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 20-609 and 20-610 of this Article shall be planted within one year from the
date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the building constructed.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-49 REVISED 03/19/12
Section 20-614 Landscaping - Residential Lots. The development of all residential lots shall
require the planting of at least one parkway tree per lot, meeting the specifications and time limit of
Sections 20-612 and 20-613.
Ord. #06-045, #12-015)
Section 20-615 Infected Trees Declared a Nuisance. All species and varieties of Elm tree (trees
of genus Ulmus) infected with the fungus known as the Dutch Elm Disease (Certostomella Ulmi)
and Ash tree (trees of genus Fraxinus) infested with the insect known as Emerald Ash Borer (Agrilus
Planipennis Fairmare), as determined by Forestry Staff of the Village or bylaboratory analysis bythe
Section of Applied Botany and Plant Pathology, Illinois Natural History Survey, or by laboratories
approved by that agency are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
Ord. #06-045. #12-015)
Section 20-616 Certain Dead Trees Declared a Nuisance. All species and varieties of Elm trees
that are dead or substantially dead, and all dead Elmwood to which the bark is still attached, which,
because of its condition, may serve as a breeding place for the European Elm Bark Beetle (Scotytus
Multisriatus) and the Native Elm Bark Beetle (Hylurgopinus Rufipes) and all Ash trees which are
significantly infested with Emerald Ash Borer or are considered substantially dead, as determined by
Forestry staff of the Village, are hereby declared to be public nuisances.
Ord. #06-045)
Section 20-617 Disposition of Trees. It shall be unlawful for any owner of any lot or parcel of land
in the Village to permit or maintain on any lot or parcel of land, any Elm tree or dead Elmwood or
Ash tree or Ashwood which, as provided in Sections 20-615 and 20-616 of this Article is a public
nuisance, and it shall be the duty of any owner promptly to remove and dispose of any the Elm tree
or dead Elmwood under the supervision and direction of the Director of Public Works or a duly
authorized representative.
Ord. #06-045)
Section 20-618 Right of Director of Public Works to Enter Premises and Inspect Elm/Elmwood
and Ash/Ashwood Trees. In order to carry out the purposes of this Article and to implement its
enforcement, the Director of Public Works, or a duly authorized representative, is hereby authorized
and empowered to enter upon any lot or parcel of land in the Village at all reasonable hours for the
purpose of inspecting any Elm trees, Ash trees, dead Elmwood or Ashwood situated there and may
remove specimens from any trees as are required for the purpose of laboratory analysis referred to in
Section 20-615 of this Article, or to determine whether the trees, because they are dead or
substantially dead, mayserve as a breeding place for the European Elm Bark Beetle, the Native Elm
Bark Beetle or the Emerald Ash Borer. It shall be unlawful for any person to take any action to
prevent the Director of Public Works, or a duly authorized representative, from entering on any lot or
parcel of land in the Village for the purpose of the inspection, or to interfere with the Director of
Public Works, or a representative, in the performance of any of the duties provided for under the
provisions of this Article.
Ord. #06-045)
Section 20-619 Notice to Owner of Infected Elm/Elmwood or Ash/Ashwood Tree to Comply
with Article. If, on laboratory analysis of specimens removed from any Elm or Ash tree by the
Director of Public Works or a duly authorized representative, it is determined that the tree is a public
nuisance as provided in Section 20-615 of this Article, or if the Director of Public Works determines
that any dead, or substantially dead, Elm tree, Ash tree, dead Elmwood or dead Ashwood, is a public
nuisance as provided by Section 20-616 of this Article, the Director of Public Works shall serve or
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TREES
20-50 REVISED 09/19/16
cause to be served on the owner of the lot or parcel of land on which the tree or dead Elmwood or
dead Ashwood is located, a written notice requiring the owner to comply with the provisions of this
Article. If the person upon whom the notice is served fails, neglects or refuses to remove and destroy
the Elm tree, Ash tree, dead Elmwood or dead Ashwood within 30 days after service of the notice,
the Director of Public Works, or a duly authorized representative, may proceed to remove and
destroy the tree, dead Elmwood or Ashwood.
If the Village removes any tree which is a public nuisance as provided by Section 20-615 or Section
20-616 of this Article, the assessment of the cost of the work done by the Village against the owner
of the lot or parcel of land involved shall be in addition to any penalties imposed in this Code for any
violation or noncompliance with any provision of this Code.
Ord. #16-044)
Section 20-620 Service of Notice. Service of notice shall be by personal service, certified mail, or
delivery service with proof of service, addressed to the owner at his or her last known address.
Ord. #06-045, #12-015)
Section 20-621 Infected Elm/Elmwood and Ash/Ashwood Trees Belonging to Village. AnyElm
tree, Ash tree, dead Elmwood or dead Ashwood, on property owned by the Village, which is a public
nuisance as provided by Section 20-615 or 20-616 of this Article, shall be removed within 30 days
under the supervision of the Director of Public Works or a duly authorized representative, at the
Village’ s expense.
Section 20-622 Insects Declared a Nuisance. Gypsy Moth (Porthetria Dispar) and Eastern Tent
Caterpillar ( Malacosoma Americana) are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. It shall be
unlawful for any owner of any lot or parcel of land in the Village to permit an infestation of egg
masses of gypsy moth or eastern tent caterpillar to remain as a nuisance. It shall be the duty of any
owner to promptly and properly remove and destroy any and all insect nuisance.
Section 20-623 Right of Director of Public Works to Enter Premises and Inspect Trees for
Certain Insects. In order to carry out the purpose of this Article and to implement its enforcement,
the Director of Public Works, or a duly authorized representative, is authorized and empowered to
enter upon any lot or parcel of land in the Village at all reasonable hours for the purpose of
determining the presence of gypsy moth and eastern tent caterpillar insects or egg masses. It shall be
unlawful for any person to take any action to prevent the Director of Public Works, or a duly
authorized representative, from entering on any lot or parcel of land in the Village for inspection or
to interfere with the Director of Public Works or such representative in the performance of any of the
duties provided for under the provisions of this Article.
Ord. #06-045)
Section 20-624 Notice to Owner of Insect Infected Tree to Comply with Article; Failure to
Comply. If it is determined that gypsy moth or eastern tent caterpillar insects or egg masses have
infected trees, the Director of Public Works shall serve or cause to be served on the owner of the lot
or parcel of land on which the nuisance exists, a written notice requiring the owner to comply with
the provisions of this Article. If the person upon whom the notice is served fails, neglects or refuses
to remove and destroy the insect nuisances within thirty days after notice, the Director of Public
Works or a duly authorized representative, may proceed to have the nuisances removed and
destroyed. The cost of the removal shall be assessed against the property owner and shall be paid by
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
20-51 REVISED 09/05/06
the owner to the Village as set forth in Section 20-619. Notice shall be served in accordance with
Section 20-620 of this Code.
Section 20-625 Insect Infected Trees Belonging to Village. All insect nuisances found in trees on
property owned by the Village shall promptly be removed under the supervision of the Director of
Public Works or a duly authorized representative, at the Village’s expense.
Article VII Penalties
Section 20-701 Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Chapter
shall be fined not more than $750 for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day on which the violation occurs or continues.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 04/18/16
CHAPTER 21 WATER
Article I General Provisions
Section 21-101 Definitions
Section 21-102 Design of Water Distribution Facilities
Section 21-103 Supervision of the Municipal Water Works System
Section 21-104 Permits
Section 21-105 Potable Water
Section 21-106 Resale of Water
Section 21-107 Acts of Interference and Tampering
Section 21-108 Design and Construction of the Municipal Water Works System
Section 21-109 Shut-Off Valves
Section 21-110 Water Meters
Section 21-111 Use and Maintenance of Fire Hydrants
Section 21-112 Outdoor Water Use Restrictions
Article II Water Service
Section 21-201 Water Service
Section 21-202 Taps and Connections
Section 21-203 Service Pipes
Section 21-204 Tapping Water Mains
Section 21-205 Notice to Public Works for the Installation of a Tap
Section 21-206 Curb Stop or Roadway Location
Section 21-207 Protection of Mains
Section 21-208 Laying Service Pipe
Article III Water Rates, Billing and Collection
Section 21-301 Billing Schedule
Section 21-302 Water Service Fees
Section 21-303 Delinquent Accounts
Section 21-304 Sewer Maintenance Charges
Section 21-305 When Billed
Section 21-306 When Payable
Section 21-307 Delinquent Accounts
Section 21-308 Lien on Real Estate
Section 21-309 Discontinuing Water Service
Section 21-310 Discontinuing Water Service in Multi-Family Dwellings
Section 21-311 Hearings
Section 21-312 Resumption of Water Service
Article IV Cross Connection Control
Section 21-401 Cross-Connections Prohibited
Section 21-402 Surveys, Inspections and Investigations
Section 21-403 Cross-Connection Prevention
Section 21-404 Cross-Connection Control - Technical Requirements
Section 21-405 Testing and Certification
WATER
21-2
Article I General Provisions
Section 21-101 Definitions.
a. AWWA/ANSI Standards. The current edition of standards published bythe American Water
Works Association and/or the American National Standards Institute.
b. Billable Water Consumption. Auser's measured and recorded water usage as metered bythe
Village-owned water meter.
c. Cross Connection Control Device. Any approved device or methodology, which prevents or
precludes the backflow, backsiphonage or backpressure between one plumbing system and
another.
d. I.E.P.A. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
e. Interface Device. Any and all components, which connect a water meter to a telemetry, data
transmission or relay system.
f. Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements. A document on file with the
Director of Engineering, which establishes design parameters for engineering and
construction in the Village.
g. Municipal Water Works System. All Village owned, operated and maintained watermains,
pipes, valves, hydrants, pumps, storage tanks, meters, cross connection control devices,
structures and appurtenances, collectively or severally, through which or by which potable
water is distributed and furnished to the water customer.
h. M.W.R.D.G.C. The Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Chicago.
i. NFPA. The National Fire Protection Association.
j. Occupant. Any person, firm, or corporation residing, inhabiting, or occupying a public or
private site or building.
k. Potable water. Water that meets the criteria established by the I.E.P.A. in the Illinois
Administrative Code.
l. Primary Shut Off Valve. A device installed on a water service pipe, usually in the public
right-of-way, used to turn on and off water between the municipal water supply and the
private premise.
m. Private Water System. Privately owned, operated and maintained watermains, pipes, valves,
hydrants, structures and appurtenances. Private water systems are typically located after the
primary shut off valve and serve private buildings and/or property.
n. Remote Register Reading Device. A device, which simulates the reading of the water meter
register.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
21-3
o. Water Distribution Facilities. That portion of a water works system that distributes water-towater
customers. (see also municipal water works system).
p. Water Meter. A device installed on a water service pipe for the purpose of measuring and
recording water flow.
q. Water Service Pipe. Apipe connected to the municipal water works system for the purpose
of distributing potable water to a private premise and/or building.
Section 21-102 Design of Water Distribution Facilities. The design of all water distribution
facilities, including water mains, valves, fire hydrants and other appurtenances shall meet the
requirements as specified in the current edition of "A Manual of Practice for the Design of Public
Improvements in the Village of Arlington Heights". Additionally, the design shall conform to
applicableAWWA/ANSI standards, applicable provisions of the "Standard Specifications for Sewer
and Water main Construction in Illinois", and of the " Grading Schedule for Municipal Fire
Protection" as published by the Insurance Services Organization. The design of water facilities in the
Village shall comply with all applicable requirements and technical policy statements of the I.E.P.A.
and the Illinois Department of Health. The hierarchy of applicability, in order of descending
precedence shall be as follows:
1. State Regulations
2. Village Specifications
3. AWWA/ANSI Standards
4. Other applicable provisions
Section 21-103 Supervision of the Municipal Water Works System. The Director of Public
Works shall have general supervision over the operation of the municipal water works system
including wells, storage tanks, water mains, pumps, pump stations, grounds, buildings, water meters,
service pipes, hydrants, valves and any related appurtenances and structures.
Section 21-104 Permits. All applications for permits as required byprovisions of this Chapter shall
be made to the Director of Building. Permits shall be issued and work shall be performed in
accordance with this chapter as well as Chapters 20 and 24 of this Code.
Section 21-105 Potable Water. The water distribution system for any premise or building intended
for human habitation or occupancy shall contain and be supplied by potable water.
Section 21-106 Resale of Water. No water shall be resold by the recipient for a price greater than
the Village's retail price of water. No water shall be resold by the recipient to any premise other than
that for which application has been made. The recipient shall notify the Director of Public Works of
any resale of water obtained from the municipal water supply.
Section 21-107 Acts of Interference and Tampering.
a. No person shall obstruct access to any Village-owned hydrant, valve, corporation cock,
stopcock or other public connection in any manner in any street, alley, easement or public
right-of-way.
WATER
21-4
b. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in any manner to interfere with or obstruct
flow; storage of water, or other authorized use of water from or in the municipal water works
system.
c. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to injure, deface, damage, remove, break,
or alter any water main, hydrant, service pipe, valve, box, building, storage tank, water meter,
cross connection control device or appurtenance or structure which is part of the municipal
water works system. It shall be the responsibility of the entity causing the damage to pay for
the repair or replacement of the damage to the components of the municipal water works
system.
Section 21-108 Design and Construction of the Municipal Water Works System.
a. All extensions of water mains or construction of new water mains shall not be undertaken
unless a permit has been issued pursuant to the applicable provisions of this Code.
b. All construction which includes private improvements shall also include construction of a
water distribution system. That system shall include, at a minimum, adequate water mains,
valves, fire hydrants, and master water meters, as applicable. Water mains shall be provided
to the property line of all public right-of-way frontages as required by the Director of
Engineering.
c. All water distribution systems shall be designed using a minimum distribution pipe diameter
of eight inches (nominal). The water main pipe shall be minimum class 52 ductile iron pipe
unless a waiver is granted by the Director of Public Works.
d. Valves shall be installed on the distribution system on approximately 800-foot centers and at
critical locations identified by the Director of Public Works.
e. Fire hydrants shall be installed on the distribution system near every street intersection.
Intermediate fire hydrants shall be spaced so that the interval between hydrants is
approximately 300 feet. Hydrants and hydrant installation shall comply with detailed
specifications on file with the Director of Engineering.
f. Hydrant and valve spacing and installation on private property shall substantially comply
with the standards established for the municipal water works system subject to review and
modification by appropriate Village departments.
g. Newly extended or constructed water mains shall be pressure tested and disinfected in
accordance with procedures defined by the Director of Engineering and the I.E.P.A.
Section 21-109 Shut-Off Valves.
a. A primary shut off valve shall be installed on every water service pipe and shall be located
within the public right-of-way, where practical. The primary shut off valve shall generally be
located between the public street and public sidewalk or property line. Upon acceptance of
the water service pipe by the appropriate Village department(s), the primary shut off valve
will be owned, operated and maintained by the Village.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
21-5 REVISED 04/18/16
b. Primary shut off valves shall be easily accessible via an approved box or vault. Review and
approval shall be obtained from the Director of Public Works.
c. The primary shut off valve shall be the point at which maintenance responsibility is
determined. The primary shut off valve (including the tapping valves) closest to the Villageowned
and operated Water main shall be maintained by the Village. The service pipe
between the Village-owned and operated water main and the primary shut off valve shall also
be maintained by the Village. The service pipe between the primary shut off valve and the
building and/or water meter shall be maintained by the property owner. All service pipes,
valves, hydrants, and appurtenances within the building or utilizing metered water shall be
maintained by the property owner as provided otherwise in this Code.
Ord. #16-009)
Section 21-110 Water Meters.
a. No premise shall be supplied with water from the municipal water works system until a
meter is installed on the water service pipe and, where applicable, until a remote register
reading device is installed on the exterior of the building being served.
b. The Village shall supply water meter devices, accessories and components for new
customers. The cost of furnishing and installing each water meter and related accessories
shall be paid for as part of the building permit fees for the subject premises.
c. All meters, registers, generators, vaults, interface devices, wires, cables, and appurtenances
used in connection with the municipal water works system shall be supplied by the Village.
Installation of the devices and components shall be accomplished in accordance with policies
established by the Director of Public Works. The devices and components related to the
metering system set forth above shall be owned, operated and maintained by the Village.
The Village will not be responsible for maintenance of valves and/or service pipes attached
to the metering devices or components.
d. The Village will be responsible for maintaining the water meter and accessories in good
working order. Flow measurement accuracy and precision will be governed by applicable
AWWA/ANSI standards. The property owner, occupant or tenant where the meter is
installed is responsible and shall be held liable for any damage and attendant costs resulting
from freezing, tampering, vandalism, etc. to the meter. The cost of repair, replacement,
and/or adjustment of the meter shall be paid by the property owner, occupant, or tenant as
soon as a bill is presented. The amount shall be a lien against the premises in which the
meter is located to the same extent and with the same effect as delinquent water charges and
sewer charges as provided for in Section 21-308 of the Code.
e. Water meters shall be installed in a location that is easily accessible. The installation of the
meter shall ensure that all flows, including fire and domestic, are measured. Actual size,
location and installation of the meter and accessories shall be approved by the Director of
Public Works. No enclosures, cabinets, walls, etc. shall be erected that will obstruct or
interfere with the reading, servicing, testing or replacement of the water meter. Property
owners, occupants, or tenants constructing such obstructions around or near the water meters
shall remove, remodel or relocate the obstruction to provide proper accessibility within ten
days of receiving notice from the Village. Failure to provide reasonable accessibility for
WATER
21-6
maintenance, servicing, testing, repair or replacement of water meters shall be cause for
water service termination and water shut off. Water service will be restored only after proper
access to the water meter has been obtained to the satisfaction of the Director of Public
Works.
f. Water meters and/or remote reading devices shall be read on a frequency determined by the
Finance Director. Authorized representatives of the Village shall be allowed to enter
buildings and/or premises at reasonable hours to make meter readings. In the event water
meter readings cannot be obtained consistent with the established billing schedule, the
Finance Director shall prepare estimated bills, based on historical usage data during similar
billing periods from the preceding year(s).
g. The water meter installed on the water service is the meter of record and shall govern all bill
calculations. The water meter register reading prevails over all other devices and readings.
The remote register readings will be used for convenience in obtaining readings. It is the
responsibility of the water customer, property owner, occupant or tenant to periodically
verify agreement between the water meter reading(s) and the remote register reading(s). Any
discrepancy between the meter readings and the remote register readings shall be
immediately reported to the Village. Whenever a difference in readings exists, the water
meter register reading will be used to determine consumption and to calculate the water bill.
h. Whenever any water meter fails to properly measure, record and register water passing
through the meter, the customer shall be charged at the rate of consumption consistent with
historical usage data during similar billing periods from preceding years. If no historical data
exists, the Finance Director shall estimate the amount of water consumed during the period
of meter failure. It shall be the responsibility of the water customer to pay for the amount of
water consumption estimated by the Finance Director.
i. Water meters shall be tested and replaced on a frequency determined by the Director of
Public Works. Normal repairs and replacement of meters shall be made by the Village at no
cost to the property owner, occupant, or tenant. Costs of repair or replacement of meters
necessitated as a result of freezing, neglect, carelessness or other improper conditions shall
be charged against and collected from the water customer.
j. The Director of Public Works or authorized representative shall be allowed access during all
reasonable hours to all water meters and backflow prevention devices for the purpose of
testing meters for accuracy and testing other devices for satisfactory operation. Tests shall be
conducted annually by the Village on all backflow prevention devices. The fee for testing
Village-owned and maintained backflow prevention devices shall not exceed the charges in
the contract for these services approved by the Board of Trustees and shall be paid by the
users of the backflow prevention devices. All water meters shall be tested at the discretion of
the Director of Public Works and in accordance with the manufacturers' suggested testing
schedules. Additional testing may be required whenever erroneous or erratic meter readings
are registered or when mechanical defects are observed. There shall be no charge for routine
testing of water meters or for testing done at the Village's initiative.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
21-7 REVISED 04/18/16
Any water meter shall also be tested upon a customer’ s complaint or request. Prior to the
test, the customer shall agree in writing to pay testing fees if the meter is certified to be
within three percent of being accurate. There shall be no testing fee if the water meter is
certified as not being within three percent of being accurate. In such cases, the meter shall
either be replaced with a properly certified meter or repaired so that the meter is within three
percent of being accurate. Fees for testing meters at a customer's request and found to be
within three percent of being accurate shall not exceed the charges in the contract for these
services approved by the Board of Trustees.
All testing charges for water meters and backflow prevention devices shall be added to the
water bill on a billing frequency approved by the Finance Director. If such charges and fees
are not paid within 20 days from billing, penalties shall be added in accordance with the
applicable Code provisions.
k. Meter Spreads. The water meter shall be installed within one foot inside the service entrance
or at another location at the written permission of the Director of Public Works. Meter
spreads shall be provided with two shut-off valves, one on the service pipe side, and one on
the house supply side of the meter spread. Valves shall be ball type full port up to two inches
above two inch valves shall be outside stem and yoke. Adrip valve shall be installed between
water meter and outlet valve protected from backflow with a vacuum breaker. The size of the
meter shall be prescribed by the Director of Public Works and the Plumbing Inspector.
l. Setting of Water Meters. The Director of Public Works, or authorized employees, shall
facilitate setting and sealing of all water meters. In no case shall anyone be allowed to
remove or replace any water meter without specific authorization from the Director of Public
Works. Meters shall be installed in a level and horizontal configuration.
Section 21-111 Use and Maintenance of Fire Hydrants.
a. No person, firm or corporation shall open or draw water from any Village fire hydrant
without prior permission from the Director of Public Works.
b. No person, firm or corporation shall tamper, alter, damage or interfere with any Villageowned
fire hydrant.
c. All fire hydrants, public and private, shall be properly inspected, maintained and tested in
accordance withAWWAand NFPA standards. Village-owned hydrants shall be painted red.
Private hydrants whose flows are measured and recorded by a Village-owned meter shall be
painted yellow. Private unmetered hydrants shall be painted red. All nozzle caps shall be
painted with a reflectorized coating as specified by the Director of Public Works.
d. No object shall be erected, constructed, maintained or installed within four feet of a fire
hydrant. This provision includes trees, bushes, shrubs, etc.
e. Water obtained from any Village-owned fire hydrant for any purpose other than fire fighting
or related public safety uses shall be metered and the water consumption shall be billed at a
WATER
21-8 REVISED 11/06/06
rate to be determined by the Finance Director. Payment for such water shall be made in
accordance with policies established by the Finance Director.
Section 21-112 Outdoor Water Use Restrictions.
Ord. #06-067)
a. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use water from the municipal water
works system for the purpose of sprinkling or watering a lawn or garden except between the
hours of 8:00 A.M. and noon or between the hours of 7:00 P.M. and 9:00 P.M., Sunday
through Saturday. Specifically exempt from the requirements of this Section are hand held
hoses or sprinkling cans used for watering.
b. Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this Section shall be fined not less than
25 nor more than $750 for each offense.
c. Temporary 14 day sprinkling permits may be issued by the Director of Public Works to
individuals who have special needs related to newly installed landscape materials.
d. In the event of an interruption to the municipal water works system water supply or in the
event of an emergency, the Village President or Village Manager is hereby authorized to
implement the Village's emergency water use plan and to impose immediate restrictions upon
the use of water for outdoor water users, including but not limited to lawn and garden
sprinkling, swimming pool filling, and ice rink activities. If deemed necessary, water service
to certain users may be curtailed or terminated for the duration of the emergency.
Article II Water Service
Section 21-201 Water Service.
a. No water shall be turned on for service at any premise or in any building in which the
plumbing does not comply with Chapter 24, "Plumbing Regulations". Notwithstanding this
provision, water service may be rendered on a temporary basis by the Director of Public
Works for construction work in progress. Temporary water service of any nature may be
terminated by the Director of Public Works at any time. No water shall be turned on by any
person other than someone authorized by the Director of Public Works.
b. No person shall make a connection to the municipal water works system or install water
service pipes without a permit for each installation or connection. Application for a permit
shall be made to the Director of Building and shall be signed by the owner or tenant of the
premises involved, and by the plumbing contractor by whom the work is to be performed.
The applicant and installer shall comply with all applicable regulations of this Code, the State
of Illinois and any other applicable regulations. The filing of an application for a permit shall
be deemed consent by the owner or occupant involved for authorized Village representatives
to enter upon the property for the purpose of making inspections.
c. All new construction requiring water service must connect to the municipal water works
system if the existing water main is within 100 feet of the subject property.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
21-9 REVISED 11/05/07
d. The permittee for the new construction must extend the water main across the entire frontage
of the property served to facilitate future extensions of the Water main.
e. The existing water well may remain in use if proper cross-connection control devices are
installed.
f. New wells will not be permitted to be drilled to service any property if a water main is
available within 100 feet of the subject property.
Ord. #06-008)
Section 21-202 Taps and Connections.
a. Charges for connection to the municipal water works system shall be based on the size of the
service connection. The charges, to be assessed as part of the permit process, shall be as
follows:
1" $ 350
1-1/2" - 2" $ 400
3" - 4" $ 600
6" - 8" $ 700
10" and larger $ 1,000
Ord. # 07-064)
b. Tapping charges for taps and connections performed by the Village shall be $300 for labor
plus the actual costs for materials. The Public Works Department will furnish the
corporation cock, round way, shut off box, and sufficient copper service pipe between the
corporation cock and the round way. Charges for these materials shall be based on the
Village’ s current vendor prices. The total tapping charge shall be the sum of the labor charge
and the materials charge as determined at the time of the determination of the permit fees.
c. Water Capital Improvement Fees. In addition to all other charges for water service, any other
person applying for a building permit for either new construction or the conversion or
remodeling of existing structures to provide additional units shall pay a water service charge
based on land use, for the purpose of providing funds for capital improvements. The
payment shall be made at the time of building permit application together with all other fees
required and shall be as follows:
single family home $ 320
multi-family dwelling $ 250 per unit
all other developments $ 640 per acre
d. Where new service pipes require tapping of Village-owned water mains and the installation
of shut off boxes, it shall be the responsibility of the permittee, at his or her own expense, to
excavate, shore, fence, connect, backfill and restore in accordance with established Village
procedures.
e. All taps two inches in nominal diameter and smaller shall be made by the Public Works
Department. No taps will be made smaller than one inch in nominal diameter. All taps
greater than two inches in nominal diameter shall be made by the permittee’ s plumbing
contractor.
WATER
21-10 REVISED 04/18/16
Section 21-203 Service Pipes.
a. All water service pipes, including taps, connections and shut off valves, from the Villageowned
water main to the building served shall be installed by, and at the cost of, the property
owner of the premise being served by the municipal water works system.
b. No water service pipes shall be connected to the Village watermain and no water service
pipes shall be installed unless the service pipe conforms to provisions of this Code and
specifications of the Village.
c. All water service pipes, both domestic and fire suppression, shall be metered. Combination
domestic/fire suppression service lines are permissible.
d. It is the responsibility of the property owner, occupant or tenant to prevent the water service
line, including meters, backflow preventers and accessories, from freezing. Costs arising
from the repair or replacement of Village-owned equipment or devices damaged by freezing
shall be paid for by the property owner, occupant or tenant. Penalties may also be assessed.
e. Primary shut off valves shall be installed on every water service pipe in accordance with
provisions of this Code. To the extent practical, primary shut off valves shall be located in
accordance with Section 21-109a of this Code.
f. All repairs and replacement of water service pipes between the primary shut off valve and the
building shall be the responsibility of the property owner. The Village shall own and
maintain the water service pipe between the Village-owned watermain and the primary shut
off valve. The Village may, in case of emergency, repair any water service pipe. The costs
for emergency repairs performed by the Village on private water service pipes shall be paid
by the property owner. In non-emergency cases, if repairs are not made within ten days after
written notice by the Director of Public Works, the water service may be terminated or the
defects repaired by the Village, all at the expense of the property owner.
g. The Village may terminate or refuse service to any person, firm or corporation who violates
any ordinance, rule, regulation or policy of the Village pertaining to the municipal water
works system or plumbing regulations. Violations of rules, regulations and policies
promulgated by the I.E.P.A. and/or M.W.R.D.G.C. may also be grounds for termination or
refusal of Village water service. This shall be in addition to any general penalties, which
may be imposed for violations of this Code.
Ord. #16-009)
Section 21-204 Tapping Water Mains. Only persons authorized by the Director of Public Works
shall be permitted to tap the street main or corporation cocks therein. All corporation cocks shall be
inserted at twelve o'clock position of the street main, and in no case nearer than eighteen-inches from
a joint or an existing tap. When the street main is less than five feet below curb grade, the tap shall
be made in a manner to least expose the service pipe to damage by frost. All house service taps to
mains shall be made under pressure using a Mueller (or equivalent) tapping and inserting machine.
The service pipe shall have a right hand bend. All tapping saddles shall be corrosion resistant.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
21-11 REVISED 04/18/16
Ord. #16-009)
Section 21-205 Notice to Public Works for the Installation of a Tap. The Public Works
Department shall be given at least 24 hours’ notice of the date, place and time that a water tap is
desired. The excavation for the tapper shall be at least three feet wide and four feet long for taps up
to two inches and shall be at least four feet wide and six feet long where a cut must be made in the
main. If the excavation is not of sufficient size or is not properly dug and it becomes necessary for
the Village to return to the job a second time, a charge in addition to the regular tapping fee shall be
made in the sum of $250 for each successive time that the Village has to return. The excavation must
be properly shored by the excavator in accordance with applicable Occupational Health and Safety
Administration (OSHA) standards. The excavation shall be inspected by an authorized Village
representative prior to tapping.
Ord. #16-009)
Section 21-206 Curb Stop or Roadway Location. Each water service pipe shall have a "T" handle
roadway stopcock installed in the right-of-way. The line of service pipe shall be approximately at
right angles to the main. Each curb stop shall be protected with a cast iron service saddle type stop
box with the word "Water" cast on its cover. The stop box shall be placed plumb and square over the
stopcock and leveled with the right-of-way grade. The contractor making the installation shall adjust
the stop box to grade where necessary. The round way shall be supported bya concrete base having a
minimum cross-section area of 64 square inches.
In new subdivisions, the general contractor or builder shall be responsible for seeing that stop boxes
are kept to grade and in good condition; after their initial installation has been approved, the general
contractor or builder shall be liable for the expense of replacing or repairing the stop boxes. Stop
boxes shall be of the saddle type and properly blocked. Minneapolis Pattern Boxes are not
acceptable.
The corporation cock (tapered thread), curb stops and all fittings for installations, and shall be of the
A.Y. McDonald, Mueller line or an approved equivalent. All fittings shall be configured for flare
connections. Connections to corporation cocks shall in all cases be made by persons authorized to
make the taps.
Ord. #16-009)
Section 21-207 Protection of Mains. No person shall make any excavation in any street within four
and one-half feet of the water main while the ground is frozen, except with the written permission of
the Director of Public Works. This permission shall specify adequate provisions to protect the main
from freezing, and the excavation work shall be conducted only under the conditions set forth in the
permission.
Ord. #16-009)
Section 21-208 Laying Service Pipe. The copper service pipe from the corporation cock to the
round way and to the water meter shall be of one continuous piece, except where fittings are
required. Over 60 feet, the use of joints shall be kept to a minimum. The service pipe shall be buried
in a minimum of 12 inches of sand. On completion of compaction of sand back fill, remaining back
fill in trench shall be free of rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks, construction debris or other
rubble detrimental to piping.
The service pipe and all related parts and connections shall not have less than five and one-half feet
of cover, measured from the finished grade to the top of the service pipe.
WATER
21-12 REVISED 04/18/16
Water and sewer services shall be installed in separate trenches with a minimum separation of ten
feet. When this separation is impractical, the Plumbing Inspector may allow a lesser separation, on
the conditions as shall be required for protection of the safety of the water supply line, in accordance
with applicable sections of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) requirements.
Article III Water Rates, Billing and Collection
Section 21-301 Billing Schedule. Unless specifically provided elsewhere, all residential water bills
shall be computed on a bi-monthly basis and all commercial and industrial water bills shall be
computed on either a monthly or bi-monthly basis, as determined by the Finance Director. The
Village shall be divided into districts for the purpose of issuing bills. Boundaries of these districts
may be changed from time to time as needed.
Ord. #97-005, #07-082, # 09-024, #14-046)
Section 21-302 Water Service Fees. Water service from the Village water system shall be billed in
two component parts.
a. All water consumed from the Village water system shall be billed at the following rate:
4.42/per thousand gallons for bills issued on or after May 1, 2014
4.64/per thousand gallons for bills issued on or after May 1, 2015
5.52/per thousand gallons for bills issued on or after January 1, 2016
5.80/per thousand gallons for bills issued on or after January 1, 2017
6.09/per thousand gallons for bills issued on or after January 1, 2018
6.39/per thousand gallons for bills issued on or after January 1, 2019
b. All bills shall include a service charge, which shall be determined by meter size, as set forth
below for bills issued on a bi-monthly basis:
Nominal Meter Size Charge
5/8" or 3/4" (includes residential meters) $ 5.20
1" $ 6.10
1½" $ 7.60
2" $ 9.50
3" $ 13.90
4" $ 20.20
6" $ 35.90
8" $ 61.10
10" and larger $ 95.60
For bills issued on a monthly basis, the service charge for each monthly period shall be onehalf
of the bi-monthly charge set forth above for the relevant meter size.
Section 21-303 Delinquent Accounts. All statements, including penalties, still remaining unpaid
20 days following the penalty date as established in Section 21-306 shall be deemed and are hereby
declared to be delinquent, as provided by law.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
21-13 REVISED 09/15/14
Ord. #97-005, #07-082, # 09-024, #10-020, # 14-046)
Section 21-304 Sewer Maintenance Charges. Pursuant to Sections 22-301 and 22-302 of this
Code, all water bills shall also list sewer maintenance charges for both users connected to the Village
water system and users not connected to the water system but connected to Village-owned sanitary
and combined sewers.
For properties connected to Village sewers and users of the Village water system, the charge shall be
as follows:
1.14 per thousand gallons of water consumption for bills issued on or after May 1, 2014
1.20 per thousand gallons of water consumption for bills issued on or after May 1, 2015
1.42 per thousand gallons of water consumption for bills issued on or after January 1, 2016
1.50 per thousand gallons of water consumption for bills issued on or after January 1, 2017
1.57 per thousand gallons of water consumption for bills issued on or after January 1, 2018
1.65 per thousand gallons of water consumption for bills issued on or after January 1, 2019
For properties connected to Village sewers but not users of the Village water system, the bi-monthly
sewer maintenance charge shall be as follows:
Residential:
41.04 for bills issued on or after May 1, 2014
43.09 for bills issued on or after May 1, 2015
51.28 for bills issued on or after January 1, 2016
53.84 for bills issued on or after January 1, 2017
56.54 for bills issued on or after January 1, 2018
59.36 for bills issued on or after January 1, 2019
Commercial:
190.31 for bills issued on or after May 1, 2014
199.83 for bills issued on or after May 1, 2015
237.79 for bills issued on or after January 1, 2016
249.68 for bills issued on or after January 1, 2017
262.17 for bills issued on or after January 1, 2018
275.27 for bills issued on or after January 1, 2019
Section 21-305 When Billed. Bills for water and sewer charges shall be mailed to each customer
on or before 30 days following the last day of the billing period.
Section 21-306 When Payable. Bills for water and sewer charges shall be due and payable when
rendered. For any bill which remains unpaid 21 days following the date the bill was issued, a penalty
in the amount of ten percent of the amount due shall be added to the bill. The penalty date and the
total amount due thereafter shall be separately listed on all bills.
Section 21-307 Delinquent Accounts. All statements, including penalties and payments due under
a deferred payment agreement, still remaining unpaid 20 days following issuance shall be deemed
delinquent.
Section 21-308 Lien on Real Estate. Delinquent water and sewer fees shall be a lien on the
premises, as provided by law. Whenever a statement for either water or sewer service remains
WATER
21-14 REVISED 12/20//04
unpaid 60 days after it has been issued, the Finance Director maycause to be filed with the Recorder
of Deeds of Cook County a notice of lien claim. This notice shall contain the legal description of the
premises served, the amount of the unpaid statement, and an assertion that the Village claims a lien
for this amount as well as for the amount of all charges subsequent to the period covered by the
statement.
If the consumer or user whose statement is unpaid is not the owner of the premises in question, and
the Finance Director has knowledge of that, then the Finance Director shall mail a notice to the
owner of the premises, if the owner's address is known to the Finance Director, whenever statements
remain unpaid for the 60-day period.
The failure of the Finance Director to record or register the lien claim or to mail notice to the owner,
or the failure of the owner to receive the notice, shall not affect the right of the Village to foreclose
the lien for unpaid, delinquent water charges or sewer rentals. A lien for unpaid, delinquent water
charges may be foreclosed in the same manner and with the same effect as the foreclosure of
mortgages on real estate.
Section 21-309 Discontinuing Water Service. After a statement becomes delinquent, a Notice of
Delinquency shall be mailed to the customer that the delinquency exists and that payment must be
made within 20 days. In the event payment is not made by the date set in the Notice of Delinquency,
the Finance Director or designee shall cause written Notice of Discontinuance of Water Service to be
served, either by personal service or certified mail return receipt requested, upon the owner, occupant
or water service user. This notice must contain the following information:
a. the balance due including any penalty charges;
b. the number of days the account is in arrears;
c. the date by which payment or other action must be made to avoid shutoff which shall not be
less than seven days after service of the Notice of Discontinuance;
d. the name, title, address and phone number of the person to contact for a resolution of the
customer's complaints and the opportunity to have a hearing on the complaint before that
person; and
Ord. #04-077)
e. that there will be a standard charge of $50 for discontinuance of water service.
Water service will then be discontinued within five business days of the shut-off date provided in
this Notice. If service is not discontinued within five business days, the Village shall not discontinue
service until at least five days after delivery of a new Notice of Discontinuance. The Village shall
not discontinue water service after 2:00 p.m. unless the Village is prepared to resume water service
the same day at the standard charge for resumption of water service. No service shall be
discontinued on a holiday or weekend day unless the Village is prepared to resume water service on
the holiday or weekend day.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent discontinuance of water service for reasons of
safety, health, or cooperation with other civil authorities.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
21-15 REVISED 12/20/04
Section 21-310 Discontinuing Water Service in Multi-Family Dwellings. In buildings with three
or more residential apartments, in addition to the procedures set forth above, the Notice of
Discontinuance of Water Service shall include:
a. statement of the statutory right of tenants to either pay amounts due and owing to the Village
and deduct that amount from the rent or petition the court for a receiver to collect rent and to
pay bills;
b. the amount due and owing and the average monthly bill; and
c. if available, the name and telephone number of a legal services agency in the area where they
may obtain free legal assistance.
The Notice must be a conspicuous size, on red paper, and in at least 14-point bold face type, except
that if the Notice is posted, the words "Notice of Utility Service Termination" shall be in 36-point
bold face type.
Section 21-311 Hearings. The Finance Director shall hear all matters relating to disputes or
complaints regarding water billing. The Finance Director shall consider the complainant's allegations
and shall explain the user's account and the contention of the Village in connection therewith. The
Finance Director shall be authorized to act on behalf of the Village in resolving the complaint. The
Finance Director shall be available during all business hours for hearing complaints. In the event he
or she is not available during business hours, the Deputy Director of Finance shall conduct the
hearing.
Ord. #04-077)
Section 21-312 Resumption of Water Service. Water shall not be turned on again until all
arrearages together with any penalties have been paid or the parties have entered into a deferred
payment agreement. In addition, a $50 fee shall be paid prior to the resumption of water service to
cover the cost of turning on the water. Once payment is received in cash, money order, cashier's
check or certified check only, the Finance Director shall instruct the Director of Public Works to
resume water service.
Article IV Cross Connection Control
Section 21-401 Cross-Connections Prohibited.
a. In accordance with the Illinois State Plumbing Code, the Illinois Environmental Protection
Act and this Code, the Village hereby establishes a cross-connection control program. The
purpose of this program is to protect the Village of Arlington Heights Municipal Water
Supply from contamination or pollution and to promote the elimination or control of actual
or potential cross-connections.
b. Connections between the municipal water works system and other water systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of known or unknown quality are prohibited
unless approved cross-connection control devices are installed, tested, certified and
maintained to insure proper operation and protection.
WATER
21-16
c. No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable water portion of any water
system and any portion of a system not equal in terms of bacteriological and chemical
quality. There shall not be any type of connection or conveyance allowed which can
introduce, or has the potential to introduce, an unsafe substance into a potable water supply
system.
d. No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or
permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary, or emergency water
supply or source, other than the Village public water supply, may enter the supply or
distribution system of the Village water works system.
Section 21-402 Surveys, Inspections and Investigations.
a. The Director of Public Works shall have the right of entry into any building and on to any
premise, during reasonable hours, for the purpose of making inspections to determine
existence of cross-connections or potential cross-connections between the municipal water
works system and a private plumbing system. Consistent refusal to allow inspection of a
specific building or premise may be cause for requirement of installation of a suitable
backflow prevention device and/or termination of water service.
b. Surveys, inspections and investigations shall be made by the Director of Public Works or
authorized agent on an interval determined to be reasonable, proper, and sufficient to insure
that cross-connections do not exist.
c. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, occupant or tenant of a building or
premises to periodically survey, or arrange to periodically survey, or arrange to have
surveyed, the water use practices in the building or on the premise to determine whether there
are actual or potential cross-connections between the private plumbing system and the
municipal water works system.
Section 21-403 Cross-Connection Prevention.
a. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, occupant or tenant of a building or
premise to prevent potential or actual cross-connections ( Including backflow, back
siphonage, and back pressure) between the municipal water works system and a private water
system.
b. Cross-connections, both potential and actual shall be removed or prevented byinstallation of
approved cross-connection control devices.
c. Cross-connection control devices used to protect the municipal water works system must
comply with specifications of University of Southern California Foundation for Crossconnection
Control and Hydraulic Research, the National Sanitation Foundation, and
AWWACross-connection Control Devices used on fire suppression systems shall be listed
by Underwriters Labs and Factory Mutual. The devices protecting the municipal water
works system shall be approved by and supplied by and owned by the Village of Arlington
Heights. Costs for said devices shall be paid for in accordance with procedures established
by the Village.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
21-17
Section 21-404 Cross-Connection Control - Technical Requirements.
a. Potable water systems shall be designed, constructed and maintained in such a manner so as
to prevent contamination from non-potable liquids, solids, and/or gasses.
b. Unless the municipal water supply is protected from cross-connections, connection to the
potable water supply system is prohibited for the following:
1. Animal grooming and treatment clinics.
2. Barber and cosmetology fixtures.
3. Bidets.
4. Car washes.
5. Drainage waste and vent systems.
6. Fire suppression systems.
7. Food service equipment
8. Heating and cooling plants.
9. Laundry and dry cleaning equipment.
10. Medical facilities.
11. Non-community water sources.
12. Nuclear and radioactive related equipment.
13. Photo processing facilities.
14. Printing shops.
15. Pumps for non-potable water, chemicals, or other substances.
16. Surgery, dissection, embalming or mortuary tables or similar equipment.
17. Other hazards identified by I.E.P.A. or the Director of Public Works.
c. Air gaps shall be provided between all water outlets, faucets, etc. The air gap shall be at least
twice the dimension of the nominal opening of the outlet or faucet. In no case shall the air
gap be less than one inch.
d. In general, only reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices will be used to
protect the municipal water works system from cross-connections. The Director of Public
Works shall determine the type of cross-connection control device required to protect the
Village water works from contamination from non-potable sources.
e. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be installed in accordance with
the manufacturer’ s recommendations. The installer shall follow I.E.P.A. guidelines for
installation and install them in a location determined by the Director of Public Works. As a
minimum, the installation of the devices shall reflect the following provisions:
1. Readily accessible for maintenance, repair, testing, and certification.
2. Protection from flooding, freezing or overheating.
3. Draining of the relief port must be accommodated. Replacement of the relief port
must also be accommodated.
WATER
21-18
4. The device must be easily removed and replaced with minimal plumbing work
involved.
Section 21-405 Testing and Certification.
a. The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for testing and certification of all
cross-connection control devices protecting the municipal water works system from
contamination.
b. Testing and certification of all cross-connection control devices shall be done at least
annually.
c. Each device shall have a tag attached listing the following information:
1. Date of most recent test.
2. Name of cross-connection control device inspector.
3. Type and date of repairs, if any.
d. Costs for testing of cross-connection control devices protecting the municipal water works
system shall be paid by the property owner, occupant, or tenant as provided for in this
chapter.
e. Costs for maintaining, repairing or replacing cross-connection control devices protecting the
municipal water works system shall be borne by the Village, unless the maintenance, repair
or replacement is necessitated by freezing, negligence or other controllable act.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 04/18/16
CHAPTER 22 SEWERS
Article I General Provisions
Section 22-101 Definitions
Section 22-102 Supervision of Sewer System
Section 22-103 Inspections
Section 22-104 Use of Public Sewers Required
Section 22-105 Sewer Service
Section 22-106 Storm Sewers and Surface Water
Section 22-107 All Sewers - Prohibited Uses
Section 22-108 Where Public Sewer Unavailable
Section 22-109 Defective Sewers
Section 22-110 Damage to Sewers
Section 22-111 Plumbing and Design Regulations
Section 22-112 Sanitary and Storm Sewer Service Line Maintenance Repair
Section 22-113 Property Lines
Article II Construction and Connections
Section 22-201 Permit Required
Article III Sewer Maintenance Charges
Section 22-301 Sewer Maintenance Charges to Users of Village Water
Section 22-302 Sewer Maintenance Charges to Private Water Users
Article IV Septic Tanks
Section 22-401 Permit Required
Section 22-402 Construction Specifications
Section 22-403 Septic Tanks - Discontinuance
Article V Illicit Discharge Ordinance
Section 22-501 Purpose
Section 22-502 Definitions
Section 22-503 Applicability
Section 22-504 Administration
Section 22-505 Severability
Section 22-506 Minimum Standards
Section 22-507 Prohibitions on Discharges
Section 22-508 Prohibition of Illicit Connections
Section 22-509 Suspension of MS4 Access
Section 22-510 Industrial or Construction Discharges
Section 22-511 Monitoring of Discharges
Section 22-512 Best Management Practices Required
Section 22-513 Watercourse Protection
Section 22-514 Notification of Spills
Section 22-515 Enforcement
Section 22-516 Appeal of Notice of Violation
Section 22-517 Enforcement Measures After Appeal
Section 22-518 Cost of Abatement
Section 22-519 Injunctive Relief
Section 22-520 Violations Deemed Public Nuisance
SEWERS
22-2 REVISED 10/05/15
Section 22-521 Remedies Not Exclusive
Article V Industrial Wastes
Section 22-501 Discharge of Industrial Wastes
Section 22-502 Discharges to Natural Outlets
Article VI Penalty
Section 22-601 Penalty
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
22-3 REVISED 07/07/08
Article I General Provisions
Ord. #08-022)
Section 22-101 Definitions. For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
a. Break-In Connection. A connection of the service lateral to the main sewer made by
breaking or puncturing the wall of the main sewer by a method which does not provide a
fitting or saddle. A break-in lateral connection typically protrudes into the main sewer and
has a cement mortar seal.
b. Combined Sewer. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
c. Garbage. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the
handling, storage and sale of produce.
d. Industrial Wastes. The liquid wastes from food preparation, industrial and manufacturing
processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
e. Maintenance. Keeping the sanitary sewer connection, sewer lines or other sewer facilities in
satisfactory working condition and good state of repair.
f. MWRDGC. The Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago.
g. Natural Outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, pond, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
h. pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of the
solution.
i. Private Sewer System. A sewer maintained by a property owner or property owner’s
association as specified in an agreement with the Village.
j. Properly Shredded Garbage. Garbage which has been shredded to such degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one- half inch in any dimension.
k. Saddle Connection. A connection of the service lateral to the main sewer using an exterior
saddle fitting of Wye or Tee configuration. The saddle fitting is typically secured to the
exterior of the main sewer using stainless steel bands, flexible non-shear couplings or other
approved mechanical fastening devices.
l. Sanitary Sewer. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground
waters are not intentionally admitted.
m. Sewage. Any combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, buildings, industrial
establishments, institutions, manufacturing plants, processing plants, or other places in which
such wastes are produced, or ground, surface, storm, or other water as may be present.
n. Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage or storm water.
SEWERS
22-4 REVISED 07/07/08
o. Sewer Cleanout. A connection and riser pipe that allows the property owner to access the
service lateral from outside of the building served.
p. Sewer Customer. The owner of each specific building or unit connected to the public sewer
system.
q. Sewer Service Line. The pipe or conduit carrying sewage or storm water from a building,
unit or premise to the publicly owned or maintained sewer mainline.
r. Storm Sewer or Storm Drain. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage
but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
s. Storm Water Restrictor. A device to regulate the discharge of storm water into the public
storm sewer system.
t. Suspended Solids. The dry weight of the solids physically suspended in a flow of sewage,
industrial waste or water, as determined by the method of determining suspended matter
described under the heading " Suspended Matter" in the Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage (Latest Edition), as published jointly by the American
Public Health Association and the American Water Works Association, and expressed in
parts per million by weight.
u. Tee Connection. A connection of the service lateral to the main sewer via an integral 90
degree angle fitting.
v. Wye Connection. A connection of the service lateral to the main sewer via an integral 45
degree angle fitting.
Section 22-102 Supervision of Sewer System. The Director of Engineering shall have direct
responsibility for the construction, and the Director of Public Works shall have direct responsibility
for maintenance and care of the public sewer system of the Village.
Section 22-103 Inspections. All inspections required to be made in regard to permits issued
pursuant to this Chapter shall be made by the appropriate Village inspector.
Section 22-104 Use of Public Sewers Required.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to discharge into any natural outlet
within the Village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Village, any sanitary sewage,
industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided
under Article V of this Chapter.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct or maintain any privy,
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage,
except as specifically authorized and permitted by the provisions of this Chapter.
c. The owner of all houses, buildings and properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purposes, located within the Village and abutting on any street, alley or
right-of-way in which there is now located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the
Village, is hereby required, at his or her own expense, to install suitable toilet facilities, and
to connect those facilities with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
22-5 REVISED 04/18/16
this Chapter and the provisions of Chapter 24, "Plumbing Regulations," within 90 days after
date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the
property line upon which the premises are located.
Ord. #16-009)
Section 22-105 Sewer Service. Every building and every unit of a row house or townhouse shall
have separate connections with a public or private sewer, or other permitted disposal system. Main
sewer connection being tapped will be done by use of a coring machine. Core hole must be present at
time of inspection. Sewer connection can be made with band saddle, stainless steel bands or rubber
insert boot in accordance with manufacturer’ s recommendations.
Section 22-106 Storm Sewers and Surface Water.
a. New connections.
1. Combined Sewer Areas. In areas designated as " Combined Sewer Areas" on the
Metropolitan Sanitary District maps, the following requirements shall apply:
a) Separation. Complete separation of sewers shall be provided within the
property lines.
b) Detention. Detention shall be provided and/or permanent constrictions shall
be built on the storm sewer system to control the flow into the existing
combined system in accordance with the requirements of the Director of
Engineering.
c) Down- Spouts. All downspouts or roof drains shall discharge onto the ground
or be connected to storm or combined sewer. No downspouts or roof drains
shall be connected to the sanitary sewers.
d) Footing Drains. Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps, and
discharge shall be made into storm sewers, combined sewers or drainage
ditches. No footing drains or drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary
sewer.
e) Floor Drains. Floor drains in basements shall be connected to sump pumps
and discharged to the sanitary or combined sewers.
f) Sump Pumps. Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge ground waters
or other storm waters shall be connected to the storm of combined sewers or
discharge into a drainage ditch. Sump pumps installed to receive and
discharge floor drain flow or other sanitary sewage shall be connected to the
sanitary or combined sewers. A sump pump shall be used for one function
only, either the discharge of storm waters or the discharge of sanitary sewage.
b. Storm Water Sump Pump Discharges. The discharge piping from sump pumps installed to
receive and discharge ground waters or other storm waters shall be terminated no more than
ten feet from the building unless written approval is granted by the Director of Engineering.
The storm water discharged shall be directed so as to not create a nuisance on any adjacent
property.
SEWERS
22-6 REVISED 07/07/08
Section 22-107 All Sewers - Prohibited Uses. All discharges to the Municipal Sewer System shall
conform to applicable standards established by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and
MWRDGC.
Section 22-108 Where Public Sewer Unavailable. Where a public sewer is not available, or where
the use of a public sewer is not required under the provisions of this Chapter, upon the prior written
permission of the Director of Public Works, a septic tank or other sewage disposal system may be
employed if in conformity with the regulations and provisions of the Cook County Health
Department and this Code.
Section 22-109 Defective Sewers. All repairs and replacements of building sewers or drains from
the Village sanitary or combined sewer to the building shall be made by and at the expense of the
owner of the premises served, and shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of this
Code, including permits. Whenever a building sewer or drain is obstructed or otherwise found to be
broken or defective, so that sewage or drainage escapes into the surrounding soil or into adjacent
premises, repair or replacement of sewers or drains shall be performed by the owner within ten days
after receipt of written notice from the Village, unless the conditions resulted from improvements
constructed by the Village or through operations allowed in right-of-way through permits issued by
the Village. In those circumstances, repairs shall be the responsibility of the Village or the permittee.
Section 22-110 Damage to Sewers. No unauthorized person, firm or corporation shall maliciously,
willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is part of the municipal sewer system.
Section 22-111 Plumbing and Design Regulations. All work, including design, performed under
the provisions of this Code shall also conform to all applicable laws and regulations, including A
Manual for the Design of Public Improvements In The Village Of Arlington Heights.
Ord. #08-022)
Section 22-112 Sanitary and Storm Sewer Service Line Maintenance and Repair.
a. The proper maintenance and operation of a sanitary building line to the point of connection
to the municipal sanitary sewer system shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
premises served by such sanitary sewer pipes. Maintenance includes, but is not limited to,
preventing any obstruction or extraneous materials or flows from entering such facilities,
protecting such facilities from any damage, and keeping same free from defects or
malfunctions. The premise owner shall make necessary provisions and take necessary
precautions to assure that such sewer facilities are at all times capable of satisfactorily
performing the services and adequately discharging the functions and producing the final
results and purposes such facilities are intended to perform, discharge or produce.
Maintenance of the premise owner’ s service line shall include rodding due to blockage or
root intrusion emanating from private or public trees and/ or repairs due to a collapsed pipe.
Maintenance of the privately owned and maintained sewer service line shall include all pipe
and structures beginning with the connection to the public sewer up to and including the
building connection and will be the responsibility of the premise owner.
This maintenance responsibility shall include all portions of the sewer service line located
in the public right-of-way.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
22-7 REVISED 04/18/16
b. The Village may, in the case of an emergency, repair any sewer line connected to the public
sanitary sewer. If the Village does such repairs, the cost of such repair work shall bepaidto
the Village by the owner of the premises served for the service within 30 days after the
Village issues an invoice for the costs.
c. The costs of cleanup on private property and repair for any backup due to the condition of
the sewer service line shall be borne by the premise owner.
d. All repairs to that portion of the main sewer line or pipe encompassed within its outer
circumference, as extended longitudinally, shall be made by and at the expense of the
Village. All repairs to that portion of the sewer service line lying outside of the outer
circumference, as extended longitudinally, or the sewer main, shall be made by and at the
expense of the owner of the premises served. All repairs to the sewer service line,
including that portion of the connection, Wye or Tee lying outside of the outer
circumference of the sewer main, shall be made by and at the expense of the owner of the
premises served.
e. In the event that a protruding break- in connection of a sewer service line requires repair, it
shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises served to remove the protruding
pipe from the sewer main and to install a properly installed Wye or Tee connection with
saddle, properly cored hole into the public main, and proper method of securing the saddle
to the main.
f. Sewer cleanouts shall be owned and maintained by the premise/building owner. Cleanouts
shall not be installed in the public right-of-way.
g. Storm water restrictors shall be owned and maintained by the premise/ building owner.
Storm water restrictors shall not be installed in Village- owned manholes.
Ord. #16-009)
Section 22-113 Property Lines. All appurtenances to building drains and building sewers, including
catch basins, manholes, clean- outs, backwater valves and fittings, shall be located within the
property lines of the premises served by such drains and sewers unless otherwise permitted
specifically by the Director of Public Works and Director of Engineering.
Article II Construction and Connections
Section 22-201 Permit Required.
a. No person, firm or corporation shall install or repair any sewer, drain tile or catch basin
without first obtaining a permit from the Director of Building. Application for a permit shall
be made to the Director of Building and shall be signed by the owner or tenant of the
premises involved, and by the plumbing contractor or person, firm or corporation who is to
perform the work.
Ord. #04-077)
b. If the Director of Building finds that the application conforms to the provisions of this Code,
and upon the receipt of a fee in the sum of $50 for each permit, a permit for the work shall be
issued.
SEWERS
22-8
c. All excavations in connection with the work to be performed under the permit shall be made
in accordance with the applicable requirements of Chapter 20, except that the issuance of a
permit pursuant to this Section shall be in lieu of the permit required under Chapter 20,
provided that all bonds required to be made under that Chapter have been filed.
d. The contractor shall notify the Director of Building at least 24 hours before commencing
work under the permit.
e. No excavation performed in connection with the permit shall be backfilled before the work
has been inspected and approved by the appropriate Village inspector.
f. Filing an application for a permit pursuant to this Section shall be deemed consent by the
owner or tenant of the premises involved to the entry upon the premises by the Director of
Building or a duly authorized representative for the purposes of making inspections.
g. All work must be performed in accordance with applicable provisions of the MWRDGC
manual and, if required, a permit must be obtained from the MWRDGC.
Article III Sewer Maintenance Charges
Section 22-301 Sewer Maintenance Charges to Users of Village Water. A system of sewer
maintenance charges for the use of the public sewer system of the Village shall be established from
time to time by specific ordinance.
Section 22-302 Sewer Maintenance Charges to Private Water Users.
a. A system of sewer maintenance charges for premises having private water supplies shall be
established from time to time by specific ordinance.
b. Immediately upon the delinquency of a statement for maintenance charges arising under the
provisions of this Section 22-302, the Collector shall notify the Director of Public Works
who shall cause the sewer service to be disconnected in accordance with the provisions for
terminating of water service. Such sewer service shall not be reconnected without the
payment in full of such sewer maintenance charges, together with all penalties and arrearage,
and the payment of the cost of such disconnection and reconnection of the sewer service.
c. The provisions of Sections 21-306, 21-307, 21-309, 21-310, 21-311 and 21-312 respecting
the collection of water charges and the terminating of water service shall be equally
applicable to the collection of sewer maintenance charges and termination of sewer service
arising under the provisions of Section 22-302.
Article IV Septic Tanks
Section 22-401 Permit Required.
a. No person, firm or corporation shall install a septic tank on any lot in the Village before
securing a permit. Application for a permit shall be made to the Director of Building and
shall contain a covenant by the owner of the premises that the owner or successors in interest,
shall not urge or assert the existence of the septic tank in opposition to the installation of a
sewer main to serve the premises, or as a reason for reducing any assessment for the cost
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
22-9 REVISED 04/18/16
thereof. No permit for a septic tank shall be issued if a public sewer is existing within 100
feet of the property line.
b. All permits issued shall be conditional upon full compliance with all applicable requirements
of this Code.
c. The Director of Building shall issue the permit, upon receipt of a fee in the amount of $15.
Section 22-402 Construction Specifications. All septic tanks shall be constructed, inspected,
tested, approved, maintained or closed up and abandoned, pursuant to the applicable provisions of
Chapter 24, and the latest Cook County Health Department Standards.
Ord. #16-009)
Section 22-403 Septic Tanks - Discontinuance. When connection is made to sewer mains, as
required by the provisions of Section 22-402 or under other circumstances, all septic tanks, vaults,
cisterns or cesspools used on the premises shall be emptied out and the waste contents hauled away.
Thereafter, the receptacles shall be filled with sand or limestone screening and shall be abandoned.
The Health Department must review the site plans.
Ord. #15-036)
Article V Illicit Discharge Ordinance
Section 22-501 Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Village of Arlington Heights through the regulation of non-stormwater
discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal
and state law. This Article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. This Article is intended to:
1) Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
by stormwater discharges by any user;
2) Prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and
3) Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures
necessary to ensure compliance with this Article.
Section 22-502 Definitions. For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions are adopted:
a. Authorized Enforcement Agent. The Director of Public Works and/or the Director of
Engineering or designee.
b. Best Management Practices ( BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge
of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance
systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to
control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage.
SEWERS
22-10 REVISED 10/05/15
c. Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) and any
subsequent amendments thereto.
d. Construction Activity. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include
construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities
include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
e. Hazardous Materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof,
that because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics
may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
f. Illegal Discharge. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drainage
system, except as exempted in Section 507 of this Article.
g. Illicit Connections. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drainage system including, without limitation,
any conveyances that allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drainage system; any connections to the storm
drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an Authorized Enforcement Agent;
or any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm
drainage system that has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and
approved by an Authorized Enforcement Agent.
h. Industrial Activity. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR,
Section 122.26 (b)(14).
i. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit. A
permit issued by EPA [or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)]
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit
is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
j. Non- stormwater Discharge. Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not composed
entirely of stormwater.
k. Pollutant. Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, without
limitation: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous
liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes;
wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or
offensive matter of any kind.
l. Storm Drainage System. Publicly- owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/ or
conveyed, including without limitation, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins,
natural and human- made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
22-11
m. Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any
form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
n. Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. A document that describes the best management
practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of
pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant
discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
o. Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged
from a facility.
Section 22-503 Applicability. This Article shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage
system generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
Authorized Enforcement Agent.
Section 22-504 Administration. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Authorized
Enforcement Agent may be delegated in writing by the director of the Authorized Enforcement
Agent to persons or entities acting on behalf of or in the employment of the Village of Arlington
Heights.
Section 22-505 Severability. If any provision of this Article, or the application of any provision of
this Article, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect, impair, or
invalidate other provisions of this Article, or their application, that can be given effect without the
unconstitutional or invalid provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or
application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Article.
Section 22-506 Minimum Standards. The standards set forth in this Article are minimum
standards. This Article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that
there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
Section 22-507 Prohibitions on Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited
to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable
water quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any
illegal discharge to the storm drainage system is prohibited except as follows:
a. Water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering,
diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active
groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation,
springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
swimming pools ( if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), firefighting
activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
b. Discharges specified in writing by the Authorized Enforcement Agent as being necessary to
protect public health and safety.
SEWERS
22-12 REVISED 10/05/15
c. Dye testing, but only with prior oral notification to the Authorized Enforcement Agent
prior to the time of the test.
d. Non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge
order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the United States
Environmental Protection Agent, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and
provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drainage
system.
Section 22-508 Prohibition of Illicit Connections. The construction, use, maintenance, or
continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited. This prohibition
expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
A person is considered to be in violation of this Article if the person connects a line conveying
sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
Section 22-509 Suspension of MS4 Access. The Authorized Enforcement Agent may suspend,
without prior notice, MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the Authorized Enforcement
Agent may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to theMS4or waters
of the United States, or to minimize danger to the public.
Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this Article may have MS4 access terminated if
such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The Authorized Enforcement Agent will
notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the
Authorized Enforcement Agent for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if
the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this Section without the prior
approval of the Authorized Enforcement Agent.
Section 22-510 Industrial or Construction Discharges. Any person subject to an industrial or
construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit maybe required in a form acceptable to the Authorized
Enforcement Agent prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
Section 22-511 Monitoring of Discharges. This Section applies to all facilities that have
stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity.
a. The Authorized Enforcement Agent shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this Article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with
this Article. If a discharger has security measures in force that require proper identification
and clearance before entry into its premises, then the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the Authorized Enforcement Agent.
b. Facility operators shall allow the Authorized Enforcement Agent ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination, and copying of records
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
22-13 REVISED 10/05/15
that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
c. The Authorized Enforcement Agent shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility
such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Authorized Enforcement Agent to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
d. The Authorized Enforcement Agent has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its
own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to
ensure their accuracy.
e. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be
inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral
request of the Authorized Enforcement Agent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing
such access shall be borne by the operator.
f. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Authorized Enforcement Agent access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this Article. A person who is
the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with
industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the Authorized Enforcement
Agent reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity
authorized or required by this Article.
g. If the Authorized Enforcement Agent has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this Article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance
with this Article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, then the Authorized Enforcement Agent mayseek issuance of
a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
Section 22-512 Best Management Practices Required. The Authorized Enforcement Agent will
adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility that
may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drainage system, or
waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials
or other wastes into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses through the use of these
structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which
is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's
expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid
NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the
extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. TheseBMPs shall
be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan ( SWPP) as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the NPDES permit.
SEWERS
22-14 REVISED 10/05/15
Section 22-513 Watercourse Protection. Every person owning property through which a
watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner
or lessee shall maintain existing privately-owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the
watercourse.
Section 22-514 Notification of Spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any
person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or
operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials that are resulting or may
result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drainage system, or
water of the United States said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said
person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency
dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the
Authorized Enforcement Agent in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed
to the Authorized Enforcement Agent within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge
of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or
operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the
actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
Section 22-515 Enforcement. Whenever the Authorized Enforcement Agent finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Article, the Authorized Enforcement
Agent may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice
may require without limitation:
a. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
b. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
c. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
d. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the
restoration of any affected property;
e. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and/or
f. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set
forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. The notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work will be done by a designated governmental agent or a contractor and the expense thereof shall
be charged to the violator.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
22-15 REVISED 10/05/15
Section 22-516 Appeal of Notice of Violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may
appeal the determination of the Authorized Enforcement Agent by filing a written notice of appeal
with the Village Manager. The notice of appeal must be received within 15 days from the date of the
notice of violation. The hearing on the appeal before the Village Manager or designee shall take
place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Village
Manager or their designee shall be final.
Section 22-517 Enforcement Measures After Appeal. If the violation has not been corrected
pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within
days of the decision of the Village Manager or designee upholding the decision of the Authorized
Enforcement Agent, then representatives of the Authorized Enforcement Agent shall enter upon the
subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, or person in
possession of any premises to refuse to allow the designated governmental agent or designated
contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
Section 22-518 Cost of Abatement. Within 15 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of
the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property
owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment. If the amount due is not
paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the Village Manager or by the
expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment
against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall become liable to the Village by
reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at
the rate of one percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the first day
following the discovery of the violation.
Section 22-519 Injunctive Relief. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail
to comply with any of the requirements of this Article. If a person has violated or continues to violate
the provisions of this Article, the Authorized Enforcement Agent may petition a court of competent
jurisdiction for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities that
would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
Section 22-520 Violations Deemed Public Nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and
penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this Article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance,
and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate,
enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
Section 22-521 Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this Article are not exclusive of any
other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law and it is within the
discretion of the Authorized Enforcement Agent to seek cumulative remedies.
SEWERS
22-16 REVISED 10/05/15
Article VI Industrial Wastes
Section 22-601 Discharge of Industrial Wastes. Industrial waste discharge shall meet the
applicable standards of the MWRDGC Industrial Waste Ordinance and the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency.
Section 22-602 Discharges to Natural Outlets. Application for a Village permit for discharge to a
natural outlet shall be made to the Director of Building. All discharges to natural outlet shall meet
the applicable standards and requirements of the MWRDGC, the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency, the Illinois Department of Transportation - Division of Water Resources and the National
Pollution Discharge Elimination System Program.
Article VII Penalty
Section 22-701 Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this Chapter, where no other
penalty is specifically provided, shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each offense.
Aseparate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 06/05/17
CHAPTER 23 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Article 1 General Provisions
Section 23-101 Director of the Building and Life Safety Department
Section 23-102 Definitions
Section 23-103 Building Permit Requirements
Section 23-104 Demolition of Buildings
Section 23-105 General Lot Grade Maximums
Section 23-106 Altering Grade levels
Section 23-107 Conformity with Lot Grading Plan
Section 23-108 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Section 23-109 Stop Work Order
Section 23-110 Final Inspections and Certificates of Occupancy
Section 23-111 Building Operations
Section 23-112 Condominium Conversions
Section 23-113 Violations
Section 23-114 Severability
Section 23-115 Exception
Article II Regulations and Standards For Antenna Structures and Earth Stations
Section 23-201 Definitions
Section 23-202 Exemptions
Section 23-203 Restrictions
Section 23-204 Standards of Construction
Section 23-205 Permit Application for Non-Commercial Antenna and Non-Commercial
Earth Stations
Section 23-206 Building Permit Required for Commercial Antenna Structures and
Commercial Earth Stations
Article III Regulations and Standards For One- and Two-Family Dwellings; Adoption of
the International Residential Code
Section 23-301 Adoption of the International Residential Code for One- and Two- Family
Dwellings
Section 23-302 Modification by Amendment and Deletion of Various Sections of the
International Residential Code
Article IV Regulations and Standards for Building Structures Other Than One- and
Two- Family Dwellings; Adoption of the International Building Code
Section 23-401 Adoption of the International Building Code
Section 23-402 Modification by Amendment and Deletion of Various Sections of the
International Building Code
Article V Regulations and Standards for Heating, Ventilation, Air-Conditioning and
Related Mechanical Systems; Adoption of the International Mechanical Code
Section 23-501 Adoption of the International Mechanical Code
Section 23-502 Modification by Amendment and Deletion of Various Sections of the
International Mechanical Code
BUILDING REGULATIONS
23-2 REVISED 10/01/11
Article VI Regulations and Standards for Fuel Gas and Related Systems; Adoption of the
International Fuel Gas Code
Section 23-601 Adoption of the International Fuel Gas Code
Section 23-602 Modification by Amendment and Deletion of Various Sections of the
International Fuel Gas Code
Article VII Regulations and Standards for Energy Conservation and Sound Control
Measures
Section 23-701 Adoption of the International Energy Conservation Code
Section 23-702 Modification by Amendment and Deletion of Various Sections of the
International Energy Conservation Code
Section 23-703 Specific Sound Control Measures for Commercial Buildings and Multi-
Family Dwelling Structures
Section 23-704 Specific Sound Control Measures for One- and Two- Family Dwellings
Article VIII Relocating Buildings
Section 23-801 Requirements and Restrictions
Section 23-802 Exception – Consent of Neighboring Owners
Section 23-803 Permit Required
Section 23-804 Application for Permit
Section 23-805 Failure to Make Changes
Section 23-806 Certificate of Occupancy
Article IX Regulations and Standards for Elevators, Dumbwaiters, Escalators, Platform
Lifts, Chairlifts, and Moving Walks
Section 23-901 Adoption of Safety Codes
Section 23-902 Elevator Requirements
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
23-3 REVISED 06/05/17
Article I General Provisions
Ord. #17-023)
Section 23-101 Director of the Building and Life Safety Department. The duties of the
Director of the Building and Life Safety Department are as follows:
a. To devote his or her whole time to the duties of the office.
b. To enforce provisions of the Building, Zoning, Fire, and Sign Regulations.
c. To make, when requested by proper authority, or when the public interest so requires,
investigations in connection with matters referred to in this Code and render written
reports on the same.
d. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal and unsafe conditions.
e. To ensure the necessary safeguards are used during construction.
Ord. #17-023)
Section 23-102 Definitions. In all International Code Council codes adopted throughout the
Municipal Code, all references to jurisdiction shall mean the Village of Arlington Heights, all
references to Department of Building Safety shall mean the Village’ s Building and Life Safety
Department, all references to Department of Fire Prevention shall mean the Village’ s Building
and Life Safety Department and/ or Fire Department as applicable, all references to Building
Director or Building Official shall mean the Director of the Building and Life Safety Department
or designee, all references to Code Enforcement Officer or Code Official shall mean the
Village’ s Code Enforcement Officers and/or Inspectors, and all references to the Appeals Board
shall mean the Village’ s Building Code Review Board and/ or Village Board, as applicable.
Section 23-103 Building Permit Requirements.
a. All new construction, and any alteration, addition, or repair, for purposes of maintenance
or otherwise, to existing buildings or structures shall require a building permit prior to
proceeding with such work, except where the fair market value of the work as determined
by the Building Director is less than $ 1000. All construction shall be in conformance
with the municipal building ordinances. All construction performed without any of the
required permits will be charged a penalty of double the listed permit fee.
b. Where more than 50% of an existing building or structure is demolished, the entire
building or structure shall comply with current Code requirements.
c. A building permit may not be issued if any contractor on the project has performed work
in the Village and all or part of such work was not in substantial compliance with the
Municipal Code or any applicable Village ordinances and the failure was part of a pattern
and practice on the part of the contractor.
d. Applicants for building permits shall submit the following, as applicable based on the
work being done:
1. Applicants for new commercial construction shall provide six sets of building
plans. Applicants for commercial alterations shall provide four sets of building
BUILDING REGULATIONS
23-4 REVISED 10/01/11
plans. Applicants for residential construction shall provide three sets of building
plans. Where the cost of the construction, alterations or addition exceeds the sum
of $5,000, such plans shall be impressed with the seal or certificate of a duly
licensed and registered architect or structural engineer of the State of Illinois. The
certification of the architect or engineer shall state that the plans conform to these
Regulations.
2. For other than single family residences, with each set of plans, plumbing,
electrical, mechanical and fire protection drawings, showing scope of work and
performance specifications;
3. Plans with existing conditions, to the extent necessary to determine compliance
with applicable codes;
4. Completed building, plumbing and electrical application forms;
5. Every application for a building permit shall show the foundation grade and set
forth a grading plan for the proposed construction, determined in accordance with
this Article and Rules established there.
6. Three plats of survey showing the exact location of proposed construction,
including all existing and proposed grades;
7. Three copies of detailed landscape drawings are required for all proposed
construction. All drawings are to be in compliance with the applicable Village
specifications. Single-family residences are exempt from the requirements of this
paragraph.
8. No plans shall be reviewed until the initial permit fee set forth in Chapter 7 of this
Code has been paid. The initial permit fee is non-refundable and will be applied to
the total permit and plan review fees due for the project.
e. The issuance of a building permit shall not affect the necessity of obtaining other permits
required by other specific and relevant provisions of this Code for permits in connection
with other such construction projects. No building permit shall be issued until other
required permits have been approved.
f. As applicable, permits issued hereunder shall be conditioned so as to require compliance
with the provisions of this Code relating to the installation of sidewalks.
g. Permits issued hereunder shall expire one year from the issuance date. Any permit under
which no substantial work is commenced within six months of issuance shall expire by
limitation and a new permit shall be secured before work is started upon payment of the
applicable re-issuance fee. In the event the construction is delayed or prevented by acts
of God, strikes, disaster or other circumstances beyond the control of the contractor,
application for exemption of this paragraph shall be made to the Director of Building in
writing. After due review of the circumstances in the application, the Director of
Building is authorized, in proper cases, to waive the re-issuance fee(s).
h. In the event a detail of construction is not covered in Article III of this Chapter, the
provisions of Article IV shall apply.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
5 REVISED 07/01/13
Ord. #13-035)
Section 23-104 Demolition of Buildings.
a. No building or other structure shall be demolished, razed or wrecked unless a permit is
first obtained from the Director of Building.
b. Application for a demolition permit shall be made to the Director of Building and be
accompanied by the following:
1. A description of the proposed building and photo documentation of the existing
structure to be wrecked, its location, nature of construction, method and procedure
of its proposed demolition, and reason therefore as well as proposed future plans
for the site;
2. For demolition in residential districts and for all properties in the B-5 zoning
district, design review is required in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
28, Section 14.2-3;
3. A bond with good and sufficient sureties, acceptable to the Finance Director,
indemnifying, keeping and saving harmless the Village against any loss, cost,
damage, expense, judgment or liability of any kind whatsoever which the Village
may suffer, or which may accrue against, be charged to or be recovered from the
Village, or any of its officials, from or by reason or on account of accidents to
persons or property during any such demolition, razing or wrecking operations,
and from or by reason or on account of anything done under or by virtue of any
permit granted for any such demolition, razing or wrecking operations. Such
bond shall be in the penal sum of $20,000 for structures not exceeding three
stories in height, and $ 40,000 for structures of four or more stories;
4. Releases from all utilities serving the premises stating that their respective
services have been disconnected and terminated in a safe and approved manner;
and
5. Such other information as may be required by the Director of Building, such as a
site plan.
6. Copies of all required State and County permits.
c. If it is determined by the Director of Building that a structure is unsafe, uninhabitable
and/ or dangerous, then a demolition permit may be issued without Design Commission
review.
d. The Director of Building shall issue a demolition permit when he or she finds that:
1. The applicable permit fee has been paid; and
2. The application and the proposed operations fully comply with all provisions of
this Code, including the prior issuance of any other permits necessary for
demolition, such as street occupation permits.
e. All demolition, razing and wrecking operations carried on under permit shall conform to
the following requirements:
BUILDING REGULATIONS
6 REVISED 10/01/11
1. All provisions of this Code respecting safety procedures to be used in occupying
streets and making excavations, including lighting, guard railing, temporary
sidewalks and proper scaffolding.
2. Rubble causing dust so as to cause a nuisance shall be adequately wetted down.
3. Except as to buildings no more than two stories in height and wholly of wood
frame construction, no more than one story at a time shall be wrecked. No wall,
chimney or other construction shall be allowed to fall in mass on an upper floor.
Bulky material, such as beams and columns, shall be lowered and not allowed to
fall.
4. Chutes for the removal of materials and debris shall be provided in all parts of
demolition operations that are more than 20 feet above grade.
5. All pits, holes or other areas below street grade shall be filled and leveled. All
debris shall be removed and the premises left in a safe condition.
Section 23-105 General Lot Grade Maximums. No lot shall be graded in such a manner as to
raise the grade of such lot to any point higher than a continuous grade level between the grade of
the lots on either side abutting such lot.
Section 23-106 Altering Grade Levels.
a. All foundation grades shall be established in such a manner as to achieve the free, natural
and unobstructed flow of surface water.
b. No grades within the Village shall be disturbed or otherwise altered, except as allowed
pursuant to a permit issued by the Director of Building. No person shall, during the
course of construction, alter or permit or cause to be altered the grade of any lot in a
manner which will permit or cause the draining of said lot in a manner to cause flooding
on an adjoining lot or otherwise change or divert the natural flow of water in a manner
deleterious to any other property.
c. The Director of Engineering shall from time to time promulgate detailed Rules, not
inconsistent with this Article, for the purpose of determining grades. Such Rules shall
become effective by filing them in the office of the Village Clerk and have the force and
effect of an ordinance of the Village.
Section 23-107 Conformity with Lot Grading Plan. If, during construction of any building,
the Director of Engineering finds that non- conformity with the lot grading plan on file is causing
or is likely to cause flooding of any adjoining lot, the Director may issue a written order
requiring compliance with such grading plan within ten days. If such order is not complied with,
the Director of Engineering may issue an order stopping all work on such building.
Section 23-108 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control. In order to prevent damage and
maintenance to downstream storm water facilities and other properties, including public streets,
the grading plan required with every application for a building permit shall contain soil erosion
and sediment control measures. These may include locations and details of soil stockpiles,
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7 REVISED 10/01/11
detention facilities, temporary and permanent berms, other structural or vegetative control
devices and statements of procedure. The area of land stripped of vegetation shall be kept
minimal. If uncovered land presents an environmental hazard, immediate corrective action shall
be required. If during the construction of any building or during the preparation or grading of
any site, the Director of Engineering finds that non- conformity with the plan on file is causing or
is likely to cause damage or require maintenance to downstream storm water facilities or other
properties, the Director may issue a written order requiring immediate compliance. If that order
is not complied with, the Director of Engineering may issue an order stopping all work on such
site or building.
These provisions shall be supplemental to the requirements of Chapter 28 " Zoning Regulations"
and Chapter 29 " Subdivision Regulations" of this Code respecting any planned development or
subdivision approval.
Section 23-109 Stop Work Order.
a. Upon notice from the Director of Building that work on any building or structure is being
pursued contrary to the provisions of this Code or in an unsafe and dangerous manner,
such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be posted at the site.
b. Any person who continues to work in or about the structure after having been served with
a stop work order, except work that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than $ 100 nor more than $ 500.
Section 23-110 Final Inspections and Certificates of Occupancy. Upon completion of the
building or structure, and before issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, a final inspection shall
be made. A request for final inspection shall be accompanied by a written statement from the
architect and/or structural engineer of record that to the best of their knowledge, information and
belief, the structure and all related fire, alarm, mechanical systems, building components, details,
and site improvements for which the Certificate is requested comply in all respects to all
applicable codes, as well as all Design Commission, Plan Commission and Village Board
approvals and plans. If the architect or structural engineer is not including systems as part of
their statement, there shall be a statement attached from the design professional for each
engineered system in the building. If any exceptions exist, they shall be noted with an
explanation of steps being taken to remedy those deficiencies.
After the final inspection, all violations of the approved plans and permit shall be noted and the
applicant shall be notified of the discrepancies.
A Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued within five business days after completion of the final
inspection and correction of any deficiencies noted. The five- day period herein provided for the
issuance of occupancy permits may be extended to permit the Building Official to determine if
such occupancy will meet applicable codes.
Section 23-111 Building Operations
a. Construction, demolition, or remodeling activity on private property that generates loud
or disruptive noises shall not start before 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and 8:00 a.m.
on Saturdays and Sundays. Activities shall cease each day no later than 7:00 p.m.
BUILDING REGULATIONS
8 REVISED 10/01/11
Monday through Friday and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays. Exceptions to this
provision may only be granted by the Village Manager.
b. No sidewalk shall be obstructed in the course of building operations without a special
permit from the Director of Public Works. Whenever removal of a sidewalk is required,
such work shall not be done until a permit is secured from the Director of Public Works.
When sidewalks are removed, proper barricading and notification to pedestrians well in
advance of the sidewalk being removed shall be provided.
c. Vehicular traffic to and from a construction site shall not use adjacent residential streets
when reasonable alternative access to the site is available and the entrances to such
residential streets have been posted, at the direction of the Village Manager, with signs
prohibiting construction traffic. Traffic and deliveries shall at no time block driveway
access to any adjacent properties unless specific permission has been granted by the
affected property owner. When necessary, proper barricading or flaggers shall be utilized
when two-way traffic is restricted.
d. Streets used by vehicles exiting from a construction site shall be kept free of dust, dirt,
mud, stones, and other debris from the site. The holder of a building permit shall take all
reasonable measures to prevent deposit of debris on the streets and shall cause any such
debris to be removed from the streets adjoining the construction site. At a minimum,
streets shall be cleaned of debris at least two times during each day's operations and at the
end of the day. Streets shall be cleaned at such additional times or as required to keep the
streets safe for use, upon notice given by an agent of the Village to the supervisor of the
construction site.
If any holder of a building permit fails to remove the dust, dirt, mud, stones or other
debris from a street within two hours after notice by the Village, the Village may remove
such material and charge the holder of the building permit with the reasonable cost of
removal. The Village's action in removing the material shall not bar any enforcement
procedures otherwise available to the Village.
e. Active construction or remodeling sites shall provide adequate security to prevent
unauthorized access by the public to structures under construction.
f. If a permit authorizes demolition or construction of a new structure or addition, the work
area is required to be fenced. The perimeter of the work area shall be protected by a new
or existing fence, no less than five feet in height. This fencing must be installed prior to
any work commencing and must remain in place until a certificate of occupancy has been
issued or demolition is completed with no additional work anticipated on the site. The
fence must be of chain link or equal quality and strength, and firmly weight ed to or
anchored into the ground, with uprights at a maximum of eight feet on center. All doors
or gates in the fence must be locked at all times other than when there is work taking
place on the site.
g. Construction activities shall comply with all parking restrictions outlined in Chapter 18 of
this Code. Furthermore, contractors shall be courteous and observe the rights of nearby
properties by not blocking the street or driveways.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
9 REVISED 10/01/11
h. Contractors shall not store materials or equipment on a site unless they are specifically
for the permitted work for that site.
i. Dust generated by construction activities shall be controlled to the extent possible. If a
problem develops, the Village may require materials or areas to be wetted to keep dust
propagation to a minimum.
j. Construction or remodeling activities shall always include appropriate provisions to
protect adjacent properties. Under no circumstances shall these construction or
remodeling activities use an adjacent property for access, storage or discharge of
construction related debris or materials. If an adjacent property must be used for access,
written permission of the property owner must be filed with the Director of Building prior
to the initiation of that use.
k. In general, no construction activity shall pose any danger to the public. All such
operations shall be conducted in a safe manner and suitable protection for the general
public shall be provided.
Section 23-112 Condominium Conversions.
a. All rental dwellings must apply to the Building Department for review and approval prior
to any conversion to a condominium development. All applications shall include, but not
limited to:
1. Completed application form;
2. Names, addresses, phone numbers of developer( s) architect, and contractor;
3. Development plan with details of implementation. ( i.e.: phases of renovation, sales,
and occupancy;
4. Review for any and all applicable building permits.
b. All condominiums and town homes must comply with Section 14-1703 through 14-1708 of
the Municipal Code.
c. All condominium conversion development projects shall be equipped with the following:
1. An automatic sprinkler system in accordance with the International Fire Code.
2. A manual fire alarm system and smoke alarms in accordance with the International
Fire Code.
Section 23-113 Violations.
a. Any person, firm, corporation or other business entity violating any of the provisions of
Chapter 23 or deviating from any plans duly approved and issued by the Director of
Building without first obtaining written authorization shall be fined not less than $100
and not more than $ 500, notwithstanding any other civil or criminal penalties, charges,
actions, or proceedings then and there enforceable by any other individual or
governmental authority.
BUILDING REGULATIONS
10 REVISED 10/01/11
b. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the Village from
instituting appropriate legal action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct
or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or
to stop an illegal act, conduct business or use of a building or structure on or about any
premises.
Section 23-114 Severability. If any provision or clause of this Article or application thereof to
any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity does not affect other provisions or
applications of the Article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.
Section 23-115 Exception. The provisions of the building regulations of the Village shall not
apply to the construction of horse stables, utilized in connection with any racetrack subject to the
regulations of the Illinois State Racing Board, if such stables are constructed of non-combustible
material.
Article II Regulations and Standards for Antenna Structures and Earth Stations
Section 23-201 Definitions. For the purpose of this Article, the words or terms used shall be as
defined in Chapter 28 of the Municipal Code.
Section 23-202 Exemptions. The following categories of antenna structures are exempt from
the requirements of this Article:
a. Commercial and non- commercial roof mounted antenna structures which measure less
than 12 feet from the highest point of the roof line of the building;
b. Any existing antenna structure which has been constructed and which was in place prior
July 15, 1991.
c. The grounding requirements of this Code are not exempt from paragraphs a and b above.
d. " Radials" used in amateur antenna systems are exempt.
Section 23-203 Restrictions.
a. No ground base antenna shall exceed 75 feet above the grade level (commercial or noncommercial).
b. No antenna shall protrude in any manner upon the public way or adjoining property.
c. No antenna shall be of a windmill type. A solid dish- type construction or design shall not
be permitted in a residentially zoned district.
d. Non- commercial roof- mounted antenna structures may not exceed 30 feet from mounting
base. Two antenna structures will be allowed for each roof, one of which may be for
radio, and one of which may be for television purposes. The base structure which
supports the mast shall not exceed three feet. No guy wires for additional supports shall
support the base structure or antenna mast.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
11 REVISED 10/01/11
e. Commercial roof-mounted antenna may not exceed 30 feet from mounting base.
f. Location of all antenna structures within all zoning districts shall be restricted as set forth
in Chapter 28.
g. " Radials" used in amateur antenna systems must not support the base structure or antenna
or be higher than two feet above the roof.
h. No earth station in an R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 Zoning District shall exceed eight feet in
diameter or 14 feet above the grade level in height. No advertising, logos, or
symbols will be permitted on any earth station surfaces except as permitted in Chapter
28. All earth stations shall be a neutral color. Earth stations shall be permitted in rear
yards only. On corner lots, no earth station shall be erected outside of the established
building line of both street frontages, and 25 feet from property lines fronting on any
street or highway.
Section 23-204 Standards of Construction.
a. Antenna structures may be constructed from one of the following materials: aluminum,
galvanized steel, or an equally weather resistant steel, or treated wood, subject to the
written approval of the Director of Building. Where two dissimilar materials such as
aluminum and concrete or aluminum and steel are in contact, provisions shall be made to
avoid electrolysis. All antenna structures shall be erected in such manner so as to be able
to withstand a minimum wind velocity of 80 m.p.h. ( impact pressure of 25 pounds per
square foot).
b. Earth stations that are elevation/azimuth fixed-mount type shall be erected in such a
manner so as to be able to withstand a minimum wind velocity of 125 m.p.h. Earth
stations that are tunable or adjustable-mount type shall be erected in such a manner so as
to be able to withstand a minimum wind velocity of 100 m.p.h.
c. All towers and/ or roof- mounted structures supporting antenna as noted in this Article
shall be grounded. Grounding shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of
the Municipal Code. The ground conductor shall be a minimum of # 10 GA copper;
however, in all instances, construction shall follow the manufacturer’ s requirements for
grounding.
Section 23-205 Permit Application for Non-Commercial Antenna and Non-Commercial
Earth Stations. Permit Applications shall be made to the Director of Building and shall provide
the following information:
a. Two sets of plans, two plats of survey and specifications for the tower structure and
appurtenances and earth station structure, including detailed plans showing locations,
heights, structural design and any other information pertinent or required by the Director
of Building.
b. All towers and/ or roof- mounted structures supporting antenna as noted in this Article shall
be properly grounded pursuant to the applicable requirements of the Municipal Code.
c. No permit will be issued for any roof mounted antenna structure or antenna which
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
12 REVISED 03/04/13
measures greater than 12 feet from the highest point of the roof line of the building unless
the design has been prepared by a registered structural engineer of the State of Illinois
and certified to comply with applicable building codes, that the basic structure which
supports the antenna mast does not extend more than three feet above the highest point on
the roof; and that no guy wires or similar appurtenances are used to support the base
structure or antenna mast.
Section 23-206 Building Permit Required for Commercial Antenna Structures and
Commercial Earth Stations.
a. Commercial antenna structures and commercial earth stations shall not be erected without a
building permit as required by this Code.
b. Commercial antenna structures and commercial earth stations shall be subject to the
zoning requirements of Chapter 28 of this Code. It is the intent of Chapter 23 that
commercial antenna structures conform to the requirements of this Article; however, if
special use permits are authorized by Chapter 28, each petition will require justification
for varying from restrictions and construction standards imposed by this Article.
c. No building permit will be issued for any commercial antenna structure or commercial
earth station unless the design has been prepared by a Licensed Structural Engineer of the
State of Illinois and certified to comply with applicable building codes.
Article III Regulations and Standards for One- and Two-Family Dwellings;
Adoption of the International Residential Code
Section 23-301 Adoption of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings
a. There is hereby adopted by reference the 2009 Edition of the International Residential
Code for One- and Two- Family Dwellings ( IRC), for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and
occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures, except as modified by
Section 23-302 of this Article.
b. The International Residential Code shall:
1. Regulate the construction of all one- and two- family residential construction
where the provisions of this Chapter specifically cover the subject matter in
question.
2. In the event that a detail of the construction or regulation is not covered by the
2009 Edition of the International Residential Code, the provisions of Article IV of
this Chapter shall apply.
Ord. #13-015)
Section 23-302 Modification by Amendment and Deletion of Various Sections of the
International Residential Code. The 2009 Edition of the IRC adopted by this Article is
modified for use in the Village by the following amendments, which amendments are given
articles and section numbers identical to the IRC. Appendices G, H, K and M are specifically
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13 REVISED 10/01/11
adopted. To the extent any provision of the IRC conflicts with any provision of the Arlington
Heights Municipal Code, the Municipal Code provision will apply.
Chapter 2 – Definitions
R201. 3 Terms defined in other codes
Add the following text at the end:
Where terms are defined in both the IRC or other ICC codes and the Municipal
Code, the definitions in the Municipal Code shall apply.
Chapter 3 – Building Planning
R301. 1 Application
Delete the text and replace with the following:
Buildings and structures and all parts thereof shall be designed by a State of
Illinois licensed architect or structural engineer; and shall be constructed, by a
licensed contractor or owner who shall be responsible for compliance with the
Village Code for construction, to safely support all loads, including dead loads,
live loads, roof loads, flood loads, snow loads, wind loads and seismic loads as
prescribed by this code.
R301.1.1 Alternative provisions
Delete the first sentence and replace it with the following:
The following standards, where used by the licensed architect or engineer, are
also permitted subject to the limitations of this Article and any applicable Village
restrictions.
Table R301.2(1)
Revise Table R301. 2(1) to read as follows:
TABLE R301.2(1) CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
Ground
Snow
Load
Wind Design Seismic
Design
Category
Subject to Damage From Winter
Design
Temp.
Icebarrier
under
layment
Req’d
Flood
Hazard
Chapter
15
of
Village
Code
Air
Freezing
Index
Mean
Annual
Temp
NOAA
Data
Waukegan
Speed
Topographic
Effects
Weathering
Frost
Line
Depth
Termite
Min
30 psf
Min
90
mph
NO Category
B
Severe 42
inches
Moderate
To
Heavy
4oF YES Nov 6,
2000
2000 47.6oF
Figure R301. 2(2) Seismic Design Categories – Site Class D
Add the following text at the bottom of figure R301.2(2):
SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORIES – SITE CLASS D*
Site Class D shall be assumed in Arlington Heights, but where soil reports
indicate worse conditions, Site Class shall be re- evaluated by the Soils Engineer
and the Building Official.
Table R301.5 Minimum Uniformly Distributed Live Loads
Amend Table R301. 5 by changing live loads for sleeping rooms from 30 to 40.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
14 REVISED 10/01/11
R302.1 Exterior Walls
Delete Exceptions 1, 3, 4, and 5.
R302. 3 Two-familyDwelling Structures
Delete Exceptions 1 and 2.
Table R302.6 Dwelling/Garage Separation
Amend Table R302. 6 to read as follows:
Change ½ inch to 5/
8 inch in all rows of Table R302.6.
Add footnote to read as follows:
When any portion of a detached garage is within 10 feet of a dwelling, all four interior
walls and the ceiling shall be covered with a minimum of 5/
8 - inch fire-resistance-rated
Type X) gypsum board.
R304. 2 Other Rooms
Change 70 to 100.
R305.1 Minimum Height
Delete the existing language and replace it with the following:
All first floor habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, bathrooms, toilet rooms,
laundry rooms, and portions of basements containing such rooms shall have a
minimum ceiling height of not less than 8 feet. All second floor rooms and other
spaces in the building shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than 7 feet 6
inches.
Exceptions 1 and 2 remain unchanged.
Add the following as Exception 3:
3. Crawl spaces shall have a minimum clear height of 30 inches measured from
the slush coat to the bottom of the floor joist or any support beam above.
R305. 1.1 Basements
Change 6 feet 8 inches to 7 feet.
In the Exception, change 6 feet 4 inches to 6 feet 8 inches.
R309.1 Floor Surfaces, Separation of Structures and Minimum Dimensions
Revise R309. 1 to read as follows:
a. Garage floor surface shall be of approved noncombustible construction. The area of the floor
used for parking automobiles and vehicles shall be sloped to facilitate the movement of
liquids to approved drain or toward the main vehicle entry. The floor surface of the garage
shall be a minimum of 6 inches below any adjacent space. In lieu of this requirement, a 6-
inch high by 6-inch wide concrete or nonabsorbent curb shall be placed against all common
walls.
b. There shall be a minimum of a 3 feet wide walkway between the house and any detached
garage or other accessory structure.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
15 REVISED 10/07/13
Ord. #13-055)
c. Any garage with multiple doors or with a garage door width wider than 12 feet shall be
considered at least a two-car garage.
The following minimums shall be for newly constructed garages only. These minimums
shall not apply to modifications or additions to existing garages, unless the existing
interior dimensions are proposed to be reduced. In those cases, the minimums set forth
below shall apply.
1. Minimum Interior Garage Dimensions
Number of Cars Depth of Garage Width of Garage
1 21 feet 4 inches 12 feet
2 21 feet 4 inches 21 feet
3 21 feet 4 inches 30 feet
2. Minimum Garage Door Sizes
Number of Cars Door Size to be at least
1 9 feet
2 16 feet or two 8-foot doors
3 16 feet + 8 feet or three 8-foot doors
3. Minimum Ceiling Height;
The minimum ceiling height for a carport, attached garage or detached garage shall
be 7 feet 6 inches.
d. One side-hinged egress door shall be provided for any detached garage.
R310.2 Window Wells
Add the following after the last sentence:
The window well shall be of galvanized metal or other approved material and
shall be bolted to the foundation wall with a minimum of 4 anchor or expansion
bolts. The base of the well shall be equipped with a screened drain tied into the
drainage system of the foundation with a rigid pipe. The base of the well shall
have a minimum of 4 inches of washed stone fill.
R310.4 Bars, Grilles, Window-well Covers and Screens
Add the following after the last sentence:
Window wells shall be covered with a metal grated cover or clear plastic or
translucent fiberglass type cover. The cover shall be capable of supporting a
minimum load of 250 lbs. The cover must be removable from the inside without
the use of a key, tool, or force greater than that, which is required for normal
operation of the emergency escape and rescue opening.
R311.2 Egress door required
Delete the existing language and replace it with the following:
Not less than two egress doors shall be provided from each dwelling unit. At least
one required egress door shall be side- hinged, and shall provide a minimum net
clear opening of 3 feet in width and 6 feet 8 inches in height. Egress doors shall
be readily openable from the inside of a dwelling without the use of a key or
special knowledge or effort.
BUILDING REGULATIONS
16 REVISED 10/01/11
R311.7 Stairways
Add the following text to this Section:
Stairways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with R311.7.1 through
R311.7.9.2. Exterior stairways of wood shall be supported at least 2 inches above
the finish grade on a concrete slab or piers. The maximum length of unsupported
wood treads shall be limited to 3 feet. For stairways greater than 3 feet in width,
additional stringer supports shall be provided such that no span exceeds 3 feet.
R311. 7.9.1 Spiral stairways
Add the following sentence at the beginning of this Section:
Spiral stairways are not permitted for use as the primary egress.
R313. 1.1 Design and installation
Replace “ Section 2904” with “NFPA 13D.”
R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems
Delete in its entirety.
R316. 5.3 Attics
Delete 3.1, 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4.
R316.5.4 Crawl Spaces
Delete 3.1, 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4.
R317. 1 Location Required
Amend item 2 by deleting everything from “and are less” to the end of the sentence.
R317.1.4 Wood Columns
Delete the exceptions.
R319. 1 Address Numbers
Delete this Section in its entirety and replace with the following:
1. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved addresses. It shall
be the duty of the owners of every building in the Village to have placed thereon
the assigned numbers above the door which is the principal entrance fronting on
the street, or where no street exists, the assigned numbers shall be above or on the
principal entrance to the building via an alley, driveway, parking lot, fire lane, or
other improved right- of-way. The assigned numbers shall be Arabic numerals at
least six inches high and of such size and shape so as to be easily visible from the
street, alley, driveway, parking lot, fire lane, or improved right- of-way. The
Arabic numerals shall be constructed of a durable material which contrasts with
the background upon which the assigned numbers are affixed.
2. The practice of affixing numbers in script or word form is not prohibited;
however, the Arabic numerals required herein must be affixed on or over the
principal entrance.
3. In any instance where numbers located on the principal entrance of the building
are not easily visible and identifiable from the street, alley, driveway, parking lot,
fire lane, or other improved right- of-way upon which the principal entrance
fronts, the Building and Fire Departments may require a monument, pole or other
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
17 REVISED 10/01/11
such additional numbering signs or placards on or about the building and premises
as necessary to ensure that such buildings are easily identifiable from the street,
alley, driveway, parking lot, fire lane, or other improved right-of-way.
4. The names of all new buildings and developments shall not include any
numerical references in vanity addresses or in identifying the buildings or
development name unless the numerical references and name are the property
number and actual street address assigned by the Village.
Chapter 4 – Foundations
R401. 1 Application
Delete the last sentence and the Exceptions.
R401.2 Requirements
Delete the section and replace with the following:
Foundation construction shall be capable of accommodating all loads according to
R301 and of transmitting the resulting loads to the supporting soil. Fill soils that
support footings and foundations shall be designed, installed and tested in
accordance with accepted engineering practice.
a. All organic material including topsoil and all landscape materials and debris
shall be removed prior to the placing of foundations, slabs, raised porches, stoops,
or similar construction.
b. Stoop foundations, the main entry stoop and all porches, terraces, and flights of
stairs exceeding three risers shall be supported on engineered foundation.
R402. 1 Wood Foundations
Delete and replace with the following:
Wood foundations are not permitted within the Village.
R403. 1.1 Minimum Size
Add after the second sentence:
At a minimum, it shall be twice the foundation wall thickness.
Change the third sentence to be 8 inches instead of 6 inches.
Add the following new paragraphs:
a. All footings should be designed for a soil bearing capacity of 3,000 psf. Soil
bearing capacity shall be verified prior to placement of concrete footings by a
licensed engineer.
1. Pier, post and column footings shall have a minimum pad size of not less
than 30 inches square by 12 inches thick.
2. Cast in place piers shall be allowed in the construction of exterior decks
the elevation of which is not more than 5 feet above grade. The minimum
diameter shall be 8 inches with the bottom belled to a diameter of 12 inches.
b. Where approved engineering design is provided to account for soil bearing
capacity, trench foundations may be used.
BUILDING REGULATIONS
18 REVISED 10/01/11
Table R403.1 Minimum Width of Concrete, Precast or Masonry Footings
Revise the values in Table R403. 1 to be not less than 16 inches.
R403.3 Frost protected shallow foundation
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
Frost protected shallow foundations are not permitted.
R404.1.2 Concrete foundation walls
Delete the last sentence and replace with the following:
Beam pockets shall be not less than 1 inch wider than the beam supported shall be
installed to provide a minimum end bearing of 4 inches.
R404. 3 Wood sill plates
Delete and replace with the following:
Wood sill plates shall be a minimum of 2-inch by 4-inch nominal lumber. Plates
shall be shimmed level to provide solid contact with the foundation wall. Shims
shall be placed not more than 32 inches on center. Voids underneath shall be
filled with approved material to prevent air infiltration and pest infestation.
R407.1 Wood Column Protection
Delete and replace with the following:
Wood columns are not permitted in below-grade applications.
R407.3 Structural Requirements
Delete and replace with the following:
The columns shall be restrained to prevent lateral displacement at the bottom and
top ends. Steel columns shall not be less than 3-inch- diameter concrete- filled steel
pipe standard weight or heavier. Column caps must be bolted or welded to steel
girders. Shim columns only at the bottom and for a maximum height of 2¼
inches. No loose shims are permitted. Embed in a minimum of 2 inches of
concrete or bolt to floor or foundation with a minimum of two ½ inch diameter
anchor bolts per base plate. Provide ½ inch thick minimum base plate.
R408, R408.1 through R408.7 Under-Floor Space
Delete text of Section R408. 1 through R408. 7, and replace with the following
paragraphs as part of revised Section R408:
a. At a minimum, the clear height of under-floor spaces shall be not less than 30
inches.
b. All crawl spaces shall have a floor slab consisting of 2 inches of concrete over
2 inches minimum stone over a minimum 6-mil vapor barrier.
c. Access shall be provided to all under-floor spaces via an interior space. Access
openings shall be not less than 30 inches by 30 inches.
d. Exterior ventilation is not allowed for under-floor space.
e. Insulation shall be based on the Energy Conservation provisions of this Code.
Chapter 5 – Floors
R502.3 Allowable joist spans
Delete and replace with the following:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
19 REVISED 10/01/11
Spans shall be in accordance with the design by the licensed architect or engineer,
but in no case shall joist dimensions be less than 2 x 8.
R502.3.1
Delete and replace with the following:
For all Tables, in this chapter of the IRC, the minimum floor joist shall be 2 x 8.
R502.6.2 Joist framing
Delete and replace with the following:
Joists framing into the side of a wood girder, steel beam, masonry wall, or
concrete foundation wall shall be supported by approved framing anchors.
R502. 7.1 Bridging
Change 2 inches by 12 inches in the first sentence to 2 x 8 or larger.
R504 Pressure Preservatively Treated-Wood Floors (On Ground)
Delete this entire section and replace with the following:
Wood floors on ground/grade are not permitted.
R506.1 General
Change 3.5 inches in the first sentence to 4 inches.
R506. 2 Site Preparation
Add at the end of the first paragraph:
Basements shall be pumped and kept dry at least 24 hours before the floor is to be
placed.
R506.2.2 Base
Delete the Exception.
Chapter 6 – Wall Construction
R602.3 Design and Construction
Add the following after the last sentence:
Balloon framing construction shall not be permitted in the Village.
Figure R602.3(1) Typical Wall, Floor and Roof Framing
Delete the drawing for Balloon Framing Construction.
R602. 3.2 Top plate
Delete the Exception.
R602.4 Interior load-bearing walls
Add at the end:
Wood frame bearing walls are not permitted in basements.
R602. 5 Interior non- bearing walls
Delete the first sentence and replace it with the following:
Interior nonbearing walls shall be constructed with a minimum of 2x4 studs
spaced a maximum of 16 inches on center.
R602.7 Headers
BUILDING REGULATIONS
20 REVISED 10/01/11
Delete and replace with the following:
Header spans shall be designed by a licensed architect or engineer and shall not be
less than the requirements of Tables R502. 5(1) and R502. 5(2).
R602. 7.2 Headers in Non- bearing walls
Delete and replace with the following:
Openings exceeding three feet shall have a minimum of two 2x4 studs laid on
edge. Openings less than three feet may have one 2x4 stud laid flat.
R606.1.1 Professional registration not required
Delete in its entirety.
R611. 1 General
Delete the second sentence.
Chapter 7 – Wall Covering
Table R702. 3.5 Minimum Thickness and Application of Gypsum Board
Delete data for rows corresponding to a single layer of 3/
8 inches thickness of gypsum
board.
Add footnote f to read as follows:
f. For the interior finish of an exterior building envelope assembly; the gypsum
board shall ( at a minimum) be 5/
8 inch thick. Gypsum board shall be taped and
finished to at least a ‘ level one’ in unoccupied spaces and ‘ level three’ in occupied
spaces, as specified by the US Gypsum Association document GA-214- 07.
R703. 2 Water- resistive barrier
Delete all exceptions.
R703.3.1 Panel siding
Add the following at the end:
All panels shall contain an approved rated siding grade mark.
R703.7.3 Lintels
Add the following after the last sentence:
All shop-primed steel lintels that are left exposed to the weather shall have a
finish coat of paint applied.
R703. 7.4.3 Mortar or grout fill
Delete in its entirety.
R703.7.6 Weepholes
Add the following at the end ( delete the period and continue the sentence):
including at head and sill flashing of windows. A vermin-proof barrier to prevent
pests and rodents from entering the wall cavity without inhibiting the flow of
moisture is required.
Chapter 8 – Roof-Ceiling Construction
R801. 2 Requirements
Add the following at the end:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
21 REVISED 10/01/11
Roof and ceiling construction shall be designed by a licensed architect or engineer
of record.
R801.3 Roof drainage
Delete the following text:
In areas where expansive or collapsible soils are known to exist,
R802.3 Framing details
Change ridge board from 1-inch to 2-inch.
R802. 3.1 Ceiling joist and rafter connections
Change the dimensions for the collar ties in the last paragraph from 1-inch by 4-inch to 2-
inch by 4-inch.
R802. 11.1 Uplift Resistance
Delete the first sentence and replace it with the following:
Roof assemblies shall have roof rafters or trusses attached to their supporting wall
assemblies by connections capable of providing the resistance required in Table
R802. 11.
Add the following at the end of the second paragraph:
At a minimum, tie down clips installed in accordance with the manufacturer’ s
requirements shall be provided at all truss and rafter ends bearing on outside wall
plates to tie the roof framing to the wall framing with a continuous load path
designed to transmit the uplift forces from the rafter or truss ties to the foundation.
R803.2.2 Allowable spans
Add the following sentence at the end:
Sheathing clip supports shall be used when framing centers exceed 16 inches oncenter.
R806. 2 Minimum area
Delete the last sentence.
Chapter 9 – Roof Assemblies
R903. 4 Roof drainage
Add a second sentence to read as follows:
Where roofs are sloped to drain over roof edges, gutters and downspouts are
required.
After the last sentence, add the following:
Gutters and downspouts shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Gutters and downspouts shall be installed on all dwelling units unless
omission is specifically permitted by the Code Official.
2. Downspouts shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer system or to the
footing drain tile system. All outlets shall discharge into the front or rear yards
only through an open splash-block or as otherwise permitted by the Code
Official.
3. Acceptable materials include the following:
i. 16 ounce, hard, cornice tempered copper,
BUILDING REGULATIONS
22 REVISED 10/01/11
ii. 26 gauge galvanized sheet metal with a 1.25 ounce total weight per square
foot zinc coating,
iii. Aluminum with a minimum gauge of 0.019,
iv. Plastic, vinyl or other material as permitted by the Code Official.
R905.2.4 Asphalt Shingles
Add the following sentence:
Asphalt shingles shall be of a Class C label or better.
R907.1 Roof Recovering
Add the following sentence:
When recovering or replacing an existing roof, the roof shall be ventilated in
accordance with the requirements of R806 for new roofs.
Chapter 10 – Chimneys and Fireplaces
R1004.1 General requirements for factory-built fireplaces
Add the following at the end:
Fire-blocking shall be provided in accordance with R1003.19. When the enclosing
chase is located on an outside wall or adjacent to an unheated area, it shall be
insulated in the same manner as the adjacent walls. Combustible framing within
the enclosure, except the supporting floor construction, shall then be covered with
5/8 inch minimum drywall, taped and sealed.
R1004.2 Hearth extensions
Add the following at the end:
Units without a sealed firebox shall have hearth extensions of not less than 3/
8
inch thick stone, tile, or other approved non- combustible material, and shall
comply with R1001.10.
R1004.4 Unvented gas log heaters
Delete and replace with the following:
Unvented gas log heaters are not permitted.
R1005.1 General requirements for factory-built chimneys
Add the following at the end:
Fire-blocking shall be provided in accordance with R1003.19. When the enclosing
chase is located on an outside wall or adjacent to an unheated area, it shall be
insulated in the same manner as the adjacent wall. Combustible framing within
the enclosure, except the supporting floor construction, shall then be covered with
inch minimum drywall, taped and sealed.
Chapter 11 – Energy Efficiency
Delete this Chapter in its entirety and refer to Article X, Regulations and Standards for
Energy Conservation and Sound Control Measures.
Chapter 14 – Heating and Cooling Equipment
M1401. 1 Installation
Add the following at the end:
Systems shall be arranged so that the circulating air from one dwelling unit does
not discharge into another dwelling unit.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
23-23 REVISED 10/01/11
Add the following at the end:
In houses that are not fully sprinklered, fire sprinkler protection shall be provided
for furnaces and boilers. Sprinkler head type and temperature rating shall be
dependent upon room configuration and ambient room temperature. Sprinkler
head temperature rating shall be not less than 212 degrees Fahrenheit nor greater
than 286 degrees Fahrenheit. Water supply to the sprinkler head(s) may be fed
from a branch of the domestic water supply in compliance with the Code.
M1408. 5 Installation
Delete 3 and replace it with the following:
3. Floor furnaces shall be installed not closer than 6 inches to the ground. The
lower six inches of the furnace shall be sealed to prevent water entry.
M1411.3 Condensate Disposal
Add the following at the end:
Condensate pumps shall be prohibited in new construction.
M1411.3.2
Add the following at the end:
The maximum length for such drain pipes shall be 15 feet.
M1413.1 General
Delete and replace with the following:
Evaporative cooling equipment is prohibited.
Chapter 16 – Duct Systems
M1601. 1.1 Above- ground Duct Systems
Delete paragraph 7 and replace it with the following:
7. For flexible duct work and connectors:
7.1 Flexible air ducts shall be limited to 8 feet in length.
7.2 Flexible air connectors shall be limited to 8 feet in length.
M1601. 4.5 Duct Installation
Add the following new paragraphs:
4. All duct work installed in an attic shall be insulated. All metal supply duct
work installed in a ventilated crawl space or other non-conditioned space shall be
insulated. Insulation shall be a minimum 2-inch, ¾ pound density blanket, or 1-
inch thick, 1½ pound density liner.
5. When non- metallic ducts or other approved insulating or lining materials are
used, the minimum thermal conductance value of the material shall be 0.23 at 75
degrees Fahrenheit.
6. Where duct liner has been interrupted, a duct covering of equal thermal
performance shall be installed.
7. Service openings shall not be concealed by duct coverings unless the exact
location of the opening is properly labeled.
8. All ducts which operate at temperatures in excess of 120 degrees Fahrenheit
shall have sufficient thermal insulation to limit the exposed surface temperature to
120 degrees Fahrenheit, and a vapor barrier shall not be required.
BUILDING REGULATIONS
23-24 REVISED 10/01/11
M1602.1 Return Air
Add the following at the end:
All ducted cold air return inlets shall be located both high and low on walls,
except in areas listed as a prohibited source in Section M1602.2. Each return inlet
register shall have operable louvers.
M1602. 2 Prohibited Sources
Delete item 4 and replace with the following:
4. A closet, bathroom, toilet room, kitchen, garage, mechanical room, boiler
room, furnace room, unconditioned spaces (including cellars, cavity walls, attics,
under- floor space) or from another dwelling unit.
Chapter 18 – Chimneys and Vents
M1803.4 Connection to Fireplace Flue
Delete Section M1803. 4 and replace with the following:
Connection of appliances to chimney flues serving fireplaces is prohibited.
Chapter 21 – Hydronic Piping
M2103. 1 Piping Materials
Delete the following materials:
standard weight steel pipe, copper tubing, chlorinated polyvinyl chloride ( CPVC),
polybutylene
Add the following at the end:
Only the above mentioned piping materials shall be used for Table M2101.1.
Chapter 22 – Special Piping and Storage Systems
M2201. 3 Underground tanks
Delete Section M2201.3 and replace with the following:
Underground tanks are prohibited.
Chapter 24 - Fuel Gas
G2406.2 Prohibited Locations
Add the following as 6:
No appliance shall be located under stairways used as a means of egress.
G2407.11 Combustion air ducts
Delete the Exception in paragraph 1.
G2426. 7 Protection Against Physical Damage
Add the following at the end:
Portions of vents which extend through occupied spaces shall be protected to
prevent damage to the vent.
Chapters 25 to 33 Plumbing
Delete all of Chapters 25 through 33 and replace with the following:
The applicable provisions of the Plumbing Regulations in the Municipal Code
shall establish the general scope of the plumbing system and equipment
requirements for One- and Two-Family Dwelling structures.
Chapters 34 to 43 Electrical
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
23-25 REVISED 03/04/13
Delete all of Chapters 34 through 43 and replace with the following:
The applicable provisions of the Electrical Regulations in the Municipal Code
shall establish the general scope of the electrical system and equipment
requirements for One- and Two- Family Dwelling structures.
Chapter 44 - Referenced Standards
GGA Gypsum Association
Add the following row:
GA 214- 07 Recommended Levels of Gypsum Board Finish …… Table R702. 3.5
Appendix G
AG103. 2 Above- ground pools and on-ground pools
Replace ANSI/NSPI-4 with ANSI/APSP-4-2007.
AG108.1 General
Replace ANSI/ NSPI- 4-99 standard for above- ground/ on- ground residential swimming
pools with ANSI/APSP-4-2007 standard for above-ground/on-ground residential
swimming pools
Appendix K
AK101. 1 General
Revise to read as follows:
a. Every exterior wall of a dwelling that is part of the building’ s thermal envelope
shall be designed and constructed to reduce the transmission of sound as provided
for in Article III.
b. Every exterior wall of a dwelling that is part of the building’s thermal envelope
shall be designed and constructed to reduce the transmission of sound as provided
for in Article III.
c. All components of the building’ s exterior envelope shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the provisions of the IRC as amended, to reduce
the transmission of noise into every habitable livable dwelling space.
d. Wall and floor-ceiling assemblies separating dwelling units including those
separating adjacent townhouse units shall provide air- borne sound insulation for
walls, and both air-borne and impact sound insulation for floor-ceiling assemblies.
AK102.1 General
Revise as follows:
Change Sound Transmission Class (STC) rating of 45 to:
Sound Transmission Class ( STC) rating of 55
AK103. 1 General
Revise as follows:
Change Impact Insulation Class ( IIC) rating of not less than 45 to:
Impact Insulation Class (IIC) rating of not less than 55.
BUILDING REGULATIONS
23-26 REVISED 01/07/19
Article IV Regulations and Standards for
Building Structures Other Than One- and Two-Family Dwellings;
Adoption of the International Building Code
Section 23-401 Adoption of the International Building Code
a. There is hereby adopted by reference the 2009 Edition of the International Building
Code ( IBC) for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction,
alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and
maintenance of buildings and structures other than for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings, except as modified by Section 23-402 of this Article.
b. The International Building Code shall regulate the construction of all buildings and
structures except for One- and Two-Family Dwellings specifically regulated by Article
III, where the provisions of this Chapter 23 specifically cover the subject matter in
question.
Ord. #13-019, # 19-001)
Section 23-402 Modification by Amendment and Deletion of Various Sections of the
International Building Code. The 2009 Edition of the International Building Code adopted by
this Chapter is modified for use in the Village by the following amendments, which
amendments are given articles and section numbers identical to the International Building
Code. Appendices C, E, F, G, H, and I are specifically adopted. To the extent any provision of
the IBC conflicts with any provision of the Arlington Heights Municipal Code, the Municipal
Code provision will apply.
Chapter 2 – Definitions
201.3 Terms defined in other codes
Add the following text at the end:
Where terms are defined in both the IBC or other ICC codes and the Municipal
Code, the definitions in the Municipal Code shall apply.
202 Definitions
In the definition of HIGH-RISE BUILDING, change 75 feet to 60 feet.
Chapter 5 – General Building Heights and Areas
501.2 Address Identification
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
1. It shall be the duty of the owners of every building in the Village to have placed
thereon the assigned numbers above the door which is the principal entrance
fronting on the street, or where no street exists, the assigned numbers shall be
above or on the principal entrance to the building via an alley, driveway, parking
lot, fire lane, or other improved right-of-way. The assigned numbers shall be
Arabic numerals at least six inches high and of such size and shape so as to be
easily visible from the street, alley, driveway, parking lot, fire lane, or improved
right- of-way. The Arabic numerals shall be constructed of a durable material
which contrasts with the background upon which the assigned numbers are
affixed.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
23-27 REVISED 01/07/19
2. The practice of affixing numbers in script or word form is not prohibited;
however, the Arabic numerals required herein must be affixed on or over the
principal entrance.
3. Each commercial building and multi- family dwelling with a rear or side
entrance on an alley, driveway, parking lot, fire lane or improved right -of-way
shall have the assigned number or numbers affixed on or over such entrance in
Arabic numerals at least six inches high.
4. In any instance where numbers located on the principal entrance of the building
are not easily visible and identifiable from the street, alley, driveway, parking lot,
fire lane, or other improved right-of-way upon which the principal entrance
fronts, the Building and Fire Departments may require a monument, pole or other
such additional numbering signs or placards on or about the building and premises
as necessary to ensure that such buildings are easily identifiable from the street,
alley, driveway, parking lot, fire lane, or other improved right-of-way.
5. Where the buildings are part of a multi-unit complex or development, either
residential or commercial, every door to every office or apartment in every
building shall be numbered as well as their principal entrance to the building
having a sign on the entrance indicating which individual numbered units are
contained therein.
6. The names of all new buildings and developments shall not include any
numerical references in vanity addresses or in identifying the buildings or
development name unless the numerical references and name are the property
number and actual street address assigned by the Village.
Chapter 7 – Fire and Smoke Protection Features
705.1 General
Add the following after the last sentence:
Gypsum board shall be taped and finished to at least a ‘ level one’ in unoccupied
spaces and ‘ level three’ in occupied spaces, as specified by the US Gypsum
Association document GA-214-07; for the interior finish of an exterior building
envelope assembly: the gypsum board shall be a minimum 5/
8 inch thick.
Chapter 9 – Fire Protection Systems
901.6 Supervisory Service
Replace the words “ where required” with “ all”.
F] 903.2 Where Required
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be required in all new buildings and
structures, except for open parking structures, open-air portions of Group A-5,
Group F-2 occupancies, and Group U occupancies.
F] 903.4.3 Floor Control Valves
Change “ high-rise buildings” to “ all buildings”.
BUILDING REGULATIONS
23-28 REVISED 10/01/11
F] 904.3.5 Monitoring
Change text to read:
Alternate automatic fire extinguishing systems shall be monitored in compliance
with the provisions of this code and NFPA 72.
F] 905.4 Location of Class I Standpipe hose connections
Add the following after the word connections in the first sentence:
with a 2½ inch x 1½ inch reducer and cap and chain.
F] 905.5 Location of Class II standpipe hose connections
Add the following after the word connections in the first sentence:
with a 1½ inch cap and chain.
F] 905.6 Location of Class II standpipe hose connections
Add the following after the word connections in the first sentence:
with a 2½ inch x 1½ inch reducer and cap and chain.
F] 907.2.13 High-rise buildings
Replace 75 feet with 60 feet.
F] 907.2.13.2 Fire department communication system
Add the following after the last sentence:
Each location of a fire department communication device shall be an independent
zone from the control panel in the fire command room.
F] 907.5.2.3.1 Public and common areas
Add the following after the last sentence:
A visible exterior weatherproof alarm notification device shall be located within
close proximity to the front main entrance of the building or tenant space, as
approved.
F] 907.6.3.1 Zoning indicator Panel
Delete the first sentence and replace it with the following:
A zoning indicator panel and the associated controls or a fire alarm panel shall be
provided at the main front entrance or at an alternative approved location.
F] 912.2.1 Visible location
Add the following sentence at the end:
Such connections shall be located at the main front entrance of the building and
within a maximum travel distance of 100 feet to the nearest fire hydrant.
F] 913.4 Valve supervision
Delete methods 3 and 4.
Chapter 11 – Accessibility
Delete the entire chapter.
Chapter 12 – Interior Environment
1207. 2 Air-borne sound
Change sound transmission class (STC) from 50 to 55.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
29 REVISED 10/01/11
1207.3 Structure-borne sound
Change impact insulation class ( IIC) from 50 to 55.
1209. 1 Crawl spaces
In the first sentence, change 18 inches by 24 inches to 30 inches by 30 inches
Add the following at the end:
At a minimum, the clear height of under-floor spaces shall be not less than 30
inches.
Chapter 15 – Roof Assemblies and Rooftop Structures
1510.3 Recovering versus Replacement
Insert the following before the first sentence:
The roofs shall be drained and ventilated in accordance with the requirements for
new roofs.
Chapter 16 – Structural Design
Table 1607.1
In item 27, change the number 30 to 40.
1608. 2 Modify to read as Snow Loads
Delete the existing text and replace with the following:
Ground snow loads shall be a minimum of 30 pounds per square foot.
Chapter 18 – Soils and Foundations
1805.1.2 Under-floor space
Add the following after the last sentence:
All crawl spaces shall have a floor consisting of not less than 3 inches of concrete
over 4 inches thickness or more of stone over a vapor barrier that equals or
exceeds 6-mil thickness.
1807.1 Foundation Walls, Retaining Walls and Embedded Posts and Poles
Add the following after the last sentence:
Timber and wood foundation systems are not permitted in the Village.
1809.9 Masonry-unit footings
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
Masonry-unit footings are not permitted in the Village.
Chapter 26 – Plastic
2603. 4.1.6 Attics and crawl spaces
Delete and replace with the following:
Within an attic or crawl space, foam plastic insulation shall be protected against
ignition by 3/
8 inch gypsum wall board, corrosion-resistant steel having a base
metal thickness of 0.016 inch or other approved material installed in such manner
that the foam plastic insulation is not exposed. The protective covering shall be
consistent with the requirements for the type of construction.
Chapter 27 – Electrical
Delete this chapter in its entirety replace with the following:
BUILDING REGULATIONS
30 REVISED 10/01/11
The applicable provisions of the Electrical Regulations in the Municipal Code
shall establish the general scope of the electrical system and equipment
requirements for other than One- and Two- Family Dwelling structures.
Chapter 29 – Plumbing Systems
Delete this chapter in its entirety replace with the following:
The applicable provisions of the Plumbing Regulations in the Municipal Code
shall establish the general scope of the plumbing system and equipment
requirements for other than One- and Two- Family Dwelling structures.
Chapter 30 – Elevator and Conveying Systems
3002.3 Emergency Signs
Add the following text:
The sign shall be 7 inches by 5 inches and read as follows: IN FIRE
EMERGENCY, DO NOT USE ELEVATOR. USE EXIT STAIRS.
3002. 4 Elevator car to accommodate ambulance stretcher
Delete and replace with the following:
At least one elevator shall be provided for fire department emergency access to all
floors. The elevator car shall be of such a size and arrangement to accommodate
an ambulance stretcher in its horizontal, open position, provided the cab size shall
be not less than 60 inches by 85 inches, to accommodate an ambulance stretcher
in its horizontal, open position; and shall be identified by the International
Symbol for emergency medical services ( Star of Life). The Symbol shall be not
less than 3 inches high and shall be placed inside on both sides of the hoist- way
door frame.
Ord. 13-019)
Chapter 34 – Existing Buildings and Structures
3408 Change of Occupancy
Amend to read as follows:
3408. 1 Conformance. No change shall be made in the use or occupancy of any
building that would place the building in a different division of the same group of
occupancies or in a different group of occupancies, unless such building is made
to comply with the requirements of this Code for such division or group of
occupancies. Subject to the approval of the Building Official, the use or
occupancy of existing buildings shall be permitted to be changed and the building
is allowed to be occupied for purposes in other groups in existing structures where
the space at issue is 3,000 square feet or less of gross floor area, the structure at
issue does not include residential occupancies, and the space at issue meets the
fire separation requirements of Table 508.4 of the International Building Code.
Chapter 35 – Referenced Standards
GGA Gypsum Association
Add the following row:
GA 214- 07 Recommended Levels of Gypsum Board Finish……… Table 705.1
Article V Regulations and Standards for
Heating, Ventilation, Air-Conditioning and Related Mechanical Systems;
Adoption of the International Mechanical Code
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
31 REVISED 10/01/11
Section 23-501 Adoption of the International Mechanical Code.
a. There is hereby adopted by reference the 2009 Edition of the International Mechanical
Code ( IMC) for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for governing the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of heating,
ventilation, air- conditioning and related mechanical systems, except as modified by this
Chapter of the Municipal Code.
b. The International Mechanical Code shall:
1. Regulate heating, ventilation, air-conditioning and related mechanical systems
in other than one and two family dwellings regulated by Article III, where the
provisions of this Chapter 23 specifically cover the subject matter in question.
2. In the event that a detail or regulation is not covered by the 2009 Edition of the
International Mechanical Code, then the provisions of the ASHRAE Standards,
applicable provisions of the Village Code shall apply.
Section 23-502 Modification by Amendment and Deletion of Various Sections of the
International Mechanical Code. The 2009 Edition of the International Mechanical Code
adopted by this Chapter is modified for use in the Village by the following amendments, which
amendments are given articles and section numbers identical to the International Mechanical
Code. To the extent any provision of the IMC conflicts with any provision of the Arlington
Heights Municipal Code, the Municipal Code provision will apply.
Chapter 3 – General Provisions
304.6 Public garages
Add the following after the last sentence:
Appliances described in this Section shall be prohibited from serving areas other
than the public garage.
304.7 Private garages
Add the following after the last sentence:
Appliances described in this Section shall be prohibited from serving areas other
than the private garage.
Chapter 5 – Exhaust Systems
505.1 Domestic systems
Delete Exception 1.
Chapter 6 – Duct Systems
602.3 Stud cavity and joist space plenums
Delete this section in its entirety.
603.6.1.1 Duct length
Delete and replace with the following:
Flexible air ducts shall be limited to 8 feet.
BUILDING REGULATIONS
32 REVISED 10/01/11
603.6.2.1 Connector length
Delete and replace with the following:
Flexible air connectors shall be limited to 8 feet.
603.17 Registers, grilles and diffusers
Add the following after the last sentence:
For residential uses under Article IV of Chapter 23 of the Municipal Code, cold
air returns shall be located both high and low in the occupied space.
Chapter 9 – Special, Appliances, Fireplaces
And Solid Fuel Burning Equipment
918.6 Prohibited Sources
In item 1, delete 10 feet and replace it with 12 feet.
Chapter 11 – Refrigeration
1101.4 Water connection
Delete and replace with the following:
Water supply and discharge connections associated with refrigeration systems
shall be made in accordance with Chapter 24 of the Municipal Code. The use of
open-loop water cooled equipment is prohibited. Exemptions from this
prohibition may be granted by the Director of Public Works upon application
submitted to the Director of Public Works for such exemption as part of the
building permit submittal process.
Chapter 12 – Hydronic Piping
1209. 3.1 Steel pipe joints
Delete this section in its entirety.
1209.3.2 Copper tubing joints
Delete this section in its entirety.
Article VI Regulations and Standards for Fuel Gas and Related Systems;
Adoption of the International Fuel Gas Code
Section 23-601 Adoption of the International Fuel Gas Code
a. There is hereby adopted by reference the 2009 Edition of the International Fuel Gas
Code ( IFGC) for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for governing fuel
gas systems, gas- fired appliances and related systems for use in buildings, structures
and premises, except as modified by this Article.
b. The International Fuel Gas Code shall:
1. Regulate fuel gas and related systems in other than one- and two- family
dwellings regulated by Article III, where the provisions of this Chapter 23
specifically cover the subject matter in question.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
23-33 REVISED 04/18/16
2. In the event that a detail or regulation is not covered by the 2009 Edition of the
IFGC then the applicable provisions of the ASHRAE Standards, applicable
provisions of the Village Code shall apply..
Section 23-602 Modification by Amendment and Deletion of Various Sections of the
International Fuel Gas Code. The 2009 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code adopted
by this Chapter is modified for use in the Village by the following amendments, which
amendments are given articles and section numbers identical to the International Fuel Gas
Code. To the extent any provision of the IMC conflicts with any provision of the Arlington
Heights Municipal Code, the Municipal Code provision will apply.
Chapter 4 – Gas Piping Installations
403.4.3 Copper and brass
Delete existing text and replace with the following:
Copper and brass pipe shall not be used.
403.4.4 Aluminum
Delete existing text and replace with the following:
Aluminum- alloy pipe shall not be used.
403.5.2 Copper and brass tubing
Delete existing text and replace with the following:
Copper and brass tubing shall not be used.
403.5.3 Aluminum tubing
Delete existing text and replace with the following:
Aluminum- alloy tubing shall not be used in exterior locations or underground.
Chapter 5 – Chimneys and Vents
501.8 Appliances not required to be vented
Delete items 1 and 2.
505.1.1 Commercial cooking appliances vented by exhaust hoods
Delete existing text and replace with the following:
Where commercial cooking appliances are vented by means of a Type I or II
kitchen exhaust hood system that serves such appliances, the exhaust hood
system shall comply with the applicable sections of the Municipal
Code.
Ord. #16-010)
Article VII Regulations and Standards for
Energy Conservation and Sound Control Measures
Section 23-701 Adoption of the International Energy Conservation Code. There is hereby
adopted by reference the 2015 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) as
now or hereafter amended, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for governing
energy efficient building envelopes and installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and
power systems for buildings/ structures, except as modified by this Article.
a. The International Energy Conservation Code shall:
BUILDING REGULATIONS
23-34 REVISED 04/18/16
1. Regulate energy conservation in all buildings and structures, where the
provisions of this Chapter 23 specifically cover the subject matter in question.
2. In the event that a detail or regulation is not covered by the 2015 Edition of the
International Energy Conservation Code or other provisions of this Article, then
the applicable provisions of the ASHRAE Standards and/or applicable
provisions of the Municipal Code shall apply.
Section 23-702 Modification by Amendment and Deletion of Various Sections of the
International Energy Conservation Code. The 2015 Edition of the International Energy
Conservation Code adopted by this Chapter is modified for use in the Village by the following
amendments, which amendments are given articles and section numbers identical to the
International Energy Conservation Code. To the extent any provision of the IECC conflicts
with any provision of the Arlington Heights Municipal Code, the more stringent provision will
apply.
Chapter 4 – Residential Energy Efficiency
402.1.1 Insulation and Fenestration criteria
Delete existing text and replace with the following:
The building thermal envelope in Arlington Heights shall comply with Table 402.1.1.
Table 402.1.1
INSULATION AND FENESTRATION REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENTa
FENESTRATION
U-FACTORb
SKYLIGHT
U-FACTORb
GLAZED
FENESTRATION
SGGCb
CEILING
R-VALUE
WOOD FRAME
WALL
R-VALUE
MASS WALL
R-VALUEe
FLOOR
OVER
UNHEATED
INTERIOR
SPACES OR
UNFINISHED
BASEMENT
R-VALUE
FINISHED
BASEMENT
WALL
R-VALUE
SLAB
PERIMETER
R-VALUE
AND
DEPTHc
CRAWL
SPACE
WALL
R-VALUE
Flat Cathedral 2x4
Walls
2x6
Walls
0.35 and shall carry
the US Department
of Energy’ s Energy
Star Rating
0.60 NR R-49 R-38
13 + 5d R-21 R-13/17 R-30 R-15 R-11
and 4 feet
R-30
a. R-values are minimums. U-factors and SHGC are maximums. R-19 batts compressed into nominal 2x6 framing cavity, such that the R-value is
reduced by R-1 or more, shall be marked with the compressed batt R-value in addition to the full thickness R-value.
b. The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC column applies to all glazed fenestration.
c. R-5 shall be added to the required slab edge R-values for heated slabs.
d. “ 13+5” means R-13 cavity insulation plus R-5 insulated sheathing. If structural sheathing covers 25 percent or less of the exterior, R -5
sheathing is not required where structural sheathing is used. If structural sheathing covers more than 25 percent of exterior, structural
sheathing shall be supplemented with insulated sheathing of at least R-2.
e. The second R-value applies when more than half the insulation is on the interior of the mass wall.
Table 402.1.3
EQUIVALENT U-FACTORSa
FENESTRATION UFACTOR
SKYLIGHT
U-FACTOR
CEILING
U-FACTOR
FRAME WALL
U-FACTOR
MASS WALL
U-FACTORb
FLOOR
OVER UNHEATED
INTERIOR
SPACES OR
UNFINISHED
BASEMENT
U-FACTOR
FINISHED
BASEMENT
WALL
U-FACTOR
CRAWL
SPACE WALL
U-FACTOR
Flat Cathedral 2x4 Walls 2x6 Walls
0.35 and shall carry the
US Department of
Energy’ s Energy Star
Rating
0.60 0.020 0.026 0.060 0.048 0.082 0.033 0.067 0.033
a. Non-fenestration U-factors shall be obtained from measurement, calculation or approved source.
b. When more than half of the insulation is on the interior, the mass wall U-factors shall be the same as the frame wall U-factor.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
35 REVISED 10/01/11
402.2.11 Thermally isolated sunroom insulation
Delete existing text and replace with the following:
The minimum R-Values and their corresponding U-factors shall be in accordance
with Tables 402.1.1 and 402.1.3 respectively. New wall(s) separating a sunroom
from conditioned space( s) shall meet the building thermal envelope requirements.
Chapter 5 – Commercial Energy Efficiency
502.3 Fenestration (Prescriptive)
Add the following at the end:
Where glazing units are provided for exterior walls, every exterior window shall
be sealed at the wall- window interface and shall be glazed with insulating glazing
with a low E coating on the inside of the outside pane.
503.3.1 Economizers
Delete Exception 1.
Table 503.3.1(1)
Delete existing table and replace with the following:
Economizers are required on all cooling systems greater than or equal to 54,000
Btu/h for packaged systems and 66,000 Btu/h for split systems. The total capacity
of all systems without economizers shall not exceed 480, 000 Btu/h per building,
or 20 percent of its economizer capacity, whichever is greater.
503.4.1 Economizers
Delete Exceptions 2 and 3.
503.4.3.2.2 Climate Zones 5 through 8
Delete existing text and replace with the following:
If a closed-circuit cooling tower is used, then a separate heat exchanger shall be
required to isolate the cooling tower from the heat pump loop, and heat loss shall
be controlled by shutting down the circulation pump on the cooling tower loop
and providing an automatic valve to stop the flow of fluid. The use of open- loop
water cooled equipment is prohibited in the Village.
Section 23-703 Specific Sound Control Measures for Commercial Buildings and Multi-
Family Dwelling Structures. The following provisions shall apply to commercial buildings and
multi- family dwelling structures, and any other spaces used for human occupancy that are
regulated by Article IV of Chapter 23 of the Municipal Code:
a. The following are the sound control regulations for all exterior building envelopes:
1. Where glazing units are provided for exterior walls, such glazing units shall have
a minimum STC rating of 32.
2. At a minimum, roof insulation shall be R-30. This requirement shall not apply to
the repair or replacement of roof membranes and/or roof assemblies.
3. Insulation for floors above unconditioned or exterior space shall be R-30.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
36 REVISED 10/01/11
4. Openings other than fenestrations shall be sealed and taped in such a manner as to
prevent sound from infiltrating into the interior building environment.
b. Sound transmission control provisions for interior spaces shall not be applicable within
spaces used as mechanical rooms, storage rooms and other spaces not to be occupied by
humans; however, those spaces shall be separated with sound insulation from other
spaces intended to be occupied by humans.
c. This Section shall apply to common interior walls, partitions and floor/ ceiling assemblies
between dwelling units; and between dwelling units and tenant spaces.
1. Walls, partitions and floor/ceiling assemblies shall have a sound transmission
class ( STC) of not less than 55 for air-borne noise when tested in accordance with
ASTM E 90. Penetrations or openings in construction assemblies for piping;
electrical devices; recessed cabinets; bathtubs; soffits; or heating, ventilating or
exhaust ducts shall be sealed, lined, insulated or otherwise treated to maintain the
required ratings.
2. Floor/ ceiling assemblies shall have an impact insulation class ( IIC) rating of not
less than 55 when tested in accordance with ASTM E 492.
3. Referenced Standards.
i. ASTM E 90-04 Test Method for Laboratory Measurement of Airborne
Sound Transmission Loss of Building Partitions and Elements.
ii. ASTM E 492-04 Test Method for Laboratory Measurement of Impact
Sound Transmission through Floor- ceiling Assemblies Using the Tapping
Machine.
Section 23-704 Specific Sound Control Measures for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. In
addition to the applicable technical provisions of Article III of this Chapter the following
provisions shall apply to all one- and two-family dwellings in the Village:
a. The following shall apply to all exterior building envelopes:
1. Exterior sheathing shall be a minimum ½ inch thick Plywood or Oriented -Strand-
Board ( OSB) or other approved materials on the entire face of all exterior walls.
2. Roof sheathing shall be a minimum 5/
8 inch thick Plywood or Oriented- Strand-
Board (OSB) or other approved materials on the entire roof surface.
3. Exterior windows shall be a minimum of insulated glass with low E coating and
shall carry the US Department of Energy’ s Energy Star Rating.
4. Exterior doors shall carry the US Department of Energy’ s Energy Star Rating, and
shall meet or exceed the following:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
37 REVISED 10/01/11
i. Doors shall be either solid core wood, insulated fiberglass, insulated steel
or an approved alternative. This provision shall apply to service doors,
front doors, back doors and doors between the garage and house;
ii. Weather stripping shall be provided for door- side treatments and doorbottom
treatments to reduce air infiltration to not more than 0.5 cubic feet
per minute per square foot;
iii. Glazing in doors, sidelights and transoms shall be of a minimum insulated
glass conforming to Table 402.1.1 of the IECC or an approved alternative.
5. All interior surfaces where gypsum board is used shall be 5/
8 inch thick and shall
be taped and finished to at least a ‘ level one’ in unoccupied spaces and ‘ level
three’ in occupied spaces, as specified by the US Gypsum Association document
GA-214- 96. All other interior surfaces, including floors and ceilings, shall be
sealed and finished to minimize the transmission of sound.
6. Openings other than fenestrations shall be sealed and taped in such a manner as to
prevent sound from infiltrating into the interior building environment.
7. Insulation for floors above unconditioned or exterior space shall be R-30.
b. The following provisions apply to walls, partitions and floor/ceiling assemblies
separating attached dwelling units including those separating adjacent townhouse units
and those housing noise generating equipment and materials.
1. Air-borne sound insulation for walls, partitions and floor/ceiling assemblies shall
meet a Sound Transmission Class ( STC) rating of not less than 55 when tested in
accordance with ASTM E 90. Penetrations or openings in construction assemblies
for piping; electrical devices; recessed cabinets; bathtubs; soffits; or heating,
ventilating or exhaust ducts shall be sealed, lined, insulated or otherwise treated to
maintain the required ratings. Dwelling units entrance doors, which share a
common space, shall be tight-fitting to the frame and sill.
2. Floor/ ceiling assemblies between dwelling units or between a dwelling unit and a
public or service area within the structure shall have an impact insulation class
IIC) rating of not less than 55 when tested in accordance with ASTM E 492.
3. Referenced Standards.
i. ASTM E 90-04 Test Method for Laboratory Measurement of Airborne
Sound Transmission Loss of Building Partitions and Elements.
ii. ASTM E 492-04 ( 1996)e Specification for Laboratory Measurement of
Impact sound Transmission through Floor- ceiling Assemblies Using the
Tapping Machine.
Article VIII Relocating Buildings
Section 23-801 Requirements and Restrictions. No residential building or structure shall be
moved into other territory already improved with residences to the extent of 75% of the building
BUILDING REGULATIONS
38 REVISED 10/01/11
sites contained within a radius of 300 feet of the outside lot lines of the new proposed location
unless:
a. Such residential building or structure is 40 years or less in age;
b. Such residential building or structure is of approximately the same age, type of
architecture, and constructed of approximately the same materials as residential buildings
and structures comprising at least 50% of the then existing residential buildings or
structures within the area; or unless such residential building or structure shall be, when
moved, so repaired, altered and improved that it will conform to the type of architecture
and be constructed of such materials so as to be similar in appearance, quality and value
to at least 50% of the residential buildings and structures then existing within the area;
c. Such residential building or structure shall conform with the provisions of these Building
Regulations so far as practicable.
Section 23-802 Exceptions - Consent of Neighboring Owners. The provisions of Section 23-
201 shall be waived if there is first obtained the written consent of the owners of 75% of the
building sites contained within a radius of 300 feet of the outside lot lines of the proposed
location to which a residential building or structure is proposed to be moved.
Section 23-803 Permit Required. No building or structure shall be moved to any new location
within the Village unless a permit therefor has been issued by the Director of Building. The
Director of Building shall issue permits if all provisions of this Article have been complied with
and the proposed new building will substantially comply with the provisions of these Building
Regulations.
Section 23-804 Application for Permit.
a. An application for a permit required under the provisions of this Article shall be
accompanied by a complete set of plans and specifications covering all proposed repairs,
alterations and improvements to be made to the building or structure proposed to be
moved.
b. Such application shall be accompanied by a cash bond in the sum of $3,000, or a bond in
the sum of $3,000 with sureties satisfactory to the Director of Building, indemnifying the
Village and guaranteeing the completion of all repairs, alterations and improvements on
such building in accordance with such plans and specifications, within one year after the
placing of such building on its new location, and further providing that in the case of
failure to complete such repairs, alterations and improvements, such moved building or
structure shall be removed from such premises.
Section 23-805 Failure to Make Required Changes. In the event that the moved building or
structure is not properly repaired, altered or improved within one year after placing such building
or structure, the bond filed in respect thereto shall be forfeited.
Section 23-806 Certificate of Occupancy. After completion and inspection, the Director of
Building shall issue a certificate of occupancy when the building or structure has been moved,
repaired, altered and improved in accordance with the conditions of the permit.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
39 REVISED 10/01/11
Article IX Regulations and Standards for Elevators, Dumbwaiters, Escalators,
Platform Lifts, Chairlifts and Moving Walks
Section 23-901 Adoption of Safety Codes. There is hereby adopted by reference the following:
a. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME)
1. Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.1-2007/CSA B44-07)
2. Performance-Based Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators ( ASME A17.7-
2007/ CSA B44.7-07)
3. Guide for Inspection of Elevators, Escalators, and Moving Walks ( ASME A17. 2-
2007)
4. Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.3-2005)
5. Safety Standards for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts (ASME A18.1-2005)
6. Standard for the Qualification of Elevator Inspectors (ASME QEI-1-2007)
b. American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE)
1. Automated People Mover Standard (ASCE 21-05), Part 1, 2006
2. Automated People Mover Standards (ANSI/ASCE/T&DI 21.2-08), Parts 2, 3 and 4,
2008
Section 23-902 Elevator Requirements.
a. A minimum of one elevator is required for all new buildings three or more stories in
height, above grade; provided, however, that no elevator shall be required in buildings of
three stories when the elevator would service no more than two dwelling units per floor.
b. All new elevators shall be equipped with emergency key opening devices at all landings.
The location and specific type of device shall be approved by the Fire Department.
c. If the elevator uses an automatic dialer, the ten digit number 847-590-3470 shall be used.
If bidirectional communication is available and is used, the elevator should call 911. The
phone line used to dial 911 must have the correct address information affiliated with that
phone line.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 04/18/16
CHAPTER 24 PLUMBING REGULATIONS
Article I General Provisions
Section 24-101 Permit Fees
Section 24-102 Issuance of Permit
Section 24-103 Failure to Comply
Article II Regulations and Standards for Plumbing; Adoption of the Illinois Plumbing
Code
Section 24-201 Plumbing Regulations
Section 24-202 Plumbing Fixtures and Irrigation Controllers
Section 24-203 Modification by Amendment of Certain Sections of the Illinois
Plumbing Code
PLUMBING REGULATIONS
24-2 REVISED 04/18/16
Article I General Provisions
Section 24-101 Permit Fees. No permits required under the provisions of this Chapter shall be
issued until the payment of applicable fees. Permit fees shall be based on the cost of inspecting
the work and shall be paid to the Finance Department. Fees for the inspection of plumbing
fixtures and appurtenances, requiring supply, drainage and vent piping, installed in new
buildings or in addition to existing buildings, shall be $10 for each fixture, with a minimum fee
of $65. Fees for the inspection of fixtures replacing others, and fees for the installation of fixtures
in existing buildings, shall be $10 for each fixture. The fee for the installation of a water heater is
25.
Section 24-102 Issuance of Permit. The Director of Building shall issue a plumbing permit
when the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this Code and the Illinois Plumbing
Code, including the payment of all permit fees.
Section 24-103 Failure to Comply. Any person who shall install plumbing in any building,
except for minor repairs, without first having obtained a permit for doing such work shall be
subject to a fine, as prescribed in the Arlington Heights Municipal Code. No plumbing or drain
laying work shall be started or continued unless the person doing such work shall have on the
premises a written permit and required plan stamped and approved by the Director of Building.
No verbal authorization or verbal permission shall be recognized.
Article II Regulations and Standards for Plumbing;
Adoption of the Illinois Plumbing Code
Section 24-201 Plumbing Regulations. There is hereby adopted by reference the Illinois
Administrative Code, Title 77: Public Health, Chapter I: Department of Public Health,
Subchapter r: Water and Sewage, Part 890 Illinois Plumbing Code, for the purpose of
establishing rules and regulations for plumbing within the Village of Arlington Heights, as now
or hereafter amended, except as modified by this Chapter.
Section 24-202 Plumbing Fixtures and Irrigation Controllers. Pursuant to 17 Ill. Adm. Code
3730.307(c) 4 and subject to the Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890) and the Lawn
Irrigation Contractor and Lawn Sprinkler System Registration Code ( 77 Ill. Adm. Code 892), all
new plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed after the effective date of this Section
shall bear the WaterSense label ( as designed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
WaterSense Program), when such labeled fixtures are available.
Section 24-203 Modification by Amendment of Certain Sections of the Illinois Plumbing
Code. The Illinois Plumbing Code adopted by this Article is modified for use in the Village by
the following amendments, which amendments are given section numbers identical to the Illinois
Plumbing Code.
Subpart E: Interceptors – Separators and Backwater Valves.
Section 890.510: Grease Interceptor Requirements
Add the following paragraph after the first paragraph in the section, as follows:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
24-3 REVISED 04/18/16
When a Type 1 Grease Hood is utilized in a commercial kitchen, as specified in the International
Mechanical Code, an external grease trap shall be required. Minimum external grease trap size
as specified in the State of Illinois Plumbing Code of 2014, Section 890, Appendix E, Subpart E,
Illustration B, Typical Grease Trap.
Section 890. 510( a)(2)
Add the following sentence:
Minimum interior grease trap size shall be 50 GPM ( gallons per minute) and shall be installed
with removable cover set flush with finished floor in a readily accessible area for regular
maintenance and inspection. The installation of a (“ 50 GPM” or “ properly sized”) grease trap is
required in any location which contains a Type II grease hood as required in the International
Mechanical Code.
Subpart F: Plumbing Fixtures
Section 890.680 Lavatories
Add the following sentence immediately after “ Lavatory” title as a first sentence of the section:
Section 890.680 Lavatories. Lavatories/hand sinks are required in all commercial kitchens and
examining rooms used by physicians, dentists, chiropractors and other medical practitioners, as
well as massage therapists, aestheticians and any other business that require direct contact with
the skin.
Subpart I: Water Supply and Distribution
Section 890-1210 Design of a Building Water Distribution System
Add subsection “ 1” after subsection “ a” as follows:
1) Hot water systems for potable water use that exceed 50’ of supply piping shall be installed
with a hot water recirculation system. When a gravity system is not applicable, a pump and
timer shall be installed with full port ball valves on both sides of the recirculation pump and
timer.
ELECTRICITY
REVISED 03/15/10
Ord. #98-086, # 07-060, # 10-009)
CHAPTER 25 ELECTRICITY
Article I General Provisions
Section 25-101 Definition
Section 25-102 Rules Adopted
Section 25-103 Amendments
Section 25-104 Additional Amendments
Section 25-105 Electrical Regulations Related to Commercial and to Include Industrial
Buildings and/or Structures for the Purpose of the Installation of
Electrical Wiring Systems, Electrical Equipment, Electrical Materials,
Devices, Apparatus, Appliances, etc.
Article II Applications, Permits, Inspections and Fees
Section 25-201 General
Section 25-202 Applications, Contents, Permit
Section 25-203 Permits Required - Must be Signed by Registered Contractor
Section 25-204 Inspection Required
Section 25-205 Service Entrance Fees
Section 25-206 Minimum Fee for Any Inspection
Section 25-207 Certificate of Approval
Section 25-208 Certificate of Approval Required
Section 25-209 Temporary Current
Article III Electrical Contractor
Section 25-301 Electrical Contractor
Section 25-302 Registration
Section 25-303 Registration Fee
Section 25-304 Registration Required
Section 25-305 Sublet Contracts
Section 25-306 Permits for Work to be Done
Section 25-307 Failure to Correct Defects
Section 25-308 Unlawful to Secure Permit for Person Not Entitled Thereto
Article IV Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 25-401 Power to Enter Building
Section 25-402 Aid of Police Department
Section 25-403 Power to Attach Official Notices and Seals
Section 25-404 Permits
Section 25-405 Inspection and Certificates of Inspection
Section 25-406 Reinspection
Section 25-407 Power to Keep Records
Section 25-408 Temporary Current Permits
Section 25-409 Power to Suspend Work of Electrical Contractors
Section 25-410 Personal Liability
Section 25-411 Regulations Not to Relieve Responsibility
Section 25-412 Regulations May be Modified
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 03/15/10
Section 25-413 Unlawful to Disturb Wiring or Equipment or to Overfuse any
Conductor or Other Equipment
Section 25-414 No Installation Under Permit Issued to Other Person
Section 25-415 Unlawful to Change Forms or Permits
Section 25-416 Revocation of Permits
Section 25-417 Penalty
ELECTRICITY
2 REVISED 10/01/07
Article I General Provisions
Section 25-101 Definition. “ Electrical equipment”, as used in this Chapter, shall mean and
include conductors and equipment installed for the utilization of electricity supplied for light,
heat or power, but does not include radio apparatus or equipment for the wireless reception of
sounds and signals nor ordinary household appliances, such as toasters, vacuum cleaners,
washing machines nor apparatus, conductors, and the equipment installed for an by public
utilities, including common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce
Commission for use in their operations as public utilities.
Section 25-102 Rules Adopted. There is hereby adopted as safe and practical standards for the
installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment in the Village the rules and regulations of
the National Board of Fire Underwriters for electric wiring and apparatus, contained in the code
known as the “ Electrical Code”, published by the National Fire Protection Association ( NFPA),
except such portions as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended, a copy of which is on file in
the Village Clerk’ s Office and the Building Department and the same is incorporated as fully as
if set out herein. Chapter 25 of the Municipal Code of Arlington Heights, 2005, as now or
hereafter amended, and the Electrical Code, as now or hereafter amended shall be known
together as the Electrical Code of the Village of Arlington Heights.
Section 25-103 Amendments. The amendments, modifications and deletions to the Electrical
Code referred to in Section 25-102, are as follows:
For the inspection of original installations in a single- family residence including all circuits,
fixtures, receptacles and equipment, the fee shall be:
Interior floor area, exclusive of attic and/or basement:
0 to 499 square feet $ 60
500 to 799 square feet $ 70
800 to 1599 square feet $ 80
1600 to 2399 square feet $ 90
2400 to 2999 square feet $ 100
3000 to 3599 square feet $ 110
3600 to 4299 square feet $ 120
4300 square feet & over $ 155
Service Size
100 ampere service $ 65
200 ampere service $ 75
400 ampere service $ 95
600 ampere service $ 105
800 ampere service $ 125
1000 ampere service $ 125
1200 ampere service $ 145
1600 ampere service $ 180
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
3 REVISED 10/01/07
2000 ampere service $ 200
3000 ampere service $ 220
4000 ampere service $ 240
15 and 20 Ampere Branch Circuits
0 - 50 circuits $ 9 each
51 – or more circuits $ 5 each
Branch Circuits Exceeding 20 Amperes
All circuits $ 18 each
Motor or Device
1st motor or device $ 16
Each additional $ 6
Minimum fee $ 40
Temporary wiring $ 40
Extra inspection fee $ 40
Carnivals $ 40
Vaults- except utility owned $ 40
Burglar alarms $ 40
Aural and/ or visual communications $ 40
Antenna systems $ 40
National Code Insertions
230-2(b) No residential occupancy or property shall have more than one service installed. There
shall be no exception made to this ruling.
230- 23(b) Minimum Size: All conductors shall not be smaller than number three copper THW,
and installed in a minimum of 1-¼ inch rigid heavy-wall galvanized steel conduit or other
conduit systems as hereinafter stated in this Chapter.
230- 23(b) Exception is deleted.
230- 24(b) To include: On private property, a pole shall be installed at intervals not to exceed
110 feet for service entrance conductors, regardless whether said conductors are installed by the
electrical contractor, owner, tenant, and the like.
Said pole shall be of cedar, not less than 25 feet in length, with a minimum diameter of six
inches at the top and set in the ground not less than four and one half feet.
A square timber will not be approved for intermediate support. It is occasionally necessary to
erect a riser on a building to obtain clearance for the service outlet or the wires between the
ELECTRICITY
4 REVISED 10/01/07
pole and the building. They must comply with the specifications supplied by the electricity
supply company.
NEW INSERTIONS
Protection on Poles
If underground service conductors are carried up a pole, the mechanical protection shall be
installed to a point at least ten feet above the ground level.
Such mechanical protection may be provided by the use of galvanized heavy wall steel conduit
only.
Service
Article 230 Size and Rating
230-31 Size and Rating:
a) General: Service-lateral conductors shall have sufficient ampacity to carry the currents
for the load as computed in accordance with Article # 220 and as hereinafter stated in this
ordinance, and shall have adequate mechanical strength.
b) Minimum Size: The minimum size of any service conductor shall not be less than #3
AWG copper.
230- 31 EXCEPTION: Service conductors for the purpose of supplying electricity for street
lighting system may be exempt from the requirements as noted above.
230-42 - Size and Rating:
a) General: Service entrance conductors shall be of sufficient size to carry the loads as
computed in Article 220 and as so required as hereinafter stated in this Chapter.
Ampacity shall be determined from Tables 310-15 through 310-86 and all-applicable
notes to these tables and/ or as required in this Chapter.
230- 43 ( Wiring Methods for 600 Volts) – Deleted except for #3 and # 11.
230- 46 Exceptions 2 through 5 shall be deleted.
230- 71 Delete Sections ( a) & ( b).
230- 71 Add new section as follows: - In all applications, a single main disconnecting means
shall be installed.
NOTE: Sequence switching not permitted.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
5 REVISED 03/15/10
230-72(a) Delete.
230-79(c) New One-Family Dwelling. For a new one-family dwelling, the service disconnect
means shall have a rating of not less than 200 amperes.
230- 79(d) All Others. For all other installations, the service disconnecting means, electrical
panelboards, and the like, shall have a rating of not less than 100 amperes.
230-79(e) Branch Circuits in Panelboards ( Breakers). Panelboards shall not exceed 42
single- pole spaces. If additional panelboards are connected, at no time shall more than 84 spaces
be used without a main disconnecting means, and not to exceed 80% of the rating of the panel.
All electrical panelboards, sub-panelboards, sub-feed conductors, and the like, shall be a
minimum of 100 ampere rated in all commercial and industrial installations.
EXCEPTION: Service equipment for special use, such as, aerators, commercial fountains, and
the like, may be permitted to be rated less than 100 ampere rated, provided that
special permission in writing is obtained from the individual responsible for
electrical inspections, prior to installation.
Service Equipment - General
If supplied at the same side of the building by more than one overhead service drop or more than
one set of underground service conductors, the service equipment shall be grouped and each set
of equipment shall be marked to identify it.
In buildings zoned as commercial or industrial and in buildings that are zoned as residential
such as apartment complexes, day or nursing homes, condominiums, retirement centers, and the
like) where vaults, transformers and/or distribution points are established throughout the various
floors of the building, all such electrical equipment shall be grouped and installed in an approved
electrical closet and/or electrical equipment room.
Such closet and/or room shall be for the exclusive use of the electrical system, and shall be so
constructed as to provide the required working space around all of the electrical equipment
installed therein.
Article 230-202(a) Conductor Size. Shall read as follows: Service-entrance conductors shall
not be smaller than # 3 gauge AWG THW copper conductors.
Article 320 - Armored Cable. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 322 - Flat Cable Assemblies. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 324 - Flat Conductor Cable. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 326 - Integrated Gas Spacer Cable. Section deleted in its entirety.
ELECTRICITY
6 REVISED 10/01/07
Article 334 - Nonmetallic Cable. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 330 - Mineral Insulated Cable. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 331 - Electrical Non- metallic Tubing. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 336 - Power and Control Cable. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 338 - Service Entrance Cable. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 336 - Nonmetallic Cable. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 338 - Service Entrance Cable. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 340 - UF Cable ( Special Permission Only). Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 362 - Electrical Non- metallic Tubing. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 378 - Nonmetallic Wireways. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 382 - Nonmetallic Extensions. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 388 - Surface Nonmetallic Raceways. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 394 - Concealed Knob & Tube. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 396 - Messenger Supported Wiring. Section deleted in its entirety.
Article 398 - Open Wiring On Insulators. Section deleted in it entirety.
Article 604 - Manufactured Wiring Systems. Deleted.
Article 605 Office Furnishings
605 All office furnishing systems that may require electricity to operate lighting fixtures
and/or receptacles, or any other type of electrical operated device.
605-2 The flexible conduit that is installed from the wall-mounted junction box or the floormounted
junction box ( whichever will apply) that will be used to contain the branch circuit
conductors to the electrified partition system, shall be liquid-tight and shall not exceed six feet in
length. Liquid- tight flexible metal conduit shall be a minimum of 1/2” electrical trade size with
ground conductor installed (green in color).
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
7 REVISED 10/01/07
605-2(a) All branch circuit conductors that are installed in the typical office furniture system
shall be a minimum of #12 gauge AWG, stranded, and the insulation shall be THHN or equal.
605- 2(b) Fusible plugs or in-line fuse devices shall be installed in each lighting fixture. The
rating of the fuse shall not exceed two amperes.
605-2(c) There shall be no more than eight power-consuming devices connected to any branch
circuit. Power- consuming devices include a duplex receptacle, lighting fixture, or any other type
of electrically operated device not mentioned in this paragraph.
605-3 All branch circuit conductors shall not be less than # 12 gauge AWG copper, and the
panelboard over current protection device shall not exceed 20 ampere rating.
605- 3(a) A ground conductor shall be installed from the electrical panelboard to the office
furniture system ground. Said grounding conductor shall be green or green with yellow strip in
color.
605- 4 All equipment and materials shall be listed by a recognized electrical testing
laboratory. See Articles 90-7 and 100 (“ Listed”). This revision shall replace Articles 605 and
605- 8(d) of the National Electrical Code.
Article 680 Swimming Pools, Fountains
680- 5(c) Wiring. Conductors on the load side of a ground- fault interrupter or of a transformer,
used to comply with provisions of Section 680-23 ( F) shall not occupy conduit, boxes, or
enclosures containing conductors installed for other loads or servicing other devices.
Branch circuit conductors serving any motor, circulating pump, etc., that is related or associated
with any swimming pool, fountain, spa, and the like, that operates at 120 volts, shall be a
separate and separate 15 ampere rated wiring system and over current protection device.
EXCEPTION: A separate branch circuit may be 20 ampere rated in the event that the
connected load exceeds 12 amperes.
680-10 Underground Wiring Location. Delete. ( See Chapter 23-Arlington Heights Building
Code.)
NOTE: Regardless of installation, the connected load on any motorized equipment for
swimming pools, fountains, spas, and the like, shall not exceed 80% of the rated
branch circuit conductor, over current protection device, etc.
NOTE: Lighting fixtures and/ or lighting devices shall not be connected to a branch circuit
that is dedicated for a motor or circulating pump associated with a swimming pool,
fountain, spa, etc., except lighting fixtures that are installed as part of the pool ( i.e.,
connected as a manufactured part of the pool).
ELECTRICITY
8 REVISED 10/01/07
680-23(a)(4) Lighting fixtures installed in swimming pools, fountains, and the like, shall not
operate at more than 12 volts, as measured between conductors. Circuit should be GFCI
protected.
Fire Alarm Systems
Article 760
Amend: NPLFA Wiring Methods and Materials 760-30(a)(2) to read as follows:
EXCEPTION: For New Construction. In metal raceway where passing through a floor or
wall to a height above any suspended or finished ceiling, if a suspended
ceiling is not present. The metal raceway shall be run up to the joist/rafter
space. In all cases, fire alarm systems must be separate from all other low
voltage systems.
Amend: NPLFA Wiring Methods and Materials 760-52(b)(2) to read:
EXCEPTION: For New Construction. In metal raceway where passing through a floor or
wall to a height above any suspended or finished ceiling, if a suspended
ceiling is not present, the metal raceway shall be run up to the joist/rafter
space. Unless adequate protection can be afforded by building construction
such as detailed in (1) above, or unless an equivalent solid guard is provided.
Section 25-104 Additional Amendments. The following additional amendments and
modifications to the Electrical Code that may be in conflict with that Code shall hereby prevail.
Residential Occupancies
Section 152- 4
Definition. The definition of a residential type occupancy shall include dwellings such as
single-family dwelling, apartment unit(s) and/or apartment complex, condominium(s), quadrotype
construction, multi- family type construction, townhouses, etc. and to include any attached
or detached buildings and/or structures that are constructed on said premises, and which are not
of the commercial and/ or industrial use.
NOTE: Where existing residential occupancies are converted to a business use, said
occupancies shall be in full compliance with all code requirements as set forth in this
Chapter and to include all requirements as set forth in the commercial and industrial
section of this Chapter.
Electrical Conduit Requirements
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
9 REVISED 03/15/10
1. All conductors that may carry electrical current rated at 50 volts or greater shall be
installed in rigid heavy- wall galvanized steel conduit, or electrical metallic tubing,
approved metal raceway, unless hereinafter stated.
All conduit systems that are exposed to any type of weather condition, and/or in contact
with the earth, shall be rigid heavy- wall galvanized steel conduit, unless hereinafter
stated.
Electrical Conduit Support for Roof Top Installations
2. All conduit systems that are so installed upon roofs and the like, shall be supported at
intervals not to exceed every five to seven feet.
The supporting materials shall consist of treated lumber, of which shall be a minimum of
4" x 4"x 15" in length, or by the use of structural steel members.
All conduit clamps and/or straps used to support any conduit system for roof top
installation shall be galvanized steel or cast iron.
Other types of support systems shall be approved by the individual responsible for
electrical inspections having jurisdiction.
All conduit systems shall run 90 degrees parallel to outside walls. All low-voltage wiring
installations that may be permitted to run exposed shall be so installed as to be
perpendicular and at 90 degree bends to building walls.
Connectors and Couplings
3. All connectors and/or couplings installed where subject to weather conditions, subject to
moisture, or in contact with the earth, etc., shall be rain tight or thread- on type.
NOTE: Connectors and/ or couplings installed in dry locations may be of the setscrew
type, compression type, threaded type, or of the crimped-on type.
Armored Cable
4. The use and installation of Armored Cable “ Type AC” ( BX type cable) is not allowed
and will not be accepted and/ or permitted.
Flexible Conduit
5. Flexible metal conduit ( Greenfield) shall be permitted for the connection of motor driven
devices, lighting fixtures where flexibility of location is necessary, or “ lay-in” type
ceiling lighting fixtures, water heaters, or baseboard heaters only.
ELECTRICITY
10 REVISED 10/01/07
In all installations, all flexible conduit (Greenfield) installations shall be as short in length
as practical, but shall not exceed more than six feet in total length.
5(a) The measured length shall be determined from the electrical junction box or fitting to the
device being serviced.
EXCEPTION: Flexible metal conduit may be permitted to exceed six feet in length,
but not more than nine feet in length, where necessary, to “ fish” an
existing wall or non-accessible ceiling for the purpose of serving
switching devices or power consuming devices in existing residential
occupancies.
NOTE: Flexible conduit ( Greenfield) will not be permitted to be “ looped” from one
junction box, fixture, or fitting to serve another junction box, fixture, or
fitting.
5(b) Flexible metal conduit will not be accepted or approved to be used in new or remodeling
work where walls are “ open”, in open attic spaces, crawl spaces, or basements, except as
permitted in paragraph 4(a) above.
In these types of installations, said flexible metal conduit (Greenfield) shall not exceed
six feet in length and shall be installed in dry locations only.
5(c) Flexible metal conduit ( Greenfield) shall not be less than 3/8 inch in electrical trade size.
5(d) Flexible metal conduit ( Greenfield) shall not contain more than four # 12 ( or equivalent)
gauge AWG THHN/THWN copper conductors within said raceway.
NOTE: Neutral and grounding conductors shall be counted as conduit fill. Refer to
Table 350 of the National Electrical Code latest edition.
Low- Voltage Wiring
6. All conductors installed for low- voltage applications such as door bells, door lock release
devices, thermostat control, low-voltage lighting, control wiring in general, etc., shall be
installed in electrical metallic tubing or rigid heavy- wall galvanized steel conduit or
approved metal raceway (whichever would apply) in all areas that are not accessible.
All ends of each conduit system shall have a bushing or a coupling installed for the
purpose of providing protection of conductors in the event of necessary conductor
replacement.
Accessible areas are locations such as crawl spaces, open attic areas, basement areas, etc.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
11 REVISED 10/01/07
NOTE: Areas and/or locations such as doorjambs, ceilings and/or wall areas covered by
permanent type finishes, etc., shall not be considered as accessible.
EXCEPTION: In areas such as door jambs, etc., where the installation of conduit
would be difficult, said low volt wiring installations may be exposed in
these areas provided an additional four conductors are employed in the
cable” as spares for the purpose of future use in the event that some of
the existing conductors may become damaged.
6(a) In installations where said low- voltage wiring is not required to be installed in a metal
raceway, said wiring systems shall be supported to a permanent part of the building
structure by insulated staples or nylon type tie wraps at intervals not to exceed every five
to seven feet.
6(b) A door bell push button shall be provided at the front and rear or side of each occupancy.
Music Systems, Telephone Systems
7. Low-voltage wiring used for the installation of music systems, telephone systems, etc.,
and to include conductors used for the purpose of receiving communications, may be
exempt from paragraph (6),6(a) and 6(b) above.
7(a) Where said cable risers are installed in and/or passing through walls, ceiling, etc. that are
not accessible or said cable is subject to mechanical injury, said cable shall be installed in
a metallic raceway. Branch cables may be run without a metallic raceway.
EXCEPTION: Single-Family Detached Units of R-1 construction shall be exempt from
paragraph 7(a).
Service Entrance Conductors
8. All service entrance conductors installed for new single family type construction shall be
a minimum AWG wire size of number 3/0 gauge copper conductor and shall also be of
type THW or THWN insulation.
8(a) Regardless of the minimum size of service entrance conductors as required in paragraph
8 above, all service entrance conductors shall be adequate for the connected load.
8(b) The required service entrance conductors as noted in paragraph 8 above shall be installed
in a minimum of two inch trade size conduit which shall be rigid heavy wall galvanized
steel conduit or rigid aluminum.
All fittings ( such as couplings, connectors, etc.) employed for the service entrance
conduit installation shall be of the threaded type. Compression type fittings shall be
permitted. Setscrew type fittings will not be accepted.
ELECTRICITY
12 REVISED 03/15/10
8(c) All service entrance conductors and tenant panels installed for apartments and/or
apartment units, quadro type housing, townhouses, condominiums, multi- family
construction, etc. shall be a minimum AWG wire size of #3 gauge copper conductors and
shall be of type THW or THWN insulation.
The required service entrance conductors and tenant panels as noted in paragraph 8(c)
shall be installed in a minimum of 1-¼ inch trade size conduit which shall be rigid heavy
wall galvanized steel conduit or rigid aluminum conduit as approved by the individual
responsible for electrical inspections.
All fittings employed for the service entrance conduit installation shall be of the threaded
type. Compression type fittings will be accepted; setscrew type fittings will not be
accepted.
8(d) Regardless of the minimum size requirements of service entrance conductors as required
in paragraph 8(c), said service entrance conductors shall be adequate for the connected
load.
8(e) The load on any service entrance conductor, main service disconnect means, switch gear,
panelboard( s), and the like, shall not exceed 80% of the rating of the said service entrance
conductors or the main service disconnect means, buss detail, switchgear, panelboard(s),
etc. in any commercial, industrial, or residential building.
There shall be no exception to this ruling.
Service Entrance Neutral Conductors
9. All service entrance neutral conductors shall be fully rated and fully sized equal to the
rating of the service entrance conductors.
Under sizing or derating of the neutral conductors is not permitted and will not be
accepted.
Electrical Equipment Rooms and/ or Closets
10. In all residential- type structures so constructed for apartment- type complexes,
condominium-type structures, nursing homes, retirement centers, and the like, and where
vaults, transformers, electrical service equipment, sub- feed service equipment, and the
like ( such as switchgear, panelboards, distribution points, etc.), that are rated at 800
amperes and above; they shall be grouped and installed in an approved electrical closet
and/or switchgear room so designed and designated for the purpose. All rooms
designated as electrical rooms shall have emergency battery lights ( two heads) installed.
10(a) Switchgear room, electrical closets, vaults, transformer rooms, and the like, shall not be
designed or installed in under, or below any stairwells that are intended for means of
egress from any building.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
13 REVISED 10/01/07
Such electrical closet shall be for the exclusive use of the electrical equipment and/or
electrical system, and shall be so designed and constructed as to provide the required
working space around and/or in front of all of the electrical equipment installed therein.
10(b) Rooms where free standing switchgear, switchboards and motor control centers are
installed, there must be two exit doors from the area. The doors shall be located
diagonally across from each other and in opposite corners of the room. Door and door
hinges shall be equal to the rating of the room. Panic hardware shall be installed on exit
doors. Exit doors shall swing outward from all switchgear, switchboard and motor
control center rooms.
10(c) Rooms where switchgear, switchboards, or motor control centers are rated 1200 amperes
or more and wall installed, two exit doors shall be located on the longest wall, one each at
opposite ends of the room. Doors and door hinges shall be equal to the rating of the
room. Panic hardware shall be installed on exit doors. Exit doors shall swing outward
from all switchgear, switchboard and motor control center rooms.
Panelboard and Service Meter Clearances
Refer to National Electrical Code)
11. A minimum of five feet clearance from any sump pump or ejector pump.
Switchgear and Panelboard Locations
12. Switchgear and/ or panelboards ( circuit breaker or fuse enclosures) shall not be installed
and will not be accepted in closets, bath and/or shower rooms, utility rooms, in, under or
below any stairwells.
Main Service Disconnect Locations
13. The Main Service disconnecting means ( circuit breaker or fused switch device( s) shall be
located within five feet of the point where the service conductors enter the building
and/ or within five feet of the metering device.
Exceptions to this rule shall be made only with approval of Public Utilities and the
Electrical Inspector having jurisdiction.
13(a) All main service disconnecting means ( circuit breaker or fused switch device) shall be
located within the main wall of any building and/ or structure.
EXCEPTION: The Main Service Disconnect Means may be installed or located in a
metering device approved for the purpose, where in a single family
dwelling, the existing incoming electrical service must be relocated
because of remodeling purposes only. This exception shall apply only to
a single- family dwelling.
ELECTRICITY
14 REVISED 10/01/07
13(b) Where the use and installation of multi-metering devices are required in buildings and/or
structures such as apartment type complexes, condominium, multi- family type structures,
etc. All Service Entrance Equipment, (such as tenant metering equipment, main service
disconnecting means, etc.) shall be grouped and shall be installed in a dedicated electrical
equipment room so approved for the purpose.
Said dedicated electrical equipment rooms shall be accessible only from within the main
structure of the building.
13(c) All meters, main disconnects, panelboards, etc. that are wall mounted shall have a
minimum of ½ inch of plywood installed behind main disconnect panelboards, etc. for
the purpose of supporting and mounting of equipment.
Fire Rating of Rooms
14. All designated switchgear rooms, electrical closets, electrical equipment rooms and/ or
electrical closets, transformer rooms, vaults, and the like, shall have a minimum fire
rating of one hour construction, or shall be rated equal to the designed structure, but not
less than one hour construction, which ever is greater.
The fire rated construction shall include all walls, doors, ceilings, and the like.
Rooms To Be Vented
15. All designated electrical closets, switchgear rooms, electrical equipment rooms,
transformer rooms and/ or vaults, and the like, that contain transformer( s) that is rated at
200 kva or larger, shall be power vented to the outside air environment.
Ventilation requirements shall be of sufficient size as to keep said rooms at an average
operating temperature. In all installations, the ventilation materials, size of ventilation
duct (s), and the like, shall be accepted by the Building Department for the purpose.
Definition: Average operating temperature shall be defined as the average temperature
of the building environment.
Service Equipment - General Requirements
16. All new electrical services shall be underground.
16(a) In all applications, a single main disconnecting means shall be installed.
NOTE: Sequence switching not permitted.
EXCEPTION: By Special Permission, Residential Single Family Only: A 400 amp
service may be installed without single main disconnect. Two 200-amp
service panels with 2 200- amp breakers and 40 circuit spaces
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
15 REVISED 10/01/07
installed per code shall be approved. Grounding shall be rated at 400-
amp and installed per grounding code.
16(b) It shall be noted in this Chapter, that the requirements relating to service entrance
equipment, metering devices, services in general, etc. shall be in full compliance with this
Chapter and to include the requirements as noted in the National Electrical Code and
latest amendments.
16(c) Deterioration of electrical service entrance equipment and/or branch circuit panelboards,
and the like:
All incoming electrical service entrance equipment, and to include any existing
switchgear, bussing detail, branch circuit panelboards, and/or part thereof, and to include
any electrical equipment that is not mentioned in this paragraph, shall be completely
free” from any corrosion, rust, and/or deterioration of any type.
If, in the opinion of the electrical inspector, there is evidence of any electrical equipment
and/ or parts thereof, that are observed to be corroded, rusted, deteriorated and/ or of an
unsafe nature, said electrical equipment, switchgear, panelboards, and the like, shall be
completely replaced with electrical equipment that is manufactured in “ new” condition.
Panelboard Rating and Circuit Breaker and/ or Fuse Capacity
17. All panelboard installations for new single family dwellings shall be a minimum of 200
ampere rated.
The main service disconnect means (circuit breaker or fused switch) shall be 200 ampere
rated and shall be installed in the same enclosure as the branch circuit breakers or branch
circuit fuse devices.
EXCEPTION: The Main Service Disconnect Means may be installed or located in a
metering device approved for the purpose, where in a single family
dwelling, the existing incoming electrical service must be relocated
because of remodeling purposes only. This exception shall apply only
to a single-family dwelling.
Each panelboard installed as part of the service entrance equipment shall have a
minimum circuit capacity of 40 openings and/ or spaces, excluding the spaces that are
required to install the main service disconnect.
17(a) Where a typical panelboard is installed in new construction, in remodeling construction,
or replacement of an existing panelboard, said panelboard shall have sufficient capacity
for the minimum number of circuit breakers or fuse devices as required in paragraph 17
above, in addition to the number of branch circuit breakers or branch fuse devices that
ELECTRICITY
16 REVISED 10/01/07
is necessary to provide a complete and safe installation as approved by the electrical
inspector having jurisdiction.
NOTE: In existing dwellings where an electrical permit is obtained for the purpose of
remodeling, the existing electrical service and related equipment may not be
required to be upgraded to 200 amperes provided the existing electrical
service and related equipment is adequate for the connected load.
17(b) All circuit breakers shall be fully sized in dimensions and for proper insertion into the
panelboard, as set forth by the switchgear and panelboard manufacturer and as listed by a
recognized testing laboratory.
Substitution of two or more circuit breakers in a space so designed or previously
occupied by a lesser number shall not be approved and will not be accepted.
Multiple Metering Systems
Panelboard Rating and Branch Circuit Capacity for Apartments
17(c) All panelboard installations for apartments and/ or apartment complexes, condominiums,
quadro type housing, townhouses, multi-family construction, and the like, shall be a
minimum of 100 ampere rated.
The disconnect means ( circuit breaker or fused switch) shall be a minimum of 100
ampere rated and shall be installed in the same panelboard enclosure as the branch circuit
breaker or branch circuit fusing devices. The service disconnect for said apartment shall
be a minimum of 100 ampere at the meter location
17(d) In a multiple occupancy building ( such as apartment buildings, condominiums, etc.)
Where a multiple metering system is installed, each metering device shall be permanently
identified as to the unit and/or apartment number, etc. by the means of a self-adhesive
engraved plastic tag.
17(e) Each panelboard as noted in this paragraph ( to include paragraph 17 through 17(i) shall
have a minimum circuit capacity of 20 openings and/or spaces, excluding the spaces that
are required to install the main service disconnect.
17(f) In addition to the requirements as noted in paragraph 17( e) above, each typical
panelboard installed in new construction or in remodeling construction, shall have
sufficient capacity for the minimum number of circuit breakers or fuse devices as
required in paragraph 17(e).
Panelboards rated at 100 ampere shall not contain and/or have the capacity to exceed 30
spaces for the installation of the branch circuit breakers or fuse devices.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
17 REVISED 10/01/07
17(g) All circuit breakers shall be fully sized in dimensions and for proper insertion into the
panelboard, as set forth by the switchgear or panelboard manufacturer and as listed by a
recognized testing laboratory.
Substitution of two or more circuit breakers in a space so designed or previously
occupied by a lesser number shall not be approved and will not be accepted.
Existing Panelboards in Residential Occupancies
17(h) In existing residential occupancies where the installation of a sub- panelboard is required
due to remodeling purposes, or the existing circuit capacity is insufficient to
accommodate additional branch circuit breakers or branch circuit fuse devices, a subpanelboard
may be installed providing a sub-feed circuit breaker or sub-fee fuse device is
installed in the main service panelboard to serve said sub- panelboard. Sub- panelboard
shall not be smaller than thirty(30) ampere rated and have two (2) extra spaces remaining
when installed.
The tapping or inserting sub- feed conductors ahead of the main service disconnect,
and/or service lugs, shall not be an accepted method of installation and shall not be
permitted.
Public Panelboards
18. A public meter and public panelboard, and to include the required number of branch
circuit breakers or branch circuit fuse devices as approved by the electrical inspector,
shall be installed in a designated public area as noted in paragraph 10(b) in any apartment
complex, quadro type housing, townhouse complex, condominium, etc., that may require
electricity to operate any electrical device, ( such as pumps, outdoor lighting fixtures,
receptacles for general use, etc.) That does not directly pertain or encompass the
immediate direct structure of a typical apartment unit, quadro type housing unit,
townhouse unit, condominium type unit, and the like.
NOTE: There shall be no exception to this ruling.
Number of Conductors Permitted on a Circuit Breaker Terminal
19. The application and/or installation of connecting more than one conductor to a circuit
breaker terminal or a fuse holder terminal shall not be approved and will not be accepted.
19(a) In wiring installations where it is required to install parallel sets of conductors, each
conductor shall be connected and/or attached to a lug or terminal so designed or sized as
to accept not more than one conductor.
ELECTRICITY
18 REVISED 10/01/07
Tandem Circuit Breakers
20. Tandem Circuit Breakers, tandem ( duplex), mini, piggy back, or space saver circuit
breakers are not permitted and shall not be accepted.
Split- Buss Panelboards
21. Split buss or multiple service disconnects in panelboards are not accepted and will not be
approved.
NOTE: Switchgear so designed and approved as sequence switching, and switches
circuit breakers or fused switches) that are so constructed and installed in a
common enclosure, does not pertain to this Section.
Panelboard Enclosures Used as a Junction
22. Panelboard enclosures, switchgear enclosures, service metering devices, etc., shall not be
used as a junction box, pull box, splice enclosure, etc.
EXCEPTION: Panelboard enclosures, switchgear enclosures, etc., that may contain
ground fault interruption devices and that may require splicing of the
neutral conductors shall be exempt from this paragraph. Panelboards
that are changed may have splices installed if 2005 National Electrical
Code, Articles 373- 7 and 373- 8 are complied with, or as approved by
the electrical inspector.
Copper Conductors
23. All wiring systems installed in any single-family dwelling, detached structures, apartment
complexes, quadro type construction, townhouses, condominiums, multi- family
construction, and the like, shall be copper.
This requirement shall include service entrance conductors, sub-feed conductors, branch
circuit conductors, neutral conductors, grounding conductors, and the like.
EXCEPTION: Public Utilities providing electricity to serve a building, structure, etc.
may be exempt from this paragraph providing said utility assumes the
responsibility and/ or maintenance of service drops from the transformer
to the metering device and/or switchgear.
NOTE: All Service Conductors that are installed from the metering device to the main
service disconnect shall be copper.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
19 REVISED 10/01/07
Grounding
24. When grounding for any combination of service entrance systems and equipment, the
grounding conductor shall be installed directly from the grounding lug and/ or neutral
buss in the service disconnect enclosure or service distribution enclosure, to the street
side of the incoming water service and ahead of any shut- off valve.
All grounding conduits shall employ an approved ground strap from the conduit to the
street side of the water-grounding electrode.
24(a) All grounding conductor shall be copper. There shall be no exceptions to this
requirement.
24(b) The ground electrode shall be copper or copper clad, and shall be a minimum of eight
feet in length, and a minimum of 5/8 inch in diameter. The ground electrode shall be
installed in accordance with N.E.C., Article 250- 83(c) (e).
Ground Conductor in Conduit
25. All ground conductors for service entrance equipment shall be installed in E.M.T.
electrical metallic tubing) or rigid heavy wall galvanized steel conduit (whichever would
apply) in all installations.
25(a) The ground conductor for service entrance equipment, where said service entrance
equipment is rated at 800 ampere and larger, shall be installed in rigid heavy wall
galvanized steel.
All fittings ( couplings, etc.) Shall be of the threaded type. Compression type fittings will
be accepted on rigid heavy wall Galvanized Steel Conduit.
Ground Identification
26. An approved ground clamp, or copper bussing material approved by the electrical
inspection having jurisdiction, and a metal identification tag shall be installed where the
grounding conductor is connected to any grounding electrode.
NOTE: In the event that a grounding conductor is not adaptable or cannot be properly
inserted into the grounding clamp in an approved manner, the electrical
inspector shall designate the “ type” and/or “ materials” that shall be utilized for
proper grounding installations or connections.
Ground Conductor Sizes
27. The size of the grounding electrode conductor shall not be less than as indicated in the
following table.
ELECTRICITY
20 REVISED 10/01/07
Alternating Current Systems
27(a) Service and Commons Grounding Conductor for Grounded Systems. Where the wiring
system is grounded, the size of the grounding conductor for an alternating current system
or for a common grounding conductor shall not be less than is shown below.
27(b) Except that where connected to made electrodes, where the conductor need not be larger
than #6 AWG copper, or its equivalent in ampacity.
Service and Commons Grounding Conductor for Grounded Systems
Size of Largest Service Conductor or Size of
Grounding Equivalent for Multiple Conductors Conductors and Conduit
Copper Copper Conduit
Up to 2 AWG 8 AWG ½"
Up to 1/0 AWG 6 AWG ½"
Up to 3/0 AWG 4 AWG 3/4"
Up to 350 KCMIL 2 AWG 3/4"
Up to 600 KCMIL 1/0 AWG 1"
Up to 1100 KCMIL 2/0 AWG 1"
Up to 1300 KCMIL 3/0 AWG 1"
Up to 1700 KCMIL 4/0 AWG 1-1/4"
Up to 2000 KCMIL 250 KCMIL 1-1/4"
Up to 2400 KCMIL 300 KCMIL 1-1/4"
Up to 2800 KCMIL 350 KCMIL 1-1/4"
Up to 3200 KCMIL 400 KCMIL 1-1/2"
Up to 4000 KCMIL 500 KCMIL 1-1/2"
Up to 4800 KCMIL 600 KCMIL 2"
Up to 5600 KCMIL 700 KCMIL 2"
Up to 6400 KCMIL 800 KCMIL 2“
27(c) Service Equipment Grounding Conductor for Ungrounded Systems. Where the wiring
system is ungrounded, the size of the grounding conductor for the service raceway and
the service equipment shall not be less than as is shown above. ( a) except that where
connected to made electrodes, the conductor need not be larger than # 6 AWG copper or
its equivalent in ampacity.
Detached Structures
28. All conduits that contain conductors for the purpose of supplying electricity to detached
structures such as garages, storage sheds, etc., shall be rigid heavy- wall galvanized steel
conduit. (See N.E.C. Article 300-5 for depth of conduit systems.)
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
21 REVISED 10/01/07
Conduits Installed Under Concrete Slabs
29. All conduits that are installed below concrete slabs within the perimeters of the
foundation wall shall be Rigid Galvanized Steel ( RGS) or Intermediate Metal Conduit
IMC).
All conduit systems that are exposed to any type of weather condition or in contact with
earth, shall be Rigid Heavy Wall Galvanized Steel Conduit ( RGS) or Intermediate
Metallic Conduit ( IMC)
Rigid Non- Metallic ( RNC) type conduit may be permitted for use and installation in lieu
of Rigid Heavy Wall Galvanized Steel Conduit (RGS). RNC conduit may be used only
for underground installation outside the foundation walls. Rigid Heavy Wall Conduit
RGS) with a full radius of 90 degrees shall be used and properly installed where the
RNC is at the point ( location) of exiting the underground location.
29(a) All conduits that contain service entrance conductors shall be Rigid Galvanized Steel
only ( RGS). All service entrance conduits that are exposed to any type of weather
condition or in contact with earth shall be Rigid Galvanized Steel ( RGS). Rigid Non-
Metallic (RNC) type conduit may be permitted for use and installation in lieu of Rigid
Heavy Wall Galvanized Steel Conduit. RNC conduit may be used only for underground
installation outside the foundation walls. RNC conduit shall be rated not less than
Schedule 80. Rigid Heavy Wall Conduit ( RGS) with a full radius of 90 degrees shall be
used and properly installed where the RNC is at the point ( location) of existing the
underground location.
Minimum Lighting Circuits for 500 Square Feet
30. Rooms not now wired, or additions to existing residential occupancies shall be done by
the rules covered herein, and there shall be a minimum of one general lighting circuit for
each 500 square feet.
Closet and Storage Illumination
31. Each closet and/ or storage area, utility room and/ or area, laundry room and/ or area, etc.,
six square feet or larger, shall have a minimum of one ceiling lighting fixture.
EXCEPTION #1: In the event that closets are designated as linen usage, lighting
fixtures are not required to be installed within said closet( s).
EXCEPTION # 2: Where combination storage and linen closets are designed as one
closet, a lighting fixture may not be required to be installed within
said closet, providing that a lighting fixture outside of the closet is
located within three feet of door opening.
ELECTRICITY
22 REVISED 10/01/07
32. All lighting fixtures installed in areas as required in paragraph 31 above shall be of the
recessed type, or florescent with a protective lens to cover the lamp of said fixture.
Switched Lighting Fixtures in Closets or Storage Areas
33. All lighting fixtures installed in any walk- in type closet or storage area, utility room,
laundry room, etc., shall be switched.
The location of said switching device shall be so installed as to be within two feet of the
entrance of said closet and/ or storage area, utility room, laundry room, etc., opposite of
hinge side of door, or as approved by the electrical inspector.
NOTE: Surface-mounted lighting fixtures may be installed in areas as required in
paragraph 33 above, providing said lighting fixtures are installed with a
protective lens to cover the lamp of said fixture.
Definition: Closets and/or storage area, utility rooms, laundry rooms, etc., that are
measured to exceed five feet in depth and/ or more than 10 feet in length shall be
considered as a walk-in type area.
Illumination in Basement Areas
34. A minimum of one switched lighting fixture shall be installed in the immediate area of
the top stair tread of all staircases leading to basement areas.
A minimum of one switched lighting fixture shall be installed in the area of the lower
most stair tread of all staircases that lead to the basement areas.
The switch device that is required to control both upper and lower lighting fixtures shall
be installed at a readily accessible location at the upper most tread area of the staircase.
NOTE: Said lighting fixtures as noted above may be relocated because of the staircase
layout where it may be necessary to provide sufficient illumination on the
general stair tread areas, as deemed necessary by the electrical inspector
having jurisdiction.
34(a) Panelboards that are installed in basement areas shall have a minimum of one lighting
fixture installed within three feet of the panelboard cover.
34(b) A minimum of one lighting fixture shall be installed within four feet of the furnace and/ or
heating system that is installed in basement area.
NOTE: Said lighting fixture shall be positioned or located to adequately provide
illumination in front of any furnace or heating appliance where servicing of
said appliance is necessary at removable manufactured service panels.
ELECTRICITY
23 REVISED 10/01/07
34(c) A minimum of one lighting fixture shall be installed over any laundry tub or laundry
equipment that is located and/ or installed in a basement area.
NOTE: In installations where the lighting fixtures ( as required above) are located in
areas where the illumination is obstructed by ducts, beams, etc., said lighting
fixtures may require relocation, and/ or additional lighting fixtures may be
required as per the electrical inspector’ s approval.
34(d) In addition to the lighting fixtures as required in this paragraph (to include paragraphs 34
through 34( e), additional lighting fixtures shall be installed to provide a minimum of one
foot candle of illumination per square foot throughout the entire basement area.
Number of Power-Consuming Devices Per Circuit
35. Lighting circuits installed in any single family dwelling, apartment complex and /or
apartment unit, condominium, townhouse, multi- family structure, etc., shall not have
more than 10 power-consuming devices ( openings) for general lighting purposes
connected thereto.
NOTE: There shall be no exceptions to this requirement.
NOTE: Power- consuming devices, as noted in this paragraph and throughout the
electrical codes as adopted by the Village of Arlington Heights, shall be
defined as any type of electrical operated devices, appliances, equipment,
apparatus, etc., and shall also include any receptacle regardless if said
receptacle be of a single or a duplex type device.
A duplex receptacle shall be counted as one power- consuming device.
A switching device shall not be considered as a power- consuming device.
Branch Circuit Protection of Lighting Devices
36. All branch circuit breakers or branch circuit fuse devices for lighting circuits shall be
rated at a maximum of 15 amperes.
NOTE: Lighting circuits shall be considered as lamps, lighting fixtures, receptacles
used for general lighting purposes and/ or general devices connected thereto.
Branch Circuit Conductor Sizes and Loads
37. The minimum size of conductor( s) for branch circuit wiring shall be AWG # 14 gauge
copper wire for general lighting loads and the maximum rating of the branch circuit
breaker or the branch circuit fuse device for lighting loads shall not exceed 15 amperes.
ELECTRICITY
24 REVISED 10/01/07
37(a) In all wiring installations for general lighting purposes, the conductors and the branch
circuit breaker or the branch circuit fuse device shall be capable of carrying the
designated load connected thereto.
37(b) Regardless of the load connected to the general lighting circuit, the load shall not exceed
80% of the rating of the branch circuit conductor or of the branch circuit breaker or the
branch circuit fuse device, etc.
37(d) All neutral conductors shall be sized equivalent to the largest branch circuit conductor
size installed in any electrical network wiring system, or with the associated circuit that
serves electricity to any power-consuming device.
Neutral conductors installed with a lesser rating than the largest branch circuit conductor,
in any electrical wiring system, will not be accepted and shall not be approved.
NOTE: The connection of lamp and/ or appliance cords shall be exempt from this
paragraph providing that said cords, appliances, devices, etc. are listed by a
recognized testing laboratory and said cords are not altered from the listing as
approved by said testing laboratory and/or in full compliance with all
electrical articles and requirements as adopted by the Village of Arlington
Heights.
Connection to Separate Circuits
38. Circuits that are installed for the purpose of general lighting shall not be connected to or
shared with a separate circuit such as circuits that are installed for pumps, furnaces,
appliances, etc., such as laundry appliances, kitchen appliances, etc.
Sump or Ejector Pumps
38(a) All sump or ejector pumps shall have a properly sized, dedicated circuit with a single
device in its own box.
Outdoor Lighting Fixtures
39. A minimum of one out- of-door weatherproofed lighting fixture shall be installed on the
exterior of the structure and at all sides and/or rear entrances and/or exits to a single
family dwelling, condominium, townhouse, apartment unit and/ or apartment complex,
multi-family type structure, etc.
39(a) A minimum of one switched out-of-door weatherproofed lighting fixture shall be
installed on the exterior of all structures such as patios, balconies, sun rooms, screened in
porches, etc. for the purpose of providing illumination in the immediate area of the
entrance and/ or exit to said patios, porches, balconies, etc.
ELECTRICITY
25 REVISED 10/01/07
39(b) Switching devices that are required in this paragraph ( to include paragraph 39 through
39(a) shall be located in a readily accessible location within the dwelling and not exceed
three feet from the entrance and/or exit areas of the residential structure.
The switching device for said lighting fixtures shall be located and/or installed within the
main building structure.
NOTE: Where the switching device( s) is installed in rooms and/ or structures that may
be subject to weather conditions ( such as screened in porches, gazebos, etc.)
Said switching device( s) shall be installed in a weatherproofed enclosure.
NOTE: Out of doors lighting fixtures that are installed in an apartment unit and/ or
apartment complex, condominium, or a multi-family type structure my not be
required to be switched providing that said lighting fixtures are controlled by a
photo cell or timing device and the circuits) originate from a public
panelboard.
Outdoor Duplex Receptacle Installations
40. A minimum of one switched out- of-door weatherproofed duplex receptacle shall be
installed and suitably located on the exterior and in the front of a single family dwelling,
apartment unit and/ or apartment complex, condominium, townhouse, multi- family
structure, etc.
NOTE: Weatherproofed duplex receptacles installed on the front or rear of an
apartment unit and/ or apartment complex or condominium for general
maintenance purposed may not be required to be switched.
40(b) A minimum of one out-of-door weatherproofed duplex receptacle shall be installed and
suitably located on the exterior of any directly connected porch, patio, balcony, sun room,
screened in porch, or any similar type structure.
G.F.I. Receptacle Protection
41. All weatherproofed receptacles installed out of doors and located at building grade level
or located within eight feet of the building grade level shall be protected by an approved
ground-fault interrupter device.
Heating Systems
42. Each heating appliance such as furnaces, hot water heaters, baseboard heaters, heat
pumps, etc., shall be served by a separate circuit( s), and said separate circuit( s) shal l not
be connected to and/or serve any other electrical device that is not directly related to said
furnaces, hot water heaters, baseboard heaters, heat pumps, etc.
ELECTRICITY
28 REVISED 10/01/07
NOTE: Two or more furnaces, hot water heaters, heat pumps, shall not be connected
to the same branch circuit. More than one baseboard heater may be permitted
to be connected to the branch circuit, providing the connected load does not
exceed 80% rating of the conductor( s) and/ or the over- current protection
device.
Disconnecting Means for Heating Systems
43. An approved switch and/or disconnecting means shall be installed to disconnect the
ungrounded conductors that serve said furnaces, hot water heaters, heat pumps, etc.
The disconnecting means shall be installed and/ or located externally on or immediately
near said furnaces, hot water heaters, heat pumps, etc.
NOTE: Disconnecting means that are manufactured and/or installed internally into the
furnaces, hot water heaters, baseboard heaters, etc., shall not be approved as
the disconnecting means of said equipment and will not be accepted.
Flexible Metal Conduit for Out-of-Door Appliances
44. A flexible metal conduit shall be required to be installed for the purpose of containing the
branch circuit conductors that serve central air conditioning units and/ or equipment, heat
pumps, etc., that are installed out of doors and require a flexible conduit connection, etc.
44(a) Said flexible metal conduit shall be liquid-tight (seal-tight) and shall not exceed six feet
in length.
44(b) All flexible metal conduit as required in this paragraph ( to include paragraph 44 through
44(b) shall contain an insulated ground conductor which shall be green in color and shall
be used solely for the purpose of providing a permanent grounding connection between
the disconnecting means and the central air conditioning unit and/or equipment as noted
in this paragraph.
Circuits for Air Conditioning Systems, Heat Pumps, Etc.
45. A separate circuit( s) shall be installed for each central air conditioning system or similar
equipment, heat pump, etc.
Said separate circuit(s) shall not be connected to and/or serve any other electrical device
or equipment that is not directly related to the air conditioning system, heat pump, etc.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
27 REVISED 10/01/07
Air Conditioning Systems, Heat Pumps, Etc., Disconnecting Means
46. Each air conditioning unit and/or equipment, heat pump, etc., shall have an approved
disconnecting means to disconnect the ungrounded conductors.
46(a) The disconnecting means shall be located immediately adjacent to the air conditioning
unit and/or equipment, heat pump, etc., and shall be firmly mounted to the building
structure, as approved by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
The disconnecting means shall be listed by a recognized testing laboratory and shall be
approved for a wet location.
46(b) The disconnecting means that is required for central air conditioning systems, heat
pumps, etc., shall not be permitted for use as a junction box, splice box, pull box, etc., for
conductors that are not directly related to the circuiting of the air conditioning system( s),
heat pump(s), etc.
46(c) Where air conditioning systems, heat pumps, etc., are installed in apartment complexes,
condominiums, quadro type housing, townhouses, etc., each disconnecting means shall
be permanently identified as to the unit number or address of the typical unit.
46(d) The disconnecting means as required in this paragraph ( to include paragraphs 46 through
46(c) and installed out of doors, for the purpose of disconnecting the ungrounded
conductors for appliances ( such as air conditioning compressors, heat pumps, etc.), shall
not be permitted for use as a junction box, splice box, pull box, etc. for other appliances
and/ or devices that are not directly related to the appliance being served.
Ceiling Paddle Fans
47. All junction boxes installed for the use and/ or attachment of any type of ceiling paddle
fan shall be listed by a recognized testing laboratory.
47(a) All methods of installation and all materials and/or supporting members used to secure
and/ or mount junction boxes as noted above shall be listed by a recognized testing
laboratory and/or shall be approved by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
Switched Lighting Fixtures Over Sinks
48. A switched lighting fixture is required and shall be installed over any kitchen sink ( s),
bathroom sink ( s), etc.
NOTE: A switching device that is installed and/ or manufactured in any lighting
fixture shall not be approved and will not be accepted as the required
switching arrangement, as required in this paragraph ( to include paragraphs 48
through 48(a).
ELECTRICITY
28 REVISED 10/01/07
48(a) An approved switching device to control the operation of said lighting fixtures shall be
located and/ or installed as not to be immediately adjacent to and/ or directly over kitchen
sink(s), bathroom sink (s), etc.
NOTE: The distance for the required switch installation and/or location shall be a
minimum of 12 inches from any kitchen and/ or bathroom sink( s).
Fans and Receptacles in Bathrooms
49. An approved exhaust fan shall be installed in each bathroom where said bathroom does
not have natural air circulation ( such as window installations on outside walls of a
structure).
The methods of exhausting the bathroom to outside air shall be approved by the plumbing
and/or building inspector-having jurisdiction.
49(a) Each bathroom and/or rooms that are required to be ventilated by an electrically operated
mechanical means ( such as by the use of an approved exhaust fan) shall be controlled by
a wall switch.
Said switching device shall not control and/or operate any other device other than the
mechanical exhaust device and/ or system.
Switch( s) to control the proper operation of the exhaust fan( s) shall not be located and/ or
installed immediately adjacent to and/or directly over any sink(s).
NOTE: Also see note in paragraph 48(a).
Whirlpools and/or Water Circulating Tubs
50. Whirlpools, Therapeutic Tubs/Pools, Hot Tubs, and/or any type tub and/or pool that may
not be mentioned in this paragraph ( to include paragraph numbers “ 50 through 50(d)”)
and which incorporates any type of electrically powered circulating system, lighting
fixtures, etc, shall be Ground Fault Interrupter protected.
All branch circuit conductors and/ or motors, lighting fixtures, etc, that are in conjunction
with and/or incorporated with whirlpools, therapeutic tubs/pools, hot tubs, etc., shall be
protected by an approved ground fault interrupting breaker and said ground fault
interrupting breaker shall not be connected to and/or associated with any other electrical
device.
50(a) An approved disconnecting means shall be installed for the purpose of disconnecting the
ungrounded conductors and shall be located in the immediate vicinity and within sight of
the motor circulating pump.
ELECTRICITY
29 REVISED 10/01/07
50(b) A flexible metal conduit shall be installed for the purpose of containing the branch circuit
conductors between the disconnecting means and the motorized pumping device, etc.
The flexible metal conduit shall be liquid tight ( seal tight) with approved fittings and
shall not exceed six feet in length from the junction box to the motor circulating pump, as
required in outdoor use.
50(c) A grounding conductor shall be installed for the purpose of grounding the motor and/ or
motorized pumping device, lighting fixtures and/or housings, etc. and said grounding
conductor shall be insulated and green in color.
The grounding conductor shall be used solely for the purpose of grounding the motor
and/or motorized pumping device, lighting fixtures and/or housings, etc. and shall be
installed in the entire conduit system.
Said grounding conductors shall be sized equal to the size of the branch circuit
conductors and shall be connected to the grounding terminal in the motor housing,
lighting fixture and/ or lighting fixture housing, etc. and shall be connected to the
panelboard where the branch circuit originates in a manner as approved by the electrical
inspector.
Receptacles Over Kitchen Counter Tops
Section 152- 4
51. All receptacles that are installed on any separate appliance circuit( s) shall be of the
duplex type and shall be 20 ampere rated.
51(a) All receptacles that serve counter-top surfaces shall have an approved ground-fault
interrupting device and said ground- fault interrupting device shall not be connected to
and/or associated with any other electrical device other than the appliance receptacles
solely intended for said G.F.I. protection.
NOTE: Duplex receptacles that are installed for the purpose of supplying electricity to
a refrigerator appliance and/or freezer, etc. shall not be connected and/or
associated with a ground- fault interrupter ( G.F.I.) circuit or device.
It shall also be noted that the duplex receptacle for supplying electricity to
said refrigerators, freezers, etc., shall be installed to be so located directly on
the wall immediately in the back of said appliances.
Automatic Dishwasher Circuits
52. A separate 15 or 20 ampere branch circuit shall be installed for any built -in automatic
dishwasher.
ELECTRICITY
30 REVISED 10/01/07
52(a) The branch circuit conductors shall be a minimum of #12 gauge copper AWG wire size,
and the branch circuit breaker or the branch circuit fuse device shall not exceed 20
amperes.
NOTE: Regardless of the minimum size of the conductors and to include the branch
circuit breaker( s) or the branch circuit fuse device( s) as noted above, the load
on the automatic dishwasher appliance branch circuit shall not exceed 80 % of
the rating of said conductors and/ or over current protection device.
52(b) All permanently installed automatic dishwashers shall be “ hard” wired with the use of
electrical metallic tubing and a minimum of 3/8 inch trade size flexible metal conduit,
which said flexible conduit shall not exceed six feet in length.
NOTE: A green in color or green with yellow stripe, insulated grounding conductor
shall be installed in all flexible conduit that serves permanently installed
automatic dishwashers.
Each permanently installed automatic dishwasher shall have an approved disconnecting
means for the purpose of disconnecting the ungrounded conductors.
The disconnecting means as required in this paragraph shall be a minimum of 15 ampere
rated.
Said disconnecting means shall be installed on the wall of the building structure and in
the immediate vicinity of the automatic dishwasher appliance as approved by the
inspector having jurisdiction.
53. A separate appliance branch circuit shall be installed for any permanently installed
microwave-type oven and/or similar appliance.
The branch circuit conductors shall be a minimum of #12 gauge AWG size.
The branch circuit breaker or the branch circuit fuse device and any receptacle installed
for and/ or associated with said appliance shall be 20 ampere rated.
NOTE: It is also recommended that all portable microwave- type appliances be
installed on a separate 20 ampere rated wiring system for the purpose of
preventing any possible overload on any existing lighting or appliance circuit.
Duplex Receptacle Locations
54. A minimum of one duplex receptacle shall be installed in all hallways, entrance areas, etc
NOTE: In hallways that are so constructed as part of the entrance area, only one
duplex receptacle may be required.
ELECTRICITY
31 REVISED 10/01/07
54(a) If in the judgment of the electrical inspector a duplex receptacle is not required because
of locations behind doors or wall spaces that may not be useable, etc., the electrical
inspector having jurisdiction may relocate and/or omit said duplex receptacle.
54(b) All duplex receptacles that are installed as required in this paragraph ( to include
paragraph 56 through 56(d) shall be for general lighting purposes and the branch circuit
conductors shall be a minimum of #14 AWG wire size.
54(c) The rating of the required branch circuit breaker or the branch circuit fuse devices for
general lighting purposes connected thereto shall not exceed 15 amperes.
Receptacles
55. All receptacles as required in this Chapter shall be of the spring- type grounding strap that
holds mounting screw captive.
Three and Four-Way Switch Locations
56. A three-way switch shall be installed at each entrance and/or exit in all hallways for the
purpose of controlling the lighting fixtures that are required. The locations of said
switching devices shall be approved by the inspector having jurisdiction.
A four-way-switching arrangement may be required in hallways where the length and/or
the construction layout of the walls are installed in a manner where it is deemed
necessary by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction to require the four-way switching
arrangement.
56(a) All rooms that have more than one entrance and/ or exit to said room( s) ( such as kitchens,
dining rooms, living rooms, family rooms, etc.) Shall have the lighting fixtures, and/or a
wall- mounted receptacle that is installed for general lighting purposes, controlled by a
three-way switching arrangement.
A four-way switching arrangement may be required in rooms as noted above where the
wall construction of said rooms is installed in a manner where it is deemed necessary by
the electrical inspector having jurisdiction to require the four-way switching
arrangements.
56(b) A three or four- way switching device to control a receptacle or lighting fixture shall be
installed where entrance from the exterior is obtained through a patio door or door(s)
installed that is directly associated with a room that has direct access to the outside at
grade level.
Illumination Requirements in Dining Rooms, Hallways, Etc.
57. All hallways, stairwells, corridors, dining rooms, kitchen areas, laundry rooms, utility
rooms, etc., shall be illuminated by means of a ceiling mounted lighting fixtures( s).
ELECTRICITY
32 REVISED 10/01/07
The intensity of artificial illumination shall be an average of three-foot candles per square
foot.
57(a) Where it is necessary to install switching devices to operate lighting fixtures as required
in this paragraph (to include paragraph 58 through 58(a), said switching devices shall be
installed as noted and required in other paragraphs in this Chapter.
Illumination Requirements for Garages
58. All storage garages shall have a minimum of one ceiling lighting fixture installed per
each automobile (car) bay and/or stall.
All ceiling-mounted lighting fixtures shall be controlled by a wall switch.
Where more than one entrance and/or exit is provided to said storage garage, all lighting
fixtures shall be switched at all locations and/ or at all entrances and/ or exits to the storage
garage.
NOTE: Overhead-type storage garage doors shall be considered as an entrance and/or
exit in relation to this code.
58(a) A minimum of one out- of-door weatherproof lighting fixture shall be installed at all
storage garage service door(s).
Said lighting fixture(s), as required in this paragraph ( to include paragraphs 58 through
58(a), shall be installed on the exterior wall and immediately adjacent to the garage
service door(s) and overhead doors. Lights outside of the service door and overhead door
controlled by three- way switches; one at garage and one at house.
A minimum of one wall- mounted switch shall be installed within the main wall and
located adjacent to the service door of said storage garage for the purpose of controlling
the lighting fixture( s) at the service door locations( s).
Detached Garages, Structures, and General Outdoor Lighting
59. All detached structures ( such as garages, storage buildings, outdoor lighting in general,
etc.) that require electricity to operate electrical devices, equipment, etc., shall be served
underground.
59(a) All conductors that serve electricity to any electrical device, equipment, etc., shall be
copper.
59(b) All conductors installed underground for detached structures, general and/or decorative
lighting, etc., shall be in full compliance with paragraph 23, inclusive of this Chapter and
to include all requirements in all articles as set forth in this Chapter.
ELECTRICITY
33 REVISED 10/01/07
Receptacles Required in Storage Garages
60. A minimum of one duplex receptacle shall be installed on the inside walls of any storage
garage.
Said duplex receptacle shall be installed and/ or located at a minimum of 48 inches above
finished grade.
60(a) A minimum of one duplex receptacle shall be installed in the ceiling area(s) of the
storage garage.
NOTE: The purpose of said duplex receptacle is to provide an electrical means for
automatic garage door opening device and it may not be required that the
ceiling- mounted receptacle be ( G.F.I.) ground- fault interrupter protected. The
location(s) of said duplex receptacle installations shall be approved by the
electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
60(b) All receptacles installed in any storage garage shall be protected by an approved ( G.F.I.)
ground-fault-interrupting device.
Said (G.F.I.) ground-fault interrupting device shall not be connected to and/or associated
with any other power- consuming device.
Conductor Attachment to Devices
61. All branch circuit conductors shall be connected to receptacles, switches, etc., by the
means of the screw terminal(s) that are so designed and/or manufactured with the said
device.
The insertion and/ or installation of any conductor into the screw less terminals of any
electrical device shall not be the accepted method of connection and/or installation of the
conductor and will not be permitted.
61(a) All branch circuit conductors shall be “ made up” and/ or spliced in such a manner as to
provide a single conductor to be connected and/or installed to any electrical device screw
terminal ( such as the terminal( s) so designed and manufactured on receptacles, switches,
lighting fixtures, etc.).
NOTE: In a typical wiring installation where the branch circuit conductor and/or the
grounded neutral conductor is required to be cut and/ or have open ends at the
device, the conductors shall b spliced in such a manner as to provide a “ pigtail”
to properly attach and/ or install the branch circuit conductor and/ or the
grounded neutral conductor to the said device.
61(b) The continuity of any branch circuit conductor, and/or to include any identified grounded
neutral conductor, shall not depend upon device connections, such as lamp
ELECTRICITY
34 REVISED 10/01/07
holders, receptacles, etc. where the removal of such devices would interrupt the
continuity.
61(c) No more than one conductor shall be connected and/ or installed to a single screw
terminal on any electrical device.
Sizes of Junction Boxes
62. In all single family dwellings, apartment units and/or apartment type complexes,
condominiums, townhouses, multi- family structures, detached structures, general outdoor
electrical installations, storage garages, etc., all junction boxes shall be metallic.
The minimum dimensions of any outlet box, switch box, junction box, splicing box, pull
box, etc., shall be 4” x 4” x 1-1/2” in measurement.
EXCEPTION: Junction boxes required for use for the proper installation and/ or
mounting of lighting fixtures may be of the eight-sided types but shall
be a minimum of 1-1/2 inches in depth.
EXCEPTION: Pancake type junction boxes may be used in locations only for out- ofdoor
lighting fixture installations where structural members interfere
with 4” x 4” x 1-½” type junction boxes or eight- sided by 1-½ inch
junction boxes installations.
Said type junction boxes shall only have one conduit entry and shall be firmly supported
in place.
62(a) Junction boxes that are required to be installed in brick and/ or masonry walls or
structures need not be of the sizes as stated in this paragraph ( to include paragraphs 62
through 62(d). However, said junction boxes shall be of the masonry type and approved
for the location by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
62(b) In existing occupancies, junction boxes of the dimensions of 2” x 2” x 4” may be
installed where it is necessary to add additional electrical devices and the existing wall( s)
are closed by permanent wall finishes and where said wall(s) are required to be “ fished.”
62(c) All panelboards, junction boxes, pull boxes, splice boxes, troughs, wares, raceways, etc.,
shall be mounted and/ or secured to a permanent member of the building structure or by
other means, as approved by the inspector having jurisdiction.
NOTE: Said panelboards, junction boxes, troughs, wares, etc., as noted above, shall
not be installed as to be suspended. Said materials as noted shall not be so
installed as to be supported by the means of drywall, wall board, ceiling tile,
etc.
ELECTRICITY
35 REVISED 10/01/07
62(d) In residential occupancies where the installation of junction boxes do not provide
sufficient depth and/ or said junction boxes may be recessed in walls, an extension “ ring”
shall be installed on said junction boxes to provide the proper mounting installation of
devices and/ or accessibility to the wiring system.
The extension “ ring” as noted in this paragraph shall be limited to one extension and shall
not exceed more than 2-½ inches in depth.
62(e) Back to back junction boxes shall not be permitted on any outside wall or fire rated
assembly. This is to include garage and furnace room walls.
Emergency Lighting Systems
63. All apartment buildings and/ or apartment type complexes, hotels, motels, condominiums,
whereas the construction of said structure provides public corridors, stairwells, hallways,
etc.) Nursing homes, day care centers, private dwellings used as day care establishments,
retirement type complex, etc., shall be required to install and fully maintain exit and
emergency lighting systems.
NOTE: In structures so constructed for the purpose of multi- family type dwellings
such as condominiums) and said structures consists of only one entrance/exit
and no more than two stories in height, said structures may be exempt from
this paragraph.
63(a) All exit signs and/or fixtures shall be a combination type, one hundred and 120 /277 volts
and a totally self- contained battery- operated unit.
All exit signs shall be internally illuminated units that shall consist of a minimum of two
lamps, which shall operate on 120/277 volts, and two low-voltage lamps that shall be
operated from the internal battery unit. ( See N.E.C., Article 700- 16.)
All exit signs shall be capable of full operation from the internal battery unit for a period
of 1-½ hours and shall be maintained at all times to provide this requirement.
63(b) All exit signs shall be listed by a recognized testing UL laboratory and shall be approved
for the purpose by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
63(c) All exit signs shall be lettered where each letter shall be a minimum of six inches in
height and a minimum of 5/8 of an inch in width. LED exit signs shall be permitted if
signs meet all of the above conditions.
All lettering shall be red in color and shall be installed on a white background.
64. All emergency lighting systems shall be battery operated, self- contained units with a
minimum of 1-½ hours operating period, and shall be maintained at all times to provide
this requirement. All emergency lighting systems shall be 120/ 277 volts.
ELECTRICITY
36 REVISED 10/01/07
64(a) All battery-operated type emergency lighting units shall consist of a minimum of two
lamps that is installed ( manufactured) on each single battery unit.
Not more than three lamps shall be approved to be installed ( manufactured) on a single
battery unit, and said battery unit shall be approved to fully operate with three lamps as
designed ( see N.E.C., Article 700- 16.)
NOTE: Emergency lighting lamps that are installed as being “ remote” from the
battery unit are not approved and will not be acceptable, unless special
permission is granted by authority having jurisdiction ( Electrical
Commission).
64(b) All emergency lighting systems and/or units shall be listed by a recognized testing
laboratory and shall also be approved by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
64(c) The locations of the emergency battery- operated lighting system and/ or unit and the
number required throughout an entire installation, as required, shall be approved by the
fire inspector having jurisdiction.
NOTE: In addition to the requirement as noted in paragraph 65( c), battery- operated
emergency lighting shall be installed in all class rooms, day rooms, recreation
rooms, exercise rooms, dressing rooms, locker rooms, wash rooms, all private
wash rooms that are available to the handicapped, all designated kitchen and
dining room areas for the purpose of serving day care centers, nursing homes,
retirement centers, and the like, and all designated means of egress from any
building or structure.
NOTE: Also see the Accessibility Standards Illustrated of the State of Illinois as
adopted by Ordinance Number # 1799 for any additional requirements
pertaining to the handicapped person( s).
64(d) All wiring systems, exit signs, and/ or circuiting installed for the purpose of the
emergency system shall be installed in a separate conduit system and shall be a
completely independent and separate system, and shall not intermingle with any other
circuiting and/or wiring system that does not pertain to the said emergency system.
64(e) There shall be a separate identified neutral conductor installed for each exit lighting
circuit.
Said neutral conductor shall not be associated with and/ or connected to any other
electrical device other than the dedicated exit lighting circuit.
64(f) The minimum size of the branch circuit conductors for the entire emergency lighting
system, and to include the exit lighting system, shall be # 12 AWG gauge wire size.
ELECTRICITY
37 REVISED 10/01/07
64(g) Branch circuit fuse(s) or branch circuit breaker(s) shall be used as the branch circuit
protection device( s) of the emergency lighting system.
An approved locking device shall be installed on the circuit breaker( s) for the purpose of
preventing said circuit breaker(s) from being shut in the off position.
Circuit breakers, which are of the “ key” operated type, may also be used as the branch
circuit protection device for the emergency lighting system.
Emergency Generators
Refer to Building and Fire Codes)
Floor Joists Notched
65. Floor joists, ceiling joists, roof trusses, floor trusses, headers, or any engineered design
structural systems shall not be notched or drilled for any electrical installation of conduit,
junction boxes, materials, equipment, devices, and the like.
65(a) EXCEPTION: Floor joists and/ or ceiling joists may be drilled for the purpose of
inserting a conduit system. However, it shall be noted that a minimum
of 1-½ inches of wood shall be remaining on the bottom of said floor
joists and/or ceiling joists when the conduit system installation is
complete.
The drilled hole shall not exceed 1-¼ inch, as measured across the
outside diameter of said hole.
If, during the inspection review, any floor joists and/or ceiling joists are
found to be less than 1-½ inches of wood remaining on the bottom of
said construction materials, it shall be the responsibility of the electrical
contractor ( or person( s) to whom an electrical permit has been issued)
to replace any floor joists and/or ceiling joists to the original
construction standards, as set forth by the building codes as adopted by
the Village of Arlington Heights.
Conductors Installed Prior to Construction Completion
66. Wiring systems and/or branch circuit conductors shall not be installed in any conduit
system and/ or raceway, junction box, etc., until all wall finishes are applied and all
mechanical work is completed.
If, in the opinion of the electrical inspector, wiring systems and/or branch circuit
conductors may be installed in conduit systems and/ or raceways without any damage
inflected to the conductors, permission may be obtained from the electrical inspector
ELECTRICITY
38 REVISED 10/01/07
having jurisdiction for the installation of wiring systems and/or conductors prior to wall
finish applications.
Removal of Temporary and/ or Abandoned Materials
67. All temporary wiring and/ or abandoned wiring, conductors, conduit systems, raceways,
junction boxes, electrical devices, electrical materials and/or equipment, etc., shall be
completely removed prior to a final electrical inspection.
Remodeling Compliance
68. All electrical installations in any type of dwelling, building, structure, etc., that are in the
construction stages of remodeling and/or expansion of an existing dwelling, building,
structure, etc., shall be done in full compliance with all of the electrical code
requirements and/or ordinances as adopted by the Village of Arlington Heights.
68(a) During the process of inspections that are conducted as required, any existing electrical
wiring system, electrical device, materials, equipment, and the like, that may be
associated with any remodeling or reconstruction, and is determined to be unsafe and/or
in non- compliance with all code requirements as adopted by the Village of Arlington
Heights, shall be revised to be in compliance with present code requirements as accepted
by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
New Construction
69. Newly constructed single- family dwellings, apartment units and/ or apartment- type
complexes, condominiums, townhouses, multi-family construction, day care center,
retirement type complexes, nursing homes, and to include structures and/ or buildings that
may not be noted in this paragraph, shall be in full compliance with all of the electrical
codes, ordinances, addendum, amendments, etc. as required by the Electrical
Commission of the Village of Arlington Heights and as adopted by the Village of
Arlington Heights.
It shall be unlawful to use or turn on power into, or induce any electric current to flow
through, any wires or equipment hereafter installed for which a certificate has not been
issued. The Public Utility Company shall not be permitted to install a service unless the
certificate has been issued.
Electrical Devices Installed Out of Doors
70. All electrical devices, apparatus, equipment, materials, and the like, that are installed
and/or located out-of-doors, shall be approved for such installations and/or locations, and
shall bear listing of a recognized testing laboratory.
70(a) All electrical devices, apparatus, materials, equipment, and the like, shall be fully
maintained to the standards as set forth by the testing laboratory listing, and shall also
meet the standards as set forth by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
39 REVISED 10/01/07
Deterioration of Electrical Service Entrance Equipment
and/ or Branch Circuit Panelboards, and Low- voltage Systems, and the Like
71. All new electrical service entrance equipment, and to include any existing electrical
equipment, such as, switchgear, branch circuit panelboards, and/or parts thereof, branch
circuit switches, receptacles, conduit systems, and to include any electrical equipment,
devices, materials, and the like, that is not mentioned in this paragraph, shall be
completely “ free” from any corrosion, rust, and/ or deterioration of any type.
If, in the opinion of the electrical inspector, or inspector having jurisdiction, there is
evidence of electrical equipment and/or parts thereof, that are observed to be corroded,
rusted, deteriorated and/ or of an unsafe nature, said electrical equipment, switchgear,
panelboards, receptacles, switches, conduit systems, and the like, shall be completely
replaced with electrical equipment that is manufactured of “ new” condition.
All low- voltage wiring systems that are installed for the use of building functions such as,
door bells, door locks, release devices, thermostat control, control wiring in general, etc.,
shall be maintained and shall be fully operational during the use of any occupancy.
Electricity
Commercial and Industrial
Section 25-105 Electrical Regulations related to Commercial and to Include Industrial
Buildings and/or Structures for the Purpose of the Installation of Electrical Wiring
Systems, Electrical Equipment, Electrical Materials, Devices, Apparatus, Appliances, Etc.
Definition. Commercial and industrial buildings and/or structures not used or occupied for
residential type occupancies and/ or purposes:
Buildings and/ or structures such as retail establishments, buildings and/ or structures used for the
purpose of manufacturing, buildings and/or structures so constructed for the use and/or
installation of office systems and/ or office personnel, buildings and/ or structures such as motels,
hotels, day care centers, nursing homes, retirement type complexes, etc., shall be classed as
commercial and/ or industrial use, and to include buildings and/ or structures as recognized in
other ordinances as adopted by the Village of Arlington Heights.
Branch Circuit Requirements for Nursing Homes, Retirement Centers, Etc.
72. All branch circuit conductors, neutral conductors or grounding conductors, that are
installed in any type of nursing home, retirement-type complex, day care centers, hotels,
motels, and the like, shall not be less than 12 AWG gauge copper wire size.
72(a) All branch circuit breakers or fuses that are connected to, and/ or associated with, lighting
circuits and to include all receptacles that are installed for general lighting purposes
connected thereto, shall be15 ampere rated.
ELECTRICITY
40 REVISED 10/01/07
NOTE: There shall be no exceptions to this ruling.
Electrical Devices Installed Out of Doors
73. All electrical devices, apparatus, equipment, materials, and the like, that is installed
and/or located out-of-doors shall be approved for such installations and/or locations, and
shall bear listing of a recognized testing laboratory.
73(a) All electrical devices, apparatus, materials, equipment, and the like, shall be fully
maintained to the standards as set forth by the testing laboratories listing, and shall also
meet the standards as set forth by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
Electrical Conduit Requirements
74. All conductors that may carry electrical current rated at 50 volts or greater shall be
installed in rigid heavy-wall galvanized steel conduit, intermediate metallic conduit, or
electrical metallic tubing or approved metal raceway unless hereinafter stated in this
Ordinance.)
EXCEPTION: Flexible metal conduit and liquid-tight flexible metal conduit may be
used, but shall not exceed six feet in length, shall contain a green in
color, or green with yellow stripe, insulated grounding conductor, and
shall be approved for use and location by the electrical inspector
having jurisdiction.
EXCEPTION: Flexible metal conduit may exceed six feet in length, but not more
than nine feet in length, to “ fish” an existing wall only
Said flexible conduit shall contain a green in color, or green with yellow stripe, insulated
grounding conductor and connected ( attached) to an acceptable grounded system as
approved by the electric inspector having jurisdiction.
NOTE: Flexible metal conduit shall not be an acceptable electrical conduit system
where installed in new or remodeling work, where walls are “ open” or in
spaces where wall or ceiling finishes have been applied, prior to required
electrical installations.
74(a) All conduits that are installed below concrete slabs within the perimeters of the
foundation wall shall be rigid galvanized steel ( RGS) or Intermediate Metal Conduit
IMC).
All conduit systems that are exposed to any type of weather condition or in contact with
earth, shall be rigid heavy wall galvanized steel conduit ( RGS) or Intermediate Metallic
Conduit (IMC).
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
41 REVISED 10/01/07
Rigid non-metallic (RNC) type conduit may be permitted for use and installation in lieu
of rigid heavy wall galvanized steel conduit. RNC conduit may be used only for
underground installation outside the foundation walls. Rigid heavy wall conduit (RGS) is
at the point ( location) of exiting the underground location.
Electrical Conduit Support for Roof Top Installations
75. All conduit systems that are so installed upon roofs and the like, shall be supported at
intervals not to exceed every five to seven feet.
The supporting materials shall consist of treated lumber, a minimum of 4” x 4” x 15” in
length or by the use of structural steel members.
All conduit clamps and/ or straps shall be galvanized steel or cast iron. All conduits shall
run 90 degrees parallel to the outside walls. All support systems shall be listed and have
final approval by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
NOTE: No service entrance conduits shall be installed on rooftops.
Service Entrance Conduit Systems
76. All service entrance conduits that are exposed to any type of weather condition or in
contact with earth shall be rigid galvanized steel (RGS). Rigid non-metallic (RNC) type
conduit may be permitted for use and installation in lieu of rigid heavy wall galvanized
steel conduit. RNC conduit may be used only for underground installation outside the
foundation walls. RNC conduit shall be rated not less than Schedule 80. Rigid heavy
wall conduit (RGS) with a full radius of 90 degrees shall be used and properly installed
where the RNC is at the point ( location) of exiting the underground location.
All fittings ( such as couplings, connectors, etc.) employed for the service entrance
conduit installation shall be of the threaded type. Set screw-type fittings will not be
permitted and will not be accepted.
Neutral Conductor Size
77. All neutral conductors shall be equal in size as the service entrance conductor( s), sub- fee
conductor(s), and/or the branch circuit conductor(s).
Derating of any neutral conductor will not be an accepted practice and shall not be
approved.
NOTE: There shall be no exceptions to this ruling.
ELECTRICITY
42 REVISED 10/01/07
Connectors and Couplings
78. All connectors and/or couplings that are used with the installation of rigid heavy-wall
galvanized steel conduit or intermediate metallic conduit that are subject to any type of
weather conditions, subject to moisture, or in contact with the earth, etc., shall be of the
compression type or thread- on type.
NOTE: Electrical metallic tubing ( EMT) shall only be permitted for installation within
the building proper and in dry locations.
78(a) The use of connectors and/or couplings installed in dry locations may be of the setscrew
type, compression type, or of the crimped- on type unless hereinafter stated in this
Chapter.
78(b) Approved fiber or plastic-type bushings shall be required to be installed on all conduits
that are 1-1/4 inch in electrical trade size or larger. .
NOTE: There shall be no exceptions to this ruling.
Branch Circuit Conductors
79. All branch circuit conductors, and to include neutral conductors or grounding conductors,
that are installed within and/or associated with any commercial and/or industrial
building( s), and to include any parking structures, detached structures, outline lighting,
etc., shall be a minimum of #12 AWG gauge copper wire size.
Copper Conductors
80. All wiring systems installed within and/or connected to any commercial building and/or
structure, industrial building and/ or structure, and to include any detached buildings
and/or structures that are so constructed in any area that is zoned as commercial and/or
industrial, etc., shall be copper.
NOTE: This requirement shall include all service entrance conductors, sub- fee
conductors, branch circuit conductors, low-voltage conductors as installed
for control wiring, communication systems, and the like.
EXCEPTION: Public Utilities providing electricity to serve a building, structure, etc.,
may be exempt from this article, providing said utility assumes the
responsibility and/ or maintenance of service drops from the
transformer to the metering device and/or switchgear.
NOTE: All service conductors that are installed from the metering device to the main
service disconnecting means shall be copper. There shall be no exceptions to
this ruling.
ELECTRICITY
43 REVISED 10/01/07
Number of Conductors Permitted on an Over Current Device
81. The application and/or installation of connecting more than one conductor to a circuit
breaker terminal or a fuse holder terminal shall not be approved and will not be accepted.
81(a) In wiring installations where it is required to install parallel sets of conductors, each
conductor shall be connected and/or attached to a lug or terminal so designed or sized as
to accept not more than one conductor.
Conductor Attachment to Devices
82. All branch circuit conductors shall be connected to receptacles, switches, etc., by the
means of the screw terminal(s) that are so designed and/or manufactured with the said
device.
The insertion and/ or installation of any conductor into the screw less terminals of any
electrical device shall not be the accepted method of connection and/or installation of the
conductor and will not be permitted.
82(a) All branch circuit conductors shall be “ made up” and/ or spliced in such a manner as to
provide a single conductor to be connected and/or installed to any electrical device screw
terminal ( such as the terminal( s) so designed and manufactured on receptacles, switches,
lighting fixtures, etc.)
NOTE: In a typical wiring installation where the branch circuit conductor and/or the
grounded neutral conductor is required to be cut and/ or have open ends at the
device, the conductors shall be spliced in such a manner as to provide a
pigtail” to properly attach and/ or install the branch circuit conductor and/ or
the grounded neutral conductor to the said device.
82(b) The continuity of any branch circuit conductor and/or to include any identified-grounded
neutral conductor shall not depend upon device connections, such as lampholders,
receptacles, etc., where the removal of such devices would interrupt the continuity.
Tandem Circuit Breakers
83. Tandem (duplex), mini circuit breakers are not permitted and will not be accepted for any
installation regardless of the type of construction.
83(a) All circuit breakers shall be fully sized in dimensions for proper insertion into the
panelboard, as set forth by the switchgear or panelboard manufacturer and as listed by a
recognized testing laboratory.
ELECTRICITY
44 REVISED 10/01/07
83(b) Substitution of two or more circuit breakers in a space so designed or previously
occupied by a lesser number shall not be approved and will not be accepted.
Split-Buss Panelboards
84. Split buss or multiple service disconnects in panelboards are not accepted and will not be
approved.
NOTE: Switchgear so designed and approved as sequence switching, and said fused
switching devices or circuit breakers that are so constructed and installed in a
common enclosure, does not pertain to this Section.
EXCEPTION: Panelboards that may contain split bussing for the purpose of contractor
installations may be exempt from this paragraph.
Panelboard Enclosures used as a Junction
85. Panelboard enclosures, switchgear enclosures, etc., shall not be used as a junction box,
pull box, splicing enclosure, etc., and will not be a accepted for such use.
EXCEPTION: Panelboard enclosures, switch gear enclosures, etc. That may contain
ground-fault interruption devices and that may require splicing of the
neutral conductors for the purpose of proper installation of said
device(s) may be exempt from this paragraph.
Service Entrance Switch Enclosure and/or Panelboard Enclosure
86. The service entrance switch enclosure shall not be used as a distribution cabinet.
In service entrance and/or panelboard enclosures, each conductor shall have its own
independent terminal and not more than one conductor for each terminal shall enter or
leave the enclosure.
Deterioration of Electrical Service Entrance Equipment and/or
Branch Circuit Panelboards, and the Like
87. All incoming electrical service entrance equipment, and to include any existing
switchgear, branch circuit panelboards, and/or parts thereof, and to include any electrical
equipment that is not mentioned in this paragraph, shall be completely “ free” from any
corrosion, rusts, and/or deterioration of any type.
87(a) If, in the opinion of the electrical inspector, there is evidence of any electrical equipment
and/ or parts thereof, that are observed to be corroded, rusted, deteriorated and/ or of an
unsafe nature, said electrical equipment, switchgear, panelboards, and the like, shall be
completely replaced with electrical equipment that is manufactured of “ new” condition.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
45 REVISED 10/01/07
Electrical Equipment Rooms and/or Closets
88. In all commercial buildings, industrial buildings, where vaults, transformers, electrical
service equipment, sub- fee service equipment, and the like, ( such as switchgear,
panelboards, distribution points, etc.) that are rated at 800 amperes or more, or
transformers rated more than 100 KVA or multiple transformers adding up to 100 KVA
or more, shall be grouped and installed in an approved electrical closet and/or switchgear
room so designed and designated for the purpose.
In all commercial and industrial buildings, where the use and installation of multimetering
devices are required, all service entrance equipments, ( such as tenant metering
equipments, main service disconnecting means, etc.) shall be grouped and shall be
installed in a dedicated electrical equipment room so approved for the purpose.
88(a) Such electrical closet shall be for the exclusive use of the electrical equipment and/or
electrical systems, and shall be so designed and constructed as to provide the required
working space around and/or in front of all of the electrical equipment installed therein.
Telephone, security, fire systems, etc., shall be allowed in the electrical equipment room
see N.E.C., Articles 110-16 and 384-4).
88(b) Electrical service equipment, switchgear rooms, electrical closets, and the like, shall not
be installed or designed to be installed in, under or below any stairwells that are intended
for means of egress from the building.
88(c) Rooms where freestanding switchgear, switchboards and motor control centers are
installed, there must be two exit doors from the area. The doors shall be locate d
diagonally across from each other and in opposite corners of the room. Door and door
hinges shall be equal to the rating of the room. Panic hardware shall be installed on exit
doors. Exit doors shall swing outward from all switchgear, switchboard and motor
control center rooms.
88(d) Rooms where switchgear, switchboards, or motor control centers are rated 1,200 amperes
or more and wall installed, two exit doors shall be located on the longest wall, one each
at opposite ends of the room. Doors and door hinges shall be equal to the rating of the
room. Panic hardware shall be installed on exit doors. Exit doors shall swing outward
from all switchgear, switchboard and motor control center rooms.
Panelboard and Service Meter Clearances
89. Working space around electrical service equipment or electrical sub- feed equipment that
measures more than 42 inches wide shall have a minimum of three feet clearance in front
and rear of said equipment, and a minimum of two feet clearance on each side of said
equipment.
All measurements shall be taken from the most outward projection of any wall, door, or
other obstruction.
ELECTRICITY
46 REVISED 10/01/07
NOTE: Metering devices and/or metering sections that may be connected or bolted to
the switchgear and/ or main service disconnect enclosure will be considered as
part of the switchgear dimension and will be included in the measurements as
noted above.
89(a) Working space involving electrical service equipment of sub- feed electrical equipment
that is rated less than 400 amperes shall have a minimum of three feet clearance in front
of said equipment and a minimum of six inch clearance on each side of said equipment.
EXCEPTION: Panelboards that may be joined together by the use of a close nipple or
other approved fitting need not have a minimum of six inch clearance
between panelboards.
Rooms To Be Vented
90. All electrical closets, switchgear rooms, electrical equipment rooms, transformer rooms,
and/or vaults, and the like, that contain transformer(s) that is rated at 100 kva or larger,
shall be power- vented to the outside air environment.
Ventilation requirements shall be of sufficient size as to keep said rooms at an average
operating temperature. In all installations, the ventilation materials, size of ventilation
duct( s), and the like, shall be accepted by the Building Department.
Definition: Average operating temperature shall be defined as the average temperature of
the building environment.
Service Disconnect Means
91. Each set of service-entrance conductors shall be provided with a readily accessible means
of disconnecting all conductors from the source of supply.
91(a) All main service disconnect means shall be installed and/ or located in the basement or
first floor area within the main wall of the building at a readily accessible point not to
exceed five feet from the point of entrance of the service conductors.
NOTE: There shall be no exceptions to the ruling noted in this paragraph.
91(b) The disconnect means shall, in all installations, be of a type approved as service entrance
equipment. Each conductor shall have its own independent terminal, and not more than
one conductor for each terminal shall enter or leave the enclosure.
91(c) The service entrance switch enclosure shall not be used as a distribution cabinet.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
47 REVISED 10/01/07
The service entrance switch enclosure shall include a terminal, which shall be insulated
from the service switch enclosure, but may be bonded to the metallic parts of the
enclosure as required for the grounded conductor.
91(d) On all services where more than one switch or circuit breaker are used as the service
entrance disconnecting means, the following rules shall apply:
All switches or circuit breakers shall be installed in a common enclosure designed,
manufactured, and approved for the purpose for which it is being used.
Where each switch or circuit breaker is not separately metered, all switches or circuit
breakers shall be contained in a common enclosure designed, manufactured, and
approved for the purpose for which it is being used.
All meters, main disconnects, panelboards, etc., that are wall-mounted shall have a
minimum of one- half inch of plywood installed behind main disconnect panelboards, etc.,
for the purpose of supporting and mounting of equipment. No exceptions to this ruling
will be allowed.
91(e) The use of auxiliary gutters, wireways, troughs, junction boxes ( except utility supply
company stub boxes, used in conjunction with underground services), raceways, and the
like, as enclosures for service entrance conductors, or the tapping of service entrance
conductors, is strictly prohibited and will not be approved.
Tenant Panelboard Locations
92. Each tenant, and/or owner of a typical tenant space (premises), in any commercial and/or
industrial building/ structure, shall be required to have a main service entrance
disconnecting means, panelboard, metering device, and the like.
92(a) The panelboard and the main service entrance disconnecting means shall be installed
and/ or located within the tenant space ( premises).
EXCEPTION: In buildings where a designated electrical equipment room is installed,
and tenant electrical equipment is located and/or installed in said
designated electrical equipment room( s), and completely accessible to
tenants or building management, and building management is
occupying the premises on a 24- hour maintenance program, the
requirement as noted in paragraph 27(a) may be omitted.
Cable Assemblies, Temporary Wiring, Extension Cords, Not
Permitted for Use and/ or Installation
93. Temporary wiring, extension- type cords, and the like, shall not be used and will not be
permitted for use to serve electricity to any power-consuming device.
ELECTRICITY
48 REVISED 10/01/07
Definition: Temporary wiring shall be defined as open and/or exposed conductors not
installed in an approved metallic or non- metallic raceway or conduit system.
Extension- type cords shall be defined as a flexible- type cord that has one or several
receptacle(s) designed or connected to one end.
EXCEPTION: Flexible-type cords may be permitted for use for maintenance and/or
cleaning equipment, portable hand told, etc., provided: ( a) flexible
type cords are used in continuous lengths without splice, (b) flexible
cords are OSHA approved, and ( c) flexible cords are suitable for the
location.
EXCEPTION: ( See Section #47 of Commercial Section).
Low-Voltage Wiring
94. All conductors installed for low-voltage applications, such as door bells, door lock
release devices, thermostat control, control wiring in general, music systems,
communication systems, etc., shall be installed in electrical metallic tubing, rigid heavywall
galvanized steel conduit, intermediate metallic conduit, and the like ( which ever
would apply), in all areas that are not accessible, or in areas where said low-voltage
installations may be subject to mechanical damage.
94(a) All conductors installed for low- voltage wiring installations shall be installed in electrical
metallic tubing, rigid heavy-wall galvanized steel conduit, intermediate metallic conduit
systems, etc., where said wiring systems are so installed in buildings and/ or structures
that may be in physical contact within 10 feet from the surrounding finished floor level.
NOTE: This requirement also includes areas such as public areas, stairwells,
corridors, and the like.
94(b) All ends of each conduit system shall have a bushing or a coupling installed for the
purpose of providing protection of conductors in the event of conductor replacement.
94(c) In installations where said low-voltage wiring is not required to be installed in a metal
raceway as noted in this paragraph or in other paragraphs as recognized in this ordinance,
said wiring systems shall be supported to a permanent part of the building structure by
insulated staples, nylon tie wraps, approved metal supporting devices, etc., at intervals
not to exceed every five to seven feet, unless hereinafter stated in this ordinance.
94(d) All low-voltage conductors shall be so installed as to “ run” 90 degree bends to building
walls and/ or perpendicular to building walls.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
49 REVISED 10/01/07
EXCEPTION: When moving or adding a telephone system in existing walls with a
vertical drop of less than ten feet, a raceway will not be required.
NOTE: Low- voltage wiring installations as noted in this ordinance shall not be
installed to be supported and/or lying on the ceiling grid systems, ceiling tile,
etc. for approved cabling systems ( see N.E.C. Articles 720 through 820- 53).
Grounding
95. When grounding for any combination of service entrance systems and equipment, the
grounding conductor shall be installed directly from the grounding lug and/or neutral
buss in the service disconnect enclosure or service distribution enclosure, to the street
side of the incoming water service and ahead of any shut-off valve.
NOTE: Water meter shall be jumpered.
EXCEPTION: In shopping centers or multi-tenant type structures where the water
supply system is not individually served from underground water
supply systems, the grounding conductor may not be required to
connect at the street side of the incoming water supply, providing all
valves and water meter are “ jumpered” and the water supply line is
sufficient in size for the required grounding electrode.
95(a) All grounding conduits shall employ an approved grounding strap from the conduit to
street side of water grounding electrode.
95(b) All devices (such as clamps, hubs, etc.) And/or materials used for the grounding system
shall be as approved by a recognized testing laboratory and the electrical inspector having
jurisdiction.
NOTE: In the event that a grounding conductor is not adaptable or cannot be properly
inserted into the grounding clamp in an approved manner, the electrical
inspector shall designate the type and/or materials that shall be utilized for
proper grounding installations or connections.
95(c) All conductors installed for grounding purposes shall be copper. There shall be no
exceptions to this requirement.
95(d) All water grounding systems shall have a supplemental grounding electrode installed.
Grounding electrode shall be connected to the ground lug of the service meter, main
disconnect ground conductor or grounded service raceway (see N.E.C., Article 250-81(a).
All ground electrodes shall be eight feet in length and 5/8 inch in diameter.
ELECTRICITY
50 REVISED 10/01/07
All ground electrodes conductors attached to building steel shall be CAD-welded,
exothermic welded, and shall be approved by electrical inspector having jurisdiction. All
grounding electrodes shall be installed in accordance with the N.E.C., Article #250.83(c)
3).
Ground Conductor in Conduit
96. All ground conductors shall be installed in E.M.T. ( electrical metallic tubing), or rigid
heavy-wall galvanized steel conduit, (whichever would apply) in all installations.
96(a) The ground conductor for service entrance equipment, where said service entrance
equipment is rated at 800 amperes and larger, shall be installed in rigid heavy- wall
galvanized steel.
All fittings (couplings, etc.) For rigid heavy-wall galvanized steel conduit shall be of the
threaded type. Set screw type fittings and/ or compression type fittings will not be
accepted.
Ground Identification
97. An approved ground clamp and metal identification tag shall be installed where the
grounding conductor is connected to the grounding electrode at each grounding location.
NOTE: There shall be no exceptions to this ruling.
Transformer Grounding
98. All grounding conductors required to ground transformers shall connect directly from the
transformer to the nearest cold water supply piping system.
The cold water supply electrode shall be sized sufficiently to accommodate the necessary
grounding system as required by the National Electrical Code, Article #250.
Should any shut-off valves or fittings be installed in the cold water supply between the
ground attachment and the street side of the incoming main water supply, all said valves
and fittings shall be jumpered with an approved bonding conductor as sized to the largest
grounding conductor installed on the largest main service equipment in the building or
structure.
NOTE: All bonding jumpers and materials used shall be approved by the electrical
inspector having jurisdiction.
Ground Conductor Sizes
99. The size of the grounding electrode conductor shall not be less than as indicted in the
following table.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
51 REVISED 10/01/07
Alternating Current Systems
100. Service and Commons Grounding Conductor for Grounded Systems - Where the wiring
system is grounded, the size of the grounding conductor for an alternating current system
or for a common grounding conductor shall not be less than is shown below.
a) Except that where connected to made electrodes, where the conductor need not be
larger than # 6 copper, or its equivalent in ampacity.
Service and Commons Grounding Conductor for Grounded Systems
Size of Largest Service Conductor or Size of Grounding Conductor
and Equivalent for Multiple Conductors and Conduit)
Copper Copper Conduit
Up to 2 AWG 8 AWG ½"
Up to 1/0 AWG 6 AWG ½"
Up to 3/0 AWG 4 AWG 3/4"
Up to 350 KCMIL 2 AWG 3/4"
Up to 600 KCMIL 1/0 AWG 1"
Up to 1100 KCMIL 2/0 AWG 1"
Up to 1300 KCMIL 3/0 AWG 1"
Up to 1700 KCMIL 4/0 AWG 1-1/4"
Up to 2000 KCMIL 250 KCMIL 1-1/4"
Copper Copper Conduit
Up to 2400 KCMIL 300 KCMIL 1-1/4"
Up to 2800 KCMIL 350 KCMIL 1-1/4"
Up to 3200 KCMIL 400 KCMIL 1-1/2"
Up to 4000 KCMIL 500 KCMIL 1-1/2"
Up to 4800 KCMIL 600 KCMIL 2"
Up to 5600 KCMIL 700 KCMIL 2"
Up to 6400 KCMIL 800 KCMIL 2"
b) Service Equipment Grounding Conductor for Ungrounded Systems - Where the
wiring system is ungrounded, the size of the grounding conductor for the service
raceway and the service equipment shall not be less than is shown above, except
that where connected to made electrodes, the conductor need not be larger than # 6
AWG copper or its equivalent in ampacity.
Transformer Disconnects
101. All transformers shall have an approved disconnecting means (switch, pullout, breaker,
or fuse) in the supply to the transformer capable of disconnecting the full
ELECTRICITY
52 REVISED 10/01/07
primary current of that transformer, and shall be located within sight of the
transformer.
101( a) All transformers shall have a disconnecting means for the secondary, which will
disconnect all conductors. This shall be a switch, pullout, breaker, or fuse, and shall be
located within sight of the transformer.
NOTE: There shall be no exceptions to this ruling.
Emergency Lighting Systems
102. Exit and emergency lighting circuits, systems, related devices, etc., shall be installed
and maintained to full operating capacity in all commercial and industrial buildings, in
each tenant space, and to include existing residential structures, and/ or portions
thereof, that may be converted to any type of business use etc.
102(a) Emergency lighting systems, wiring methods, location of emergency lighting fixtures,
or battery units, number lighting fixtures or battery units required, etc., shall be
approved by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
102(b) All exit, stairway, fire escape and directional signs shall be illuminated by electricity
and shall be installed and properly maintained to full operating capacity in all existing
buildings, tenant spaces, etc., and all buildings, tenant spaces, etc., hereafter erected,
altered or converted.
103. All exit signs and/ or fixtures shall be a combination type, one hundred and 120/ 277
volts and a totally self-contained battery operated unit.
All exit signs shall be an internally illuminated unit, which shall consist of a minimum
of two lamps which shall operate on 120/ 277 volts and two low- voltage lamps that
shall be operated from the internal battery unit.
All exit signs shall be capable of full operation from the internal battery unit for a
period of 1-½ hours, and shall be maintained at all times to provide the required
illumination as indicated in this section of this ordinance.
103( a) All exit signs shall be listed by a recognized testing laboratory and shall be approved
for the purpose by the fire inspector having jurisdiction.
103(b) All exit signs shall be lettered where each letter shall be a minimum of six inches in
height and a minimum of 5/8 of an inch in width. LED exit signs shall be permitted if
signs meet all of the above conditions.
All lettering shall be red in color and shall be installed on a white background.
ELECTRICITY
53 REVISED 10/01/07
104. All emergency lighting systems shall be battery operated, self -contained units with a
minimum of one and 1-½ hours operating period, and shall be maintained at all times
to provide this requirement. All emergency lighting systems shall be 120/277 volts.
104(a) All emergency lighting systems and/or units shall be listed by a recognized testing
laboratory and shall also be approved by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
104( b) The locations of the emergency battery operated lighting system and/ or units and the
number required throughout an entire installation, as required, shall be approved by the
Inspectional Services Division having jurisdiction.
NOTE: Battery operated emergency lighting shall be installed in all class rooms,
day rooms, recreation rooms, exercise rooms, dressing rooms, locker
rooms, wash rooms, conference rooms, and all private wash rooms that are
available to the handicapped, all public washrooms, and all means of egress
from any building, structure, etc.
105 The minimum size of the branch circuit conductors for the entire emergency lighting
system, and to include the exit lighting system, shall be #12 AWG gauge wire size.
105(a) Branch circuit fuse(s) or branch circuit breaker(s) shall be used as the branch circuit
protection device( s) of the emergency lighting system.
105( b) An approved locking device shall be installed on the circuit breaker( s) for the purpose
of preventing said circuit breaker(s) from being shut in the off position. Circuit
breakers, which are of the “ key” operated type, may also be used as the branch circuit
protection device for the emergency lighting system.
105(c) Wiring Methods. All battery units shall be supplied by a separate permanently wired
2-wire single- phase 120/ 277 volt un- switched fused circuit.
Fire Pumps
106. The special provisions of this Section shall apply to all fire pumps required to be
installed by other sections of the Building Code and by other agencies of the
Municipal, County or State governments.
106( a) The service, as required by this Code or some government agencies, shall be installed
according to Article 230 of the N.E.C.
106(b) In buildings where emergency generators are required by government agencies, the fire
pump shall be required to be connected to the emergency generator system
Out-of-Doors Illumination
107. All outside exit areas of a building, structure, tenant space, etc., and shall be
adequately illuminated by electrical lighting fixtures.
ELECTRICITY
54 REVISED 03/15/10
Lighting shall be continuous during the time that conditions of occupancy require that
exit areas be open for means of egress and the intensity of lighting required is not
provided by means of natural light.
Duplex Receptacle Requirements
108. The minimum of duplex outlets required in any commercial or industrial building shall
be two per room in any office area.
A minimum of two per each wall in warehouse or shop area, minimum of one per
bathroom, except as allowed by the individual responsible for electrical inspections.
108(a) All duplex receptacles shall be a minimum of 20 ampere rated. All receptacles shall be
of the spring- type grounding strap that holds mounting screws captive.
108( b) All receptacles that are installed in commercial- type day care centers shall be so
installed a minimum of 46 inches above the floor level and that said receptacles shall
be of the child protected type.
108( c) Multi- type receptacle units may be permitted for use to supply power to personal ( desk
top) type computers and related computer equipment only, provided that cords for said
multi- type receptacles are free from splices, frays, all cords are of the groundable type,
cords shall not exceed six feet in length, and the multi-receptacle device is listed by a
recognized testing laboratory.
Said multi- type receptacle devices shall be 15 ampere protected and shall only be used
for personal (desktop) type computers and related equipment.
Multi-type receptacle devices shall be powered from a permanently installed wall
mounted and/ or a floor mounted duplex receptacle.
All multi- type receptacle units shall be listed by a recognized standard testing laboratory
and shall be maintained to the standards as set forth by said testing laboratory.
108(d) All receptacles that are installed within six feet of any sink, installed in washrooms,
locker rooms, installed out of doors and within eight feet of finished grade level, or
installed in and/or associated with foliage, plants, and the like, shall be ground-fault
interrupter protected.
NOTE: There shall be no exceptions to this ruling.
NOTE: Office furnishings systems are deleted from above.
Grounding Conductors Required in Flexible Conduits
ELECTRICITY
55 REVISED 10/01/07
109. A grounding conductor shall be installed in each flexible conduit and said grounding
conductor shall be firmly connected to the lighting fixture and also to the junction box
where said flexible metal raceways are connected.
109(a) The grounding conductor shall be required for installation in all flexible conduit systems
for all florescent lighting fixtures regardless of voltage.
Heating Systems
110. All heating systems such as furnaces, hot water heaters, baseboard heaters, etc., shall be
served by a separate dedicated circuit(s) and said separate dedicated circuit(s) shall not
be connected to and/ or serve any other electrical device that is not directly related to
said furnaces, hot water heaters, baseboard heaters, etc.
NOTE: Two or more furnaces, hot water heaters, or baseboard heaters shall not be
connected to the same branch circuit.
EXCEPTION: More than one baseboard heater may be permitted to be connected to
the branch circuit providing the connected load does not exceed 80%
rating of the conductor( s) and/ or the over current protection device.
Disconnection Means for Heating Systems
111. An approved disconnecting means ( switch) shall be installed to disconnect the
ungrounded conductors that serve said furnaces, hot water heaters, baseboard heaters, etc.
The disconnecting means ( switch) shall be installed and/or located externally on, or
immediately near, said furnaces, hot water heaters, baseboard heaters, etc.
NOTE: Disconnecting means ( switch) that are manufactured and/ or installed internal
into the furnace, hot water heaters, baseboard heaters, etc., shall not be
approved as the disconnecting means of said equipment and will not be
accepted.
Switched Lighting Fixtures
112. In all commercial and industrial buildings, a minimum of one switched lighting fixture
shall be required for any office, warehouse area, sales area, etc.
NOTE: Where an office and/ or warehouse area has more than one entrance and/ or
exit, a three-way switching arrangement shall be installed.
EXCEPTION: Switched lighting fixtures may not be required providing
sufficient illumination is maintained from unswitched lighting fixtures that are
ELECTRICITY
56 REVISED 10/01/07
served from dedicated night lighting circuits. Said lighting circuit shall have a
lock on device installed on the circuit breaker. Night lighting circuits shall be
considered emergency circuits (see Section 111).
112(a) All switching devices installed in any commercial and/or industrial structure, shall be a
minimum of 15 or 20 ampere rated.
Voltage Identification
113. When more than one voltage is installed or when voltages exceed 240 volts in a
building, tenant space, etc., black lettering on an orange sticker shall be installed on the
following covers:
a) Switchgear
b) Panelboard
c) Junction Box
d) Pull and/or Tap Box
e) Disconnects
Lettering shall be sized in relation to size of cover.
113( a) Color coding for different voltages shall be as follows:
LINE/VOLTAGE COLOR NEUTRAL/ COLOR
277V - 480V Brown Grey Only
Orange “ ”
Yellow “ ”
120V - 208V - 240V Black White
Red White/ Tracer
Blue “ ”
All grounding conductors shall be insulated and green or green with yellow stripe in
color.
The identification of all neutral conductors shall be identified with the corresponding
branch circuits, that make up the network wiring system.
This identification shall be done with tie-wraps or black electrical tape.
NOTE: There shall be no exceptions to this ruling.
Expansion Joints
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
57 REVISED 10/01/07
114. All raceways that are required to use expansion fittings shall use listed fittings approved
for expansion joints by a recognized testing laboratory.
NOTE: No other fitting shall be used or will be accepted.
Sizes of Junction Boxes
115. All electrical junction boxes, pull boxes, outlet boxes, switch boxes, troughs, and the
like, shall be metallic where installed in all commercial, industrial, retail, motel, hotel,
and out- of-door electrical installations.
The minimum dimensions of any junction box, outlet box, switch box, splicing box, pull
box, etc., shall be 4” x 4” x 1-½” in measurement.
NOTE: Junction boxes required for use for the proper installation and/or mounting of
lighting fixtures may be of the eight- sided type but shall be a minimum of 1-½
inches in depth.
115(a) Junction boxes that are required to be installed in brick and/or masonry walls or
structures need not be of the sizes as stated in this paragraph ( to include paragraph 53
above). However, said junction boxes shall be of the masonry type and approved for the
location by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
115( b) In existing occupancies, junction boxes of the dimensions of 2” x 2 ” x4”
may be installed where it is necessary to add additional electrical devices and the
existing wall( s) are closed by permanent wall finishes and where said wall( s) are
required to be “ fished.”
115(c) All panelboards, junction boxes, pull boxes, splice boxes, troughs, wireways, raceways,
etc., shall be mounted and/ or secured to a permanent member of the building structure
or by other means, as approved by the inspector having jurisdiction.
NOTE: Electrical equipment, panelboards, junction boxes, pull boxes, troughs,
wireways, raceways, conduit systems, and the like, shall not be mounted on
wall board ( drywall) as a sole support of said electrical equipment or
materials.
Said panelboards, junction boxes, troughs, wireways, etc., as noted above, shall not be
installed as to be suspended. Said materials as noted shall not be so installed as to be
supported by the means of drywall, wall board, ceiling tile, etc.
115( d) All junction boxes that are mounted on metal studding shall incorporate a stand- off clip
and/or device that is mounted to said junction box to prevent the junction box from
being pushed back into the wall if a cord/ plus is inserted into the receptacle.
ELECTRICITY
58 REVISED 10/01/07
All metal clips that are used to mount junction boxes and/or conduit systems shall be
screwed to said metal studding so that the metal clip cannot become dislodged when
wall finishes are applied.
Temporary and Abandoned Wiring Systems
116. All temporary and/or abandoned wiring systems, raceways, conduit systems, boxes,
metering devices, service entrance materials, and the like, shall be removed from any
building and/or premises, properties, etc., prior to final inspection.
Remodeling and Upgrading Existing Materials
117. All existing commercial and/or industrial buildings, tenant spaces, etc., that apply for a
permit for remodeling purposes and/ or additions to existing structures, etc., shall be in
full compliance with all electrical codes and/or ordinances.
117(a) If existing wiring systems, devices, materials, installation methods, etc., are not in
compliance with present electrical code and/ or ordinance requirements, then said wiring,
devices, materials, installation methods, etc., shall be upgraded to present code and/or
ordinance requirements and as per the electrical inspector’ s approval.
117( b) Remodeling as identified in this Section of this Ordinance shall be defined as the
following:
Remodeling of more than 50% of a ceiling area in a typical tenant space, building,
structure, or the like.
Remodeling of more than 50% of walls in a typical tenant space, building, structure, or
the like.
Remodeling of more than 50% of any service equipment in a typical tenant space,
building, structure, or the like.
Categorization of “ areas” shall be interpreted as walls, ceilings, or service equipment,
within or associated with a typical tenant space, building, structure or the like.
For inspection purposes, compliance with code requirements will only pertain to areas
as identified above that undergo remodeling for which a permit has been obtained.
In the event where an electrical inspector observes any electrical code violation in
locations other than areas that undergo remodeling, where said violation may constitute
a hazard or unsafe condition to any occupant or tenant, said violation shall be upgraded
to present code requirements as approved by the Director of Building, Field Supervisor
or the electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
Electrical Permit Required
ELECTRICITY
59 REVISED 10/01/07
118. An electrical permit is required and shall be obtained from the Building Department prior
to any electrical installation, alteration or prior to any electrical installation, alteration or
repair of any electrical wiring system, materials, devices, equipment, apparatus, etc.,
and/ or to include the repair of any exiting electrical wiring system, material, device,
equipment, apparatus, etc., in the Village of Arlington Heights.
118(a) It shall be the full responsibility of any person(s), firm, corporation, establishment, etc.,
for which an electrical permit is obtained, to be in full compliance with all code- related
paragraphs and/or requirements, ordinances, amendments, addendum, etc., which have
been proposed by the Electrical Commission of the Village of Arlin gton Heights or as
adopted by the Village of Arlington Heights.
Inspection Requirements
119. All electrical installations or alterations of equipment, materials, devices, and the like,
shall be inspected before any of the electrical installation, repairs, alterations, and the
like, is concealed.
119(a) If any electrical equipment, material, devices, and the like, is found to be unsafe and/or
not in compliance with all code requirements, addendum, amendments, etc., as approved
by the individual responsible for electrical inspections, then said equipment, materials,
devices, and the like, shall be upgraded and/ or reinstalled as necessary, and the required
inspections performed before any concealment and/or backfill.
Any person, firm, company or corporation shall notify the individual responsible for
electrical inspections, giving him 24 hours before the required electrical inspection.
119( b) The individual responsible for electrical inspections is empowered to remove, and/ or
cause to be removed, from said building and/or premises any material that might
interfere with a thorough inspection. Said removal shall be at owner, tenant, and/ or
landlord’ s expense.
119(c) After wires are drawn in the conduits and properly spliced, it shall be the duty of the
person, firm, company or corporation to notify the individual responsible for electrical
inspections, who shall inspect such work within 24 hours of such notice being given.
119(d) The individual responsible for electrical inspections shall issue a final certificate of
approval after the completion of installation of all wiring or all apparatus if said work is
found to be in full compliance of the terms of this code and with the rules adopted.
119(e) It shall be unlawful to use or turn on power into, or induce any electric current to flow
through, any wires or equipment hereafter installed for which a certificate has not been
issued. The Public Utility Company shall not be permitted to install a service unless the
certificate has been issued.
ELECTRICITY
60 REVISED 10/01/07
The foregoing does not restrict the issuance of a temporary certificate by the individual
responsible for electrical inspections for the use of electricity for construction purposes.
New Construction
120. In newly constructed day care centers, retirement type complexes, nursing homes,
commercial buildings, industrial buildings, single and multi-family type dwellings, and
to include structures and/ or buildings that may not be noted in this ordinance, shall be in
full compliance with all of the electrical codes, ordinances, addendum amendments, and
the like, as recognized and/ or required by the Electrical Commission of the Village of
Arlington Heights, and as adopted by the Village of Arlington Heights.
Drawings Required for Electrical Installations
121. All applications for an electrical permit to install, repair, alter, etc., any electrical wiring
systems, devices, equipment, apparatus, etc., shall include drawings indicating the
minimum following information.
1. The number of power-consuming devices ( receptacles), lighting fixtures,
switches, etc., connected to a new circuit and/ or an existing circuit.
2. The number of circuits proposed to be installed.
3. The wire gauge and the type of wire proposed for the installation.
4. The number of conductors that will be installed in a new conduit system and/ or an
existing conduit system when the total wiring installation is complete.
NOTE: If a new electrical service is proposed to be installed or an existing
electrical service is proposed to be upgraded, the following
information must be submitted.
5. The complete electrical service distribution system, which shall include the
following:
a) The size of the service conductors.
b) The type of insulation on the service conductors.
c) The size and type of the service conduit.
d) The size and rating of the service main disconnect and the panelboard.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
61 REVISED 03/15/10
e) The size of the grounding conductor, size and type of the conduit that will
be used to enclose the grounding conductor and the location of the
grounding conductor attachment ( street side of the incoming water
service).
f) The location( s) of all-electrical service equipment, transformers,
generators, and the like.
Supervising Code Enforcement
122. The individual responsible for electrical inspections supervising such enforcement of the
electrical codes, Chapters, addendums, amendments, etc., as required by the Electrical
Commission of the Village of Arlington Heights and as adopted by the Village of
Arlington Heights has the responsibility for making interpretations of the requirements
and/or rules, for giving approval of wiring methods, devices, equipment, materials,
methods of installations, etc., and for granting special permission contemplated in a
number of the requirements and/or rules.
Article II Applications, Permits, Inspections and Fees
Section 25-201 General. No electric wiring for light, heat or power shall be installed hereafter
in a building or structure, nor shall an alteration or extension of an existing electric wiring
system be made, except in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter and the standards and
specifications, rules and regulations as contained in the code known as The Electrical Code
N.E.C. 2005 Edition), as adopted and modified, and unless a permit therefor shall have been
issued.
Section 25-202 Applications, Contents, Permit. All persons or corporations desiring to install
wires or other apparatus for the use of electrical current for any of the purposes mentioned in the
foregoing section, before commending or doing any electrical construction work of any kind
whatever, either installing new electrical apparatus or repairing apparatus already in use, shall
file an application for a permit therefor in the Building Department. Such application must be
filled out on special forms in triplicate, to be obtained from the Building Department, and must
be accompanied by proper inspection fees. Such application shall describe in detail the material
and apparatus desired to be used, the class of work to be done, give the locality by street and
number and shall be signed by the contractor, or contractor’ s authorized representative. Upon
the filing of such application and the payment of the proper inspection fees, if the application is
found to be proper, such permit shall be issued.
Section 25-203 Permits Required - Must be Signed by Registered Contractor. Permits will
be issued only on the payments in advance of the proper inspection fee. All applications for
permits must be signed by the person, firm or corporation registered and must also be
countersigned by an accredited representative of the person, firm or corporation signing the
affidavit attached to the application for registration.
ELECTRICITY
62 REVISED 10/01/07
Section 25-204 Inspection Required. The individual responsible for electrical inspections shall
make or cause to be made electrical inspections as follows:
a. During Installation: The individual responsible for electrical inspections shall, during
the installation of an electric wiring system, make or cause inspections to be made to
assure compliance with this Code and the rules.
No work in connection with an electric wiring system shall be covered or concealed until
it has been inspected as prescribed in this subdivision and permission to do so has been
given by the individual responsible for electrical inspections.
b. On Completion of Work: The electrical contractor shall notify the individual
responsible for electrical inspections whenever the work shall advance to the point of
completion of the installation as shown on the application for a permit therefor. The
individual responsible for electrical inspections shall, within a reasonable time after
notice of the completion of electrical wiring, for which a permit is required by this Code,
make or cause to be made an inspection of such work and such tests as may be necessary
to determine that it conforms with this Code and the rules.
c. Reinspection: The individual responsible for electrical inspections shall make or cause to
be made a reinspection of an electric wiring installation whenever he deems it necessary
in the interest of public safety.
If an electric wiring system upon reinspection is found to be defective and unsafe, the
individual responsible for electrical inspections shall revoke all certificates, in effect at
that time, relating to such system; and the use of such system shall be discontinued until
it has been made to conform to this Code and the rules and a new certificate has been
issued by the individual responsible for electrical inspections.
Section 25-205 Service Entrance Fees. For the inspection of each service entrance, the fee
shall be as specified in Section 25-103 – Amendments.
Ord. #08-002)
Section 25-206 Minimum Fee for Any Inspection. The minimum fee for an inspection of
electrical equipment installed or altered shall be $ 55.
Section 25-207 Certificate of Approval. The individual responsible for electrical inspections
shall issue a certificate of approval after each inspection in which the wiring apparatus is found
to be in compliance with the terms of this Code and with the rules adopted and shall issue a final
certificate of approval, so marked, upon final inspection of the completed job if the installation is
found to comply with the provisions of this Code.
Section 25-208 Certificate of Approval Required. It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use
of, or to supply current for any wires or electric wiring for light, heat or power in a building or
structure, unless the required final certificate of approval has been issued by the individual
responsible for electrical inspections.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
63 REVISED 03/15/10
Section 25-209 Temporary Current. The individual responsible for electrical inspections
may, in his discretion, give temporary permission for a reasonable time, to supply and use
current in part of an electrical installation before such installation has been fully completed and
the certificate issued, but the public utility supplying such current shall not consider this
temporary permission as the final connection.
Article III Electrical Contractor
Section 25-301 Electrical Contractor. The term “ Electrical Contractor” as used in this Chapter
shall be understood to mean any person engaged in the business of installing or altering by
contract electrical equipment for the utilization of electricity supplied for light, heat or power,
not including radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and signals,
conductors, and other equipment installed for or by public utilities including common carriers
which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission, for use in their operation
as public utilities; but the term “ Electrical Contractor” does not include employees employed by
such contractor to do or supervise such work.
Section 25-302 Registration. Any person desiring to engage in the business of electrical
contracting shall apply for registration with the Building Department. Upon the filing of such
application in proper form, and the payment of the registration fee, as provided for in Section 25-
303, the individual responsible for electrical inspections shall register the applicant as an
Electrical Contractor, and shall issue to the applicant a certificate of registration which will
authorize the applicant to engage in such business for the year in which it is issued.
Section 25-303 Registration Fee. The fee for registration as an Electrical Contractor shall be
30 per annum, which sum shall be paid by the applicant to the Village, in advance, upon filing
the application; provided, that when such application is made by an applicant, not previously
registered in this Village, or after July 1, of any year, the fee for registration shall be $ 30 for the
remainder of such calendar year.
Section 25-304 Registration Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of Electrical Contractor, as herein defined, without being registered as an Electrical
Contractor in the manner hereinafter set forth; provided, however, that is such person is already
registered for the current year in another city or village within the State of Illinois, in conformity
with the State Statutes, such Electrical Contractor shall not be required to pay a registration fee
in this Village.
Section 25-305 Sublet Contracts. When contracts to install electrical work have been obtained
by persons who are not registered as Electrical Contractors, as provided for in this Chapter and
the contract is assigned or sublet to a registered electrician on a subcontract basis, the name of
such registered Electrical Contractor shall immediately be disclosed by the registered electrical
contractor to the other party to be contract in writing.
Section 25-306 Permits for Work to be Done. No registered Electrical Contractor
shall install any electrical conduits, electrical wires, equipment, or apparatus in any building or
structure for which a permit is required, until such permit shall have been secured. In
case any work is begun on the installation of electrical conduits, raceways, or the installation,
ELECTRICITY
64 REVISED03/15/10
alteration or repair of electrical wires or apparatus in any building or structure without a permit
authorizing the same being first issued therefor, or the aforetime installations are being made in
violation of the electrical regulations of this Code, the individual responsible for electrical
inspections shall have the power to stop and desist therefrom until the proper permit is secured.
Section 25-307 Failure to Correct Defects. Failure on the part of any registered electrical
contractor to correct any defect, error, or deficiency in any work installed under the authority of a
permit issued to him by the individual responsible for electrical inspections within ten calendar
days after written notification thereof by the inspector, or within such further reasonable time as
may, upon request, be prescribed, the individual responsible for electrical inspections shall,
without future notice, stop the issuance of permits to such registered Electrical Contractor until
such corrections have been made, inspected, and approved. In addition thereto, the penalty
provided in this Chapter may be enforced.
Section 25-308 Unlawful to Secure Permit for Person Not Entitled Thereto. It shall be
unlawful for any registered Electrical Contractor to secure or furnish a permit for the installation,
alteration and repair of electrical wires and apparatus to any person not entitled to such permit
under the electrical regulations of this Chapter.
Article IV Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 25-401 Power to Enter Building. The individual responsible for electrical inspections
shall have the power to enter any building or premises at any reasonable hour in the discharge of
their duties, and it shall be competent for them, when necessary, to remove any existing
obstructions such as laths, plastering, boarding or partitions which may prevent a perfect
inspection of the electrical equipment; they shall also have the power to enter any building used
in whole or in part for the purpose of public assemblage at any time when occupied by the
public, in order to examine electrical equipment in such building, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to interfere with them in the performance of their duties.
Section 25-402 Aid of Police Department. Whenever, in the opinion of the individual
responsible for electrical inspections, it shall be necessary to call upon the department of police
for aid and assistance in carrying out or enforcing any of the provisions in this Code governing
the inspection of electrical equipment, he shall have the authority to do so, and it shall be the
duty of any member of the department of police when called upon by the individual responsible
for electrical inspections, to act according to the instructions of and to perform such duties as
may be required by the individual responsible for electrical inspections in order to enforce or put
into effect the provisions of this Code relating to the inspection of electrical equipment.
Section 25-403 Power To Attach Official Notices and Seals. The individual responsible for
electrical inspections is hereby empowered to attach to electrical cabinets and equipment an
official notice or seal to prevent use of electricity, and it shall be unlawful for any other person to
put or attach such seal, or to break, change, destroy, tear, mutilate, cover or otherwise to deface
or injure any such official notice or seal posted by an inspector.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
65 REVISED 03/15/10
Section 25-404 Permits. The individual responsible for electrical inspections shall issue
permits for such installation and alteration of electrical equipment in all cases where application
for such permit shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations applicable thereto;
provided, however, that no permit shall be issued for installing or altering any contract, electrical
equipment, unless the person applying for such permit is registered as an electrical contractor as
required in Section 25-302 of this Chapter, and further provided, that the inspection fee as
provided for in this Chapter shall have been paid in advance upon filing the application.
Section 25-405 Inspection and Certificates of Inspection. The individual responsible for
electrical inspections of the Village shall inspect all electrical equipment installed or altered,
except such electrical equipment as may be lawfully exempt, and shall require that it conform to
the electrical regulations of this Code.
Upon completion of such installation or alteration in compliance with the electrical regulations
of this Code, the individual responsible for electrical inspections shall, on request made by a
registered electrical contractor, issue a certificate of inspection covering such installation or
alteration; provided, however, that no such certificate shall be issued until all inspection fees for
such installation have been paid.
Section 25-406 Reinspection. The individual responsible for electrical inspections is hereby
empowered to reinspect any electrical equipment within the scope of the electrical regulations of
this Code, and when the equipment is found to be unsafe to life or property, shall notify in
writing the person owning, using or operating the same to place such electrical equipment in a
safe and secure condition in compliance with the electrical regulations of this Code within such
time as the individual responsible for electrical inspections shall consider just and reasonable.
Refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of such notification shall subject the person
owning, using or operating such electrical equipment to the penalties provided for in the last
section of this Chapter and, in addition thereto, the individual responsible for electrical
inspections of the Village is hereby empowered to cut off and stop current to any such electrical
equipment found unsafe to life or property.
Section 25-407 Power to Keep Records. The individual responsible for electrical inspections
shall keep complete records of all permits issued and inspections made and other official work
performed under the electrical regulations of this Code.
Section 25-408 Temporary Current Permits. Whenever any electrical equipment has been
installed or altered, no electrical current shall be used on such equipment, except as hereinafter
provided, previous to the inspection of such equipment by the individual responsible for
electrical inspections and the issuance of a temporary current permit covering designated
portions or the entirety of such installation or alteration; provided, however, that in case of any
installation or alteration, covered by permit authorizing such installation or alteration, the portion
of such equipment comprising the service entrance equipment and wiring, the meter and meter
connection cabinet and the meter wiring up to but not beyond the customer’ s disconnecting
switch or other disconnecting device may be made electrically alive, prior to inspection and the
issuance of a temporary current permit; and provided further that, in such
ELECTRICITY
66REVISED03/ 15/10
case, the electrical inspector shall be notified of the intention to make such portion of the
equipment electrically alive and that the customer’ s disconnecting switch or other disconnecting
device shall be sealed in the “ off” position and tagged with a warning notice reading as follows:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place this switch in the ‘ on’
position or to use electricity on any wiring beyond this switch previous to
the issuance, by the individual responsible for electrical inspections, of a
temporary current permit or a certificate of inspection authorizing the use
of current on this installation.”
Section 25-409 Power to Suspend Work of Electrical Contractor and to Revoke Permits.
The individual responsible for electrical inspections is hereby empowered to suspend the permit
privileges of any registered electrical contractor who shall fail to pay any just indebtedness to the
Village for inspection fees for electrical wires and apparatus as fixed by that part of this Chapter
dealing therewith, until such registered electrical contractor shall discharge and pay to the
Village all just indebtedness then due and owing from such registered electrician.
Section 25-410 Personal Liability. In all cases where any action is taken by the individual
responsible for electrical inspections to enforce the provisions of any of the sections contained in
Chapter 25 and the National Electric Code adopted thereby, such acts shall be done in the name
of and on behalf of the Village of Arlington Height, and the individual responsible for electrical
inspections in so acting for the Village shall not render himself liable for any damage that may
accrue to persons or property as a result of any such act committed in good faith in the discharge
of his duties, and any suit brought against the individual responsible for electrical inspections by
reason thereof shall be defended by the Village of Arlington Heights, at its costs, until final
termination of the proceedings contained therein.
Section 25-411 Regulations Not to Relieve Responsibility. The electrical regulations of this
Code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning,
operating or installing any electrical wires, appliances, apparatus, construction or equipment for
damages to anyone injured by any defect therein by reason of the inspection authorized herein or
the certificate of inspection issued by the individual responsible for electrical inspections; nor
shall the Village of Arlington Heights be held liable for any damages resulting from the
enforcement of the electrical regulations of this Code.
Section 25-412 Regulations May be Modified. The electrical regulations of this Code may be
modified or waived by special permission in particular cases where such modification or waiver
is permitted by “ special permission” in those regulations. Such permission shall in all cases be
obtained from the individual responsible for electrical inspections in writing prior to the
commencement of the work.
Section 25-413 Unlawful to Disturb Wiring or Equipment or to Overfuse any Conductor or
Other Equipment. It shall be unlawful for any person in any way to cut, disturb, alter or
change any electrical wiring or to permit such electrical wiring to be cut, disturbed, altered or
changed unless done in conformity with the electrical regulations of this Code.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
67 REVISED 03/15/10
It shall be unlawful for any person to overfuse any conductor, motor or apparatus in excess of the
maximum allowed by the electrical regulations of this Code for such conductor, motor or
apparatus, or to install any substitute in lieu of an approved fuse or device so as to remove or
reduce the factor of safety of the same.
Section 25-414 No Installation Under Permit Issued to Other Person. It shall be unlawful for
any person to install, alter or repair any electrical wires or apparatus by authority of a permit
issued to and for the use of some other person.
Section 25-415 Unlawful to Change Forms or Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to
change, add or mutilate so as to change the original wording, unless authorized by the individual
responsible for electrical inspections, of any written or printed form issued to registered electrical
contractors by the individual responsible for electrical inspections.
Section 25-416 Revocation of Permits. The individual responsible for electrical inspections is
authorized to revoke any permit or certificate obtained by fraud, misrepresentation, or in any way
contrary to the provisions of the electrical regulations of this Code, for the installation, alteration,
repair and use of any electrical equipment. In addition, any permit, certificate or any printed
form or document issued to any person who shall have been convicted of a violation of any of
the sections of this Chapter shall be revoked by the individual responsible for electrical
inspections. Notice of revocation shall be in writing mailed to the person having committed such
violation.
Section 25-417 Penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter, or who
maintains any electrical wiring and apparatus found to be dangerous to life and property, shall be
fined not less than $ 25 and not more than $ 750 for each offense. Each day such violation shall
continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, and so much of any electrical installation
as may be erected or altered and maintained in violation of this Chapter shall be condemned and
the individual responsible for electrical inspections is hereby empowered to cut off and
discontinue current to such electrical wires and apparatus installed or maintained in violation of
this Chapter.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 10/01/11
CHAPTER 26 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Article I Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code
Section 26-101 Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code
Section 26-102 Modification by Amendment and Deletion of Various Sections of the
International Property Maintenance Code
Section 26-103 Notice
Section 26-104 Vacant Land Maintenance
Section 26-105 Unoccupied or Abandoned Building Maintenance
Section 26-106 Corrective Measures
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
2 REVISED 10/01/11
Article I Regulations and Standards for Property Maintenance and Upkeep;
Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code
Section 26-101 Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code
a. There is hereby adopted by reference the 2009 Edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code ( IPMC) for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for
governing the conditions and maintenance of all buildings, structures, and
appurtenances thereto, and all premises, by providing standards for supplied utilities
and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit occupancy and use; and the condemnation of building,
structures and premises unfit for human use, and to order demolition or removal of such
existing structures and/ or conditions, except as modified by other provisions in the
Municipal Code.
b. The International Property Maintenance Code shall:
1. Regulate all buildings, structures and premises where the provisions of this
Chapter specifically cover the subject matter in question.
2. In the event that a detail, condition or regulation is not covered by the 2009
Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code or the Arlington
Heights Municipal Code, the Building Director shall determine the measures
that shall apply.
Section 26-102 Modification by Amendment and Deletion of Various Sections of the
International Property Maintenance Code. The 2009 Edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code adopted by this Chapter is modified for use in the Village by the following
amendments, which amendments are given articles and section numbers identical to the
International Property Maintenance Code. Appendix A is specifically adopted and the
provisions in that Appendix are mandatory. To the extent any provision of the IPMC conflicts
with any provision of the Arlington Heights Municipal Code, the Municipal Code provision
will apply.
CHAPTER 3 – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
302.4 Weeds
Add, in the second line, after in excess of:
12 inches in height from the ground on vacant land, or in excess of 8 inches from
the ground on occupied premises
303.2 Enclosures
Replace “ 48 inches” with “60 inches”.
304.14 Insect Screens
Delete the following text from the first sentence:
During the period from [DATE] to [DATE],
CHAPTER 4 – LIGHT,VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
404.3 Alternative devices
Replace the text “ International Building Code” with “applicable requirements of the
Arlington Heights Municipal Code.”
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
3 REVISED 10/01/11
404.3 Minimum ceiling heights
Replace the text “7 feet” with “6 feet 8 inches” throughout this Section.
404.5 Overcrowding
Delete existing text and replace with the following:
Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the
minimum area requirements of Table 404.5. A space, room or dwelling unit shall
be deemed by this code to be overcrowded when occupied by more occupants
than permitted.
Table 404.5
Insert new Table 404.5 to read as follows:
MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS
ROOM
OR
SPACE
MINIMUM AREA IN SQUARE FEET
1 to 2
Occupants
3 to 5
Occupants
6 or more
Occupants
Living room No requirements 120 150
Dining room No requirements 80 100
Bedrooms Shall comply with Section 404.4
Sleeping area
The minimum occupancy area required by this Table shall not be
included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy
area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with Section
404.4.
Combined spaces
Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the
requirements of this Table if the total area is equal to that required for
separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a
combination living room/ dining room.
CHAPTER 6 – MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
602.3 Heat supply
Delete existing text and replace with the following:
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more
dwelling unit, dormitory or guest room on terms, either express or implied , shall
supply sufficient heat to provide a minimum temperature of 68oF from 6:30 a.m.
to 10:30 p.m., and a minimum temperature of 65oF at all other times.
Delete the following:
The last sentence in Exception 1 and Exception 2 in its entirety.
602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces
Delete the following text:
during the period from [ DATE] to [DATE]
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
4 REVISED 10/01/11
604.2 Service
Delete the existing text and replace it with the following:
The size and usage of appliances and equipment, and the electrical service for
dwelling units shall be in accordance with the Electrical Regulations in the
Municipal Code.
CHAPTER 7 – FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
Delete this chapter in its entirety and see Chapter 27 of the Municipal Code for Fire
Regulations.
Section 26-103 Notice. A property owner must provide notice to the Director of Building within
30 days when a business located on the property ceases to operate. The notice must state:
a. The date operations ceased;
b. The cause for ceasing operations;
c. The date for any new operations or occupancy.
Section 26-104 Vacant Land Maintenance.
a. Any property in the Village that remains undeveloped for a period of longer than 60 days
or on which improvements have been demolished, and for which no application for
redevelopment has been provided shall be appropriately landscaped. All pavement may
be required to be removed and replaced with appropriate landscaping or maintained in a
manner acceptable to the Director of Building or designee. For the purposes of this
Article, appropriately landscaped shall consist of, at a minimum: grading to prevent water
run-off on adjacent properties, four inches of topsoil, and grass or equivalent landscaping.
b. No person shall change the grade of a vacant lot by depositing dirt, refuse, garbage, or
material of any nature whatsoever, without the approval of the Director of Building. If
such change of grade shall take place without such approval, the owner or person in
control shall be directed by the Village Manager to restore the grade of said lot. If, after
ten days' notice, such restoration shall not have been made, the Village Manager may
enter upon the lot and restore the grade and bill the owner for the cost of restoring the
grade. If such bill is not paid, the cost of restoration shall be collected in an appropriate
action brought by the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
b. All landscaping must be maintained in accordance with Chapters 19 and 28 of the
Municipal Code of the Village of Arlington Heights.
c. All utilities must be appropriately terminated.
Section 26-105 Unoccupied or Abandoned Building Maintenance.
a. For purposes of this Article, a vacant building is any commercial building that remains
unoccupied for 60 days or more.
b. All vacant buildings and accessory structures shall be maintained in accordance with the
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
5 REVISED 10/01/11
property maintenance requirements in the Municipal Code of the Village of Arlington
Heights.
c. All signs and supporting structures must be removed in accordance with Chapter 30 of
the Municipal Code of the Village of Arlington Heights.
d. The owner of any vacant building shall not allow the following on the property:
1. Buildings that are boarded up, partially destroyed, or left unreasonably in a state
of partial construction for a minimum period of 60 days;
2. Broken windows in any structures;
3. Illegal parking of vehicles;
4. Accessory buildings and building exteriors, which are maintained in such
condition as to become defective, unsightly, or in deterioration or disrepair;
5. Lumber, trash, debris or solid waste, as defined in Chapter 19 of the Municipal
Code, on the property;
6. Abandoned, discarded or unused objects, vehicles or equipment;
7. Stagnant water;
8. Any device, decoration, design, fence or structure which is unsightly by reason of
its condition or because it is in violation of any other Village ordinance, or
9. Dirt piles, broken pavement, concrete and asphalt debris.
Section 26-106 Corrective Measures.
a. The Village Manager or designee shall serve a notice of violation or order on the property
owner through certified mail or personal service. This order shall direct the Owner to
make necessary repairs, to discontinue any illegal action or condition and to take any
other necessary corrective measures.
b. If the property owner fails to correct the violation within 30 days after written notification
is sent, the property owner shall be fined not less than $ 100 and not more than $ 750
notwithstanding any other penalties, actions or proceedings. Each day that a violation
exists constitutes a separate offense.
c. The Village Manager or designee may undertake such repairs or action when, in his or
her judgment, the failure to make them will endanger the public health, safety or welfare
and the owner fails, neglects or refuses to make repairs or other corrective action called
for by the notice of violations within 45 days after written notification is sent by certified
mail or personally served. In accordance with State law, the Village Manager or designee
shall apply to the Circuit Court of Cook County for an order authorizing action to be
taken or for an order requiring the owner to take the necessary action. Any reasonable
expense incurred by the Village in making such repairs or undertaking other corrective
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
6 REVISED 10/01/11
measures shall be a charge against the owner, which may be recovered, in an appropriate
action at law.
d. In addition to all other remedies provided by law, the Village shall have a lien on the
property for the reasonable costs of the repairs or corrective measures. The lien shall be
superior to all other liens and encumbrances except tax liens. Within 180 days after the
cost is incurred, the Village shall cause to be filed a notice of lien in the Office of the
Recorder of Cook County. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: (1)
a description of the real estate sufficient for identification; ( 2) the amount of money
representing the cost and expense incurred; and ( 3) the date or dates when the cost and
expense were incurred by the Village.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 10/01/11
CHAPTER 27 FIRE REGULATIONS
Article I Adoption of the International Fire Code
Section 27-101 Adoption of the International Fire Code
Section 27-102 Modification by Amendment and Deletion of Various Sections of the
International Fire Code
Article II Hazardous Materials Regulations
Section 27-201 Spills Prohibited
Section 27-202 Definitions
Section 27-203 Hazardous Material Responses - Cost Reimbursement
Section 27-204 Fault not to be Considered
Section 27-205 Distribution of Reimbursed Costs - Replacement of Material(s) and/or
Other Expenses
Section 27-206 Regulations or Remedies
Section 27-207 Penalty
Article III Public Fireworks Displays
Section 27-301 Definitions
Section 27-302 Sale of Fireworks
Section 27-303 Permit for Fireworks Display: Application
Section 27-304 Inspection by Village
Section 27-305 Transferability of Permits
Section 27-306 Bond
Section 27-307 Fireworks Used in Public Display
Section 27-308 Seizure of Fireworks
Section 27-309 Penalty
FIRE REGULATIONS
27-2 REVISED 01/07/19
Article I Adoption of the International Fire Code
Section 27-101 Adoption of the International Fire Code
a. There is hereby adopted by reference the 2009 Edition of the International Fire Code for the
purpose of establishing rules and regulations for safeguarding of life and property from fire
and explosion hazards arising from storage, handling and use of hazardous substances,
materials, devices and from operations and conditions hazardous to life or property in the
occupancy or use of buildings, structures and premises, except as modified by this Article.
b. The International Fire Code shall:
1. Regulate all buildings, structures and premises where the provisions of this Chapter
23 specifically cover the subject matter in question.
2. In the event that a detail, operation or regulation is not covered by the 2009 Edition of
the International Fire Code, the applicable provisions in the National Fire Protection
Association Fire Codes 2008, published by the National Fire Protection Association,
shall apply.
Ord. #17-001)
c. All contractors who perform the tests required by Section 107.2 of the International Fire Code
shall submit the records of all tests in the Village in a manner set forth by the Village. In
addition, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property for which any test is required
to ensure that its contractor performing the test submits it as required by the Village.
Ord. #13-019, # 19-001)
Section 27-102 Modification by Amendment and Deletion of Various Sections of the
International Fire Code. The 2009 Edition of the International Fire Code adopted by this Chapter is
modified for use in the Village by the following amendments, which amendments are given articles
and section numbers identical to the International Fire Code. Appendices D, I, and J are specifically
adopted and the provisions in each Appendix are mandatory. To the extent any provision of the IFC
conflicts with any provision of the Arlington Heights Municipal Code, the Municipal Code provision
will apply.
CHAPTER 1 – SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
102.3 Change of Use or Occupancy.
Revised 102.3 to read as follows:
No change shall be made in the use or occupancy of any building that would place the
building in a different division of the same group of occupancies or in a different group
of occupancies, unless such building is made to comply with the requirements of this
Code for such division or group of occupancies. Subject to the approval of the Building
Official, the use or occupancy of existing buildings shall be permitted to be changed
and the building is allowed to be occupied for purposes in other groups in existing
structures where the space at issue is 3,000 square feet or less of gross floor area, the
structure at issue does not include residential occupancies, and the space at issue meets
the fire separation requirements of Table 508.4 of the International Building Code.
CHAPTER 3 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
302.1 Definitions
In the definition of BONFIRE, Add the following after the word ceremonial:
pleasure, cooking, warmth or similar purposes having a total fuel area greater than 3
feet in diameter and 2 feet in height.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
27-3 REVISED 10/01/11
307.1 General
Add the following at the end:
Fuel for open burning shall consist only of seasoned firewood and shall be ignited
with a small quantity of paper. The fire shall not be utilized for waste disposal
purposes.
307.4.1 Bonfires
Delete the following from the first sentence:
unless the fire is contained in a barbecue pit.
307.4.3 Portable Outdoor Fireplaces
Delete the exception and replace it with the following:
Portable outdoor fireplaces used at detached single family dwellings.
308.1.4 Open Flame Cooking Devices
Delete Exception 3.
308.3 Group A Occupancies
Delete exception 1.2.
CHAPTER 4 - EMERGENCY PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS
403.2 Public Safety Plan
Delete the following from the first sentence:
In other than Group A or E occupancies,
CHAPTER 5 - FIRE SERVICE FEATURES
503.2.5 Dead Ends
Delete and replace with the following:
See Appendix D, as amended.
503.3 Marking
Delete and replace with the following:
The Fire Code Official shall cause and direct that all fire lanes be clearly marked
in a manner and under conditions he deems necessary and appropriate; including,
but not limited to, the following regulations:
1. A sign shall be posted on both sides of an approach of any fire lane stating
NO PARKING - FIRE LANE”. These signs shall have arrows indicating the
area of parking restriction. Signs bearing the legends “ DO NOT BLOCK”, “ FIRE
LANE”. “ DO NOT ENTER”, “ EMERGENCY VEHICLES ONLY”, or such
other appropriate signs that may be directed for placement at positions near,
along, or within such fire lanes as necessary.
2. In all other areas designated as fire lanes, there shall be posted signs stating
NO PARKING - FIRE LANE”. These signs shall be posted at intervals not
exceeding 75 feet.
3. The Fire Chief or his authorized representative is the only authority for the
direction and placement of signs herein. No signs shall be posted without the
FIRE REGULATIONS
27-4 REVISED 01/07/19
direction and approval of the Fire Chief or his authorized representative.
4. No sign shall be placed near, along or within a fire lane which does not
conform with the color, size, material, legend and placement standards unless
approved by the Fire Chief or his authorized representative.
5. The owner or occupant of the premises at his sole expense shall purchase,
place and keep all signs clean and free of obstructions.
6. In all cases, fire lane signs shall be white with red three-inch letters. The
dimensions of the sign shall be 12 inches horizontally and 18 inches vertically.
These signs shall be installed so that the top of the sign is no less than 6 feet nor
more than 6 feet above grade.
7. Snow shall be removed from all fire lanes.
8. There shall be no parking or placing of any objects in, along or within a fire
lane or any approach to a fire lane at any time.
9. The direction and warning legend posted on signs shall control and take
precedence over any pavement markings in the vicinity.
505.1 Address Notification
Change 4 inches to 6 inches
CHAPTER 6 - BUILDING SERVICES AND SYSTEMS
603.8 Incinerators
Delete the words “ residential type” from the first sentence.
603.8.1 Residential Incinerators
Delete and replace with the following:
Residential incinerators are prohibited.
CHAPTER 9 - FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
903.2 Sprinklers where required
Revise 903.2 to read as follows:
Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be required in all new buildings,
except for open parking structures, open-air portions of Group A-5, Group F-2
occupancies, and Group U occupancies.
903.3.7 Fire Department Connections
Replace “ be approved by the fire code official” with:
comply with the requirements of Section 912.”
903.4.3 Floor Control Valves
Change “ high-rise buildings” to “ all buildings”
904.3.5 Monitoring
Delete and replace with the following:
Alternate automatic fire extinguishing systems shall be monitored in compliance
with the provisions of this code and NFPA- 72.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
5 REVISED 10/01/11
905.4 Location of Class I Standpipes Hose Connections
Add the following text after the word “ connections”:
with a 2½ inch x 1½ inch reducer and cap and chain.
905.5 Location of Class II Standpipe Hose Connections
Add the following text after the word “ connections”:
with a 1½ inch cap and chain.
905.6 Location of Class III Standpipe Hose Connections
Add the following text after the word “ connections”:
with a 2½ inch x 1½ inch reducer and cap and chain.
905.11 Existing Buildings
Add the following at the end:
Elimination of fire hoses from an existing Class III standpipe system is permitted
only if all of the following conditions are met:
1. The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system
in accordance with 903. 1.1 or 903. 1.2 of the IFC.
2. Provide a 1½” brass cap with chain.
3. Provide a 2½” x 1½” reducer with a 1½” brass cap with a chain on the
2 ½” fire hose valve.
A permit, including review and approval by the Fire Chief, must be obtained for
each building where the fire hoses are to be removed. A final inspection by the
Village will be conducted upon completion of the removal.
907.2.13 High- rise buildings
Replace 75 feet with 60 feet
907.2.13.2 Fire Department Communications
Add the following at the end:
Each location of a fire department communication device shall be an independent
zone from the control panel in the fire command room.
907.6.2.3.1 Public and Common Areas
Add the following at the end:
A visible exterior weatherproof alarm notification device shall be located within
closest proximity to the front main entrance of the building or tenant space, as
approved by the Fire Chief and the Building Director of duly authorized
designees.
907.7.3.1 Zoning Indicator Panel
Delete the first sentence and replace with the following:
A zoning indicator panel and the associated controls, or, fire alarm control panel
shall be located within the closest proximity to the front main entrance of the
building or tenant space as approved by the Fire Chief, Building Director or duly
authorized designees.
912.2.1 Visible Location
FIRE REGULATIONS
6 REVISED 10/01/11
Delete and replace with the following:
Fire department connections shall be fully visible and located at the main front
entrance of the building and within a maximum travel distance of 100 feet to the
nearest fire hydrant or as directed by the Fire Chief or designee.
913.4 Valve supervision
Delete methods 3 and 4.
CHAPTER 22 - MOTOR FUEL- DISPENSING FACILITIES AND REPAIR GARAGES
2206.2.3 Above-ground tanks located outside, above grade
Change 12,000 to 1,000 and 48,000 to 3,000.
2206. 2.4.1 Tank capacity limits
Change 15,000 to 1,000 and 48,000 to 3,000.
2206.2.4.2 Fleet vehicle motor fuel-dispensing facilities
Change 20,000 to 1,000 and 80,000 to 3,000.
2206. 2.6 Special enclosures
Item #6 – Change 6,000 to 1,000 and 18,000 to 3,000, 20,000 to 1,000, and 80,000 to
3,000.
2206. 5 Secondary Containment
Add the following at the end:
Secondary containment shall be sized to provide 150% of the capacity of the tank.
CHAPTER 24 - TENTS AND OTHER MEMBRANE STRUCTURES
2403.2 Approval required
Change 400 to 120.
CHAPTER 34 - FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS
3404.4.8 Empty containers and tank storage
Delete the following text from the first sentence:
unless free from explosive vapors.
CHAPTER 38 - LIQUID PETROLEUM GASES
3801. 1 Scope
Add the following at the end:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a plant for the production of
liquefied petroleum gases in the Village. No liquefied petroleum tank shall be
filled within the Village.
3803. 1 General
Add the following after the last sentence:
It shall be unlawful to retain on the premises any liquefied petroleum tank in
conjunction with a fuel system when the supply of natural gas is sufficient to
accommodate the needs of the related occupancy.
3804. 2 Maximum capacity within established limits
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
27-7 REVISED 08/04/14
Change 2000 to 1000.
Ord. #14-040)
CHAPTER 46 - CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS
4603.6.6 Group R-2
Amend the first paragraph to read as follows:
An automatic fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in
accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in existing Group R-2 occupancies more
than three stories in height or with more than 16 dwelling or sleeping units. Automatic
smoke detection shall be provided in all interior common areas of the building where not
protected by an automatic sprinkler system.
APPENDIX D
D103. 4 Dead ends
Delete and replace with the following:
Dead- end fire apparatus roads shall be provided with a cul- de- sac for turning
around all fire apparatus.
Figure D103.1
Delete all figures shown in D103. 1 except for the cul- de- sac.
Table D103. 4
Delete the table in its entirety.
D103.5 Fire apparatus access road gates
Begin the first sentence with:
As approved by the Fire Code Official,
Article II Hazardous Materials Regulations
Section 27-201 Spills Prohibited. It shall be unlawful, whether intentional or unintentional, for
any person, firm or corporation to release, emit, spill or leak any material, which constitutes a
hazardous material incident.
Section 27-202 Definitions. For the purpose of this Article, the following words and terms shall
have the following meanings:
a. Hazardous Material(s) Incident. The leakage, release, seepage or emission of any
substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location or other
characteristics, is determined by the Fire Chief or an authorized representative, based
upon a reasonable degree of scientific certainty, to pose an unreasonable and inordinate
risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance or the
environment, including but not limited to, explosives, compressed gases, flammable and
combustible liquids, flammable and water reactive solids, oxidizers and peroxides,
poisons, radioactive materials, corrosives or otherwise regulated materials, or any
substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or
regulation.
b. Expenses to the Village. All costs and expenses of the Village incurred in the clean-up or
abatement of hazardous materials or the extinguishing of a fire involving hazardous
materials, including but not limited to the following: actual labor costs of Village
FIRE REGULATIONS
27-8 REVISED 10/01/11
personnel involved in the clean-up or abatement of the discharge(s) including Worker's
Compensation benefits, fringe benefits and administrative overhead or any other medical
expenses, immediate or long term, or personnel exposed to the hazardous material, cost
of equipment operation, damage or loss as published and updated by the Village; cost of
materials ordered directly by the Village; the cost of any labor and material( s) expended
through the retention of other parties to assist in clean-up or abatement and the repair of
the property in the area of the incident.
c. Village. Any Department of the Village of Arlington Heights.
Section 27-203 Hazardous Material Responses - Cost Reimbursement. Expense reimbursement
to the Village: The person or companies in immediate control or possession of the
hazardous material( s) at a hazardous materials incident, to which the Village has responded, shall
be responsible for reimbursement to the Village of all expenses incurred by the Village related to
the response, the handling or the clean- up of the material( s). There shall be joint and several
liability for reimbursement including but not limited to the person(s) or companies in immediate
control of the hazardous material( s), the shipper, the manufacturer, the distributor, the transporter
of the material(s) involved, or third parties having caused or contributed to the cause of the
release of the hazardous material( s).
Section 27-204 Fault Not to be Considered. The person or company in immediate control or
possession of the hazardous material at a hazardous materials incident shall be liable for any
other costs, fees or expenses of whatever kind or nature which are incurred by the Village or its
agent in the abatement, clean-up or repair. The fault of the entity in immediate control or
possession of this Article, repair shall mean, without exception, the return of the property to the
condition that existed immediately prior to the incident.
Section 27-205 Distribution of Reimbursed Costs - Replacement of Material(s) and/or
Other Expenses. The reimbursement funds may be used to replenish the supplies used by the
Village at the scene of the hazardous material(s) incident. Supplies may include, but shall not be
limited to, protective clothing, absorbents, neutralizing chemicals, detection monitoring
equipment, firefighting forms and chemicals, overtime personnel expenses, laboratory analysis,
medical treatment, immediate and long term, for exposed or injured personnel, or equipment or
supplies damaged or destroyed by exposure to the hazardous material(s) at the incident.
Section 27-206 Regulations or Remedies. Nothing in this Article IV shall be deemed to relieve
any party from any other obligation or responsibilities that it might otherwise have under law to
any other agency or party.
Section 27-207 Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
Article shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $ 5 nor more than $ 750.
Article III Public Fireworks Displays
Section 27-301 Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, fireworks shall
mean and include any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of
substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols,
toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which
require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles,
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
9 REVISED 10/01/11
bombs, or any other devices of like construction and any devices containing any explosive or
flammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, except
that the term " fireworks" shall not include sparklers, auto flares, paper caps containing not in
excess of an average of 25/100 of a grain of explosive content per cap, and toy pistols, toy canes ,
toy guns or other devices which use caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted.
Section 27-302 Sale of Fireworks. It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to
own, possess, discharge, manufacture, sell, expose for sale, loan or give away any substance or
article of fireworks; except that the Village Manager may issue a permit for public fireworks
displays.
Section 27-303 Permit for Fireworks Display; Application. An application for a permit to
conduct a public fireworks display shall be made in writing to the Village Manager and shall
state the name of the person desiring to conduct such display, the place of residence and age, the
proposed place for the public display of fireworks and what experience the applicant has had, if
any, in the discharge of fireworks. This application shall be sworn to before a notary public or
other officer authorized by law to administer oaths.
Section 27-304 Inspection by Village. The Village Manager shall, upon receipt of an
application for a permit to conduct a public fireworks display, refer it to the appropriate Village
departments for an inspection of the location designated in the application for the proposed
public display of fireworks. If, after inspection, it is determined that it would not be hazardous to
surrounding property or dangerous to any person or persons to permit the public display of
fireworks at that location, the application shall be approved and returned to the Village Manager.
After the applicant pays a $ 115 fee, the Village Manager shall issue a permit, giving the
applicant permission, upon satisfactory proof of bond, to conduct a public display of fireworks.
The permits shall designate the kinds and quantities of fireworks to be used at such public
display, and no other kinds and no greater quantities of fireworks than therein specified shall be
used at the public display.
Section 27-305 Transferability of Permits. No permit issued under the provisions of this
Article shall be transferable.
Section 27-306 Bond. All permits issued by the Village Manager are conditional upon the
permittee furnishing a bond in an amount deemed adequate by the Director of Building for the
payment of all damages which may be caused either to a person or persons or to property by
reason of the permitted display, and arising from any acts of the permittee, permittee’ s agents,
employees or subcontractors. Failure to present the Village Manager with proper evidence that
the bond has been secured three days prior to the display will automatically result in revocation
of the permit and forfeiture of the permit fee.
Section 27-307 Fireworks Used in Public Display. Fireworks to be used in a permitted public
display may not be brought into the Village until satisfactory evidence of the bond, required by
Section 27-606, has been presented to the Village Manager, and in no event more than five days
before the proposed date of the display. The fireworks shall be stored in a safe place and any
fireworks unused during the display shall be immediately disposed of in a manner safe for the
particular type of fireworks remaining.
Section 27-308 Seizure of Fireworks. The Director of Building, Fire Chief or the Police Chief
FIRE REGULATIONS
10 REVISED 10/01/11
shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed at the owner’ s expense all stocks of fireworks
possessed in violation of this Article.
Section 27-309 Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be fined not
less than $ 5 nor more than $ 750 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 29 SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
Article I General Provision
Section 29-101 Definitions
Section 29-102 Purpose
Section 29-103 Rules for Interpretation and Construction
Section 29-104 Scope of Regulations
Section 29-105 Partial Exceptions
Section 29-106 Additional Requirements for Land Outside Village Limits
Section 29-107 Variations
Section 29-108 Building and Other Permits
Section 29-109 Illegal Subdividing and Penalties Therefor
Section 29-110 Penalty
Article II Procedure for Subdivision of Land
Section 29-201 Filing Preliminary Plat
Section 29-202 Plan Commission Consideration of Preliminary Plat
Section 29-203 Consideration of Preliminary Plat by Board of Trustees
Section 29-204 Effect of Approval of Preliminary Plat
Section 29-205 Installation of Survey Monuments
Section 29-206 Preparation of Detailed Plans for Required Improvements
Section 29-207 Preliminary Review of Plans for Required Improvements
Section 29-208 Final Approval of Plans for Required Improvements
Section 29-209 Preparation of Final Plat
Section 29-210 Additional Approvals, Certifications and Documents
Section 29-211 Review by Director of Engineering
Section 29-212 Submission of Final Plat to Plan Commission
Section 29-213 Submission of Final Plat and Other Documents to the Board of Trustees
Section 29-214 Approval of Final Plat by the Board of Trustees
Section 29-215 Recording of Final Plat
Section 29-216 Unit Developments
Section 29-217 Plat Forms
Article III Subdivision Design Standards
Section 29-301 Scope
Section 29-302 Comprehensive Plan and Official Map
Section 29-303 Land Subject to Flooding
Section 29-304 Street Layout and Design
Section 29-305 Alleys
Section 29-306 Block Standards
Section 29-307 Residential Lot Standards
Section 29-308 Building Setback Lines
Section 29-309 Easements
Article IV Dedication of Lands for Parks, Schools and Other Public Areas
Section 29-401 Dedication of Park Lands and School Sites and Other Public Areas or
For Payments of Fees in Lieu Thereof
Section 29-402 Limitations on Size of Dedicated Land
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
Section 29-403 Form and Time of Offer; Acceptance; Rejection
Section 29-404 Sites Not Set Forth in the Official Plan or Official Map
Section 29-405 Park Districts and Park Management
Section 29-406 Unit Developments
Section 29-407 Library Services Contribution Fee
Article V Installation of Required Improvements
Section 29-501 Required Improvements
Section 29-502 Exceptions for Existing Improvements
Section 29-503 Agreement, Bond and Deposit Guaranteeing Installation of Required
Improvements
Section 29-504 Inspection
Section 29-505 Acceptance of Required Improvements by the Village
Article VI Contributions for Connection to Existing Public Facilities
Section 29-601 General Requirements; Costs
Section 29-602 Partial Contributions
Section 29-603 Time of Payment
Section 29-604 Contribution Fees Additional to all Other Fees and Charges
Article VII Real Estate Protection for Purchasers From Subdivision Sellers
Section 29-701 Purpose
Section 29-702 Short Title
Section 29-703 Subdivision Seller
Section 29-704 Liberal Construction
Section 29-705 Exemptions
Section 29-706 Severability
Section 29-707 Effective Date
Section 29-708 Scope of Regulation
Section 29-709 Penalty
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
Article I General Provisions
Section 29-101 Definitions. Whenever used in this Chapter, the following terms and words shall
have the meaning set opposite them:
a. Alley. Astrip of land along the side of or in the rear of lots intended to provide access to and
from streets and such lots
b. Building Setback Lines. A line nearest the front of and across a lot or parcel of land
establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the front line of a building or
structure and the line of the fronting street right-of-way.
Ord. #07-039)
c. Downtown District Streets. Any street designated as such on the Village Official Map or
Village Comprehensive Plan Map designed to provide pedestrian and vehicular access to
adjacent property, parking and loading areas, as well as move and distribute traffic to other
streets in the thoroughfare network in an environment of diverse land uses in a concentrated
area.
d. Collector Street. Any street designated as such on the Village Official Map or Village
Comprehensive Plan Map designed to provide access to adjacent property and collect traffic
from sub-collector streets and local streets for distribution to the arterial road network and
across neighborhood areas.
e. Comprehensive Plan. Along-range public policy, adopted and, from time to tome amended
by the Board of Trustees, affecting community character, economic well-being, cultural and
social amenities, ease and convenience of circulation, and orderly development of various
land uses, and serving as a policy guide in all decisions related to community growth.
Ord. #03-068)
f. Consolidation: The combining of two or more lots or portions of two or more lots into a
lesser number of lots for the purpose of creating a single unified development.
g. Cul-de-sac. A street having one open end and being permanently terminated by a vehicle
turn-around at the other end.
h. Dead-end Street. A street having only one outlet and no features for vehicle turnaround.
i. Drive, Private. A private roadway providing access from a street to two or more dwellings
on the same lot.
j. Driveway. A private motor vehicle access way between the roadway and a parking area
within a lot.
k. Frontage. The property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or
terminating) measured along the line of the street; or with a dead-end street, all property
abutting on one side of such street measured from the nearest intersecting street and the end
of the dead-end street.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
l. Frontage Drive. Any public or private roadway, paved parking lot aisle or driveway parallel
with an adjacent arterial street which provides access to adjoining property and separates
through traffic on arterial streets from vehicles accessing adjacent property.
m. Local Street. A street intended primarily as access to adjoining properties.
n. Lot. Aportion or basic unit of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended to be the unit by
which such land would be individually developed and transferred.
o. Major Arterial Street. Any street designated as such in the Village Official Map or Village
Comprehensive Plan Map designed to collect traffic from local streets, sub-collector streets,
collector streets and secondary arterial streets and provide movement of large volumes of
traffic across adjacent communities.
p. Official Map. The map adopted and, from time to time, amended by the Board of Trustees
showing the location of existing and proposed public service facilities and improvements,
thoroughfare system improvements, park and school sites, and land for other public purposes
for commencing and maintaining proceedings to subdivide such land as provided by law.
q. Owner. The individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation or trust, or
any other legal entity, having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided for purposes of commencing and maintaining proceedings to subdivide such land
as provided by law.
Ord. #03-068)
r. Resubdivision: Aconsolidation, as defined in this Chapter, or the division of land which was
previously subdivided by means of platting through the Arlington Heights approval process.
s. Road or Roadway. The paved area existing on the street right-of-way, exclusive of
sidewalks, driveways or related uses.
t. Road or Roadway. The paved area, exclusive of sidewalks, driveways or related uses, on
private property used or intended to be used for circulation, passage or travel of motor
vehicles from a street to two or more adjacent parcels.
u. Secondary Arterial Streets. Any street designated as such on the Village Official Map or
Village Comprehensive Plan Map designed to collect traffic from local streets, sub-collector
streets and collector streets and provide traffic movement between areas of the Village.
v. Street. The street right-of-way or easement, whether public or private, it shall not be
considered as the area of the paving or other improvement on the street right-of-way unless
the paving and improvement coincides with the boundaries of the right-of-way.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
w. Street Width. The shortest distance between the property lines abutting both sides of a street
right-of-way.
x. Sub-collector Street. Any street designated as such in the Village Official Map or
Comprehensive Plan Map designed to provide unrestricted access to adjacent property and
collect traffic from local streets and distribute it to streets of higher classification such as a
collector or arterial street.
Ord. #03-068)
y. Subdivider. The owner, or any other person, firm or corporation authorized by the owner,
undertaking proceedings under the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of subdividing
land or resubdividing land.
z. Subdivision. Any division or resubdivision of land by means of mapping, platting,
conveying, changing or rearranging of boundaries, or otherwise; it shall also relate to the
process of subdividing or other land subdivided where appropriate to the context.
aa. Walkway. A strip of land across a block reserved and dedicated for public use for the
purpose of providing pedestrian access through the block.
Ord. #03-068)
Section 29-102 Purpose. The provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the following:
a. To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare.
b. To assist in carrying out and implementing the Comprehensive Plan of the Village of
Arlington Heights.
c. To set forth rules and regulations for the subdivision and resubdividion of real
property.
d. To protect and preserve neighborhood character.
e. To provide for wholesome community environment, adequate municipal services,
safe streets and comprehensive and sound development of the municipality, both as
to present and future requirements.
Section 29-103 Rules for Interpretation and Construction.
a. Where the conditions imposed by the provisions of this Chapter are either more restrictive or
less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of any other
applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which
are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
b. The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or other
private agreement, provided that when the regulations of this Chapter are more restrictive or
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private
agreement, the requirements of this Chapter shall govern.
c. No subdivision of land which is not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this
Chapter shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this Chapter;
moreover, to the extent that a subdivision of land is in conflict with the requirements of this
Chapter, that subdivision of land shall remain unlawful.
d. The provisions of this Chapter are cumulative and additional limitations upon all other laws
and ordinances passed or which may be passed governing any subject matter set forth in the
provisions of this Chapter.
Section 29-104 Scope of Regulations.
a. Jurisdiction. This Chapter is adopted pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-12 and shall apply to all land
located within the Village and to all such land outside the Village which is subject to the
control of the Village pursuant to statute, as it may be amended from time to time.
Ord. #03-068)
b. Applicability. No person shall:
1. Divide or further divide land, or
2. Consolidate residentially zoned lots which come under common ownership after
November 1, 2003, or
3. Otherwise alter the boundaries of lots or parcels of land, or
4. Dedicate land for use as streets, alleys or sidewalks or for other public purposes,
except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
c. Exempt subdivisions. The foregoing to the contrary notwithstanding, this chapter shall not
apply to the following exempt subdivisions:
1. The division or further division of land into lots or parcels, each of which contains
more than five acres, where such subdivision does not involve the creation of any
new streets or easements of access;
2. Atransaction between owners of adjoining land which involves only a change of the
boundary between the land owned by such persons;
3. A conveyance of land or interests therein for use as right-of-way by a railroad or
other public utility subject to State or Federal regulations, where no new street or
easement of access is involved;
4. A conveyance made to correct a description in a prior conveyance;
5. Any lease for a term of less than five years;
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
6. Any transfer by operation of law.
Section 29-105 Partial Exceptions. Any resubdivision, including consolidation of land, shall be
exempt from the requirements of this Chapter relating to the filing of preliminary plats if the
proposed resubdivision meets all of the following:
a. The entire area does not exceed one acre.
b. The proposal does not require any variations from Chapters 28 or 29 of this Code.
c. The proposal does not require any public improvements pursuant to Article V of this
Chapter.
d. The proposed lot area of each lot is no more than 20% greater or 10% less than the average
zoning lot area on that same frontage.
e. The proposed lot width of each lot is no more than20% greater or10% less than the average
zoning lot width on the same frontage.
An application for such exemption must be made to the Director of Planning and
Community Development, on forms provided for such purpose. Upon receipt of such application,
the Director of Planning and Community Development shall forward same to the Village Manager
for review and determination that no additional public improvements would be required. If the
Village Manager so determines, the application shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission. The
subdivider may then proceed to secure the approval of the final plat in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 29-205 through 29-217.
Section 29-106 Additional Requirements for Land Outside Village Limits. Where land subject
to the provisions of Section 29-104 is outside the boundaries of the Village, all requirements of Cook
County respecting subdividing and the installation of improvements shall be complied with where
such requirements are higher than the minimum comparable requirements of this chapter.
Section 29-107 Variations.
a. In cases where there are particular difficulties or peculiar hardships in carrying out the literal
provisions of this chapter, the Plan Commission may recommend to the Board of Trustees
that a variation from such provision be granted.
b. Such recommendation to the Board of Trustees shall be made in writing, set forth all
pertinent facts and circumstances of the case, and present the Plan Commission's reasons for
recommending the variation. Such recommendation may be made to the Board of Trustees
before the Plan Commission takes any further action on the matter before it. Such
recommendation may be made by referring the variation matter to the Board of Trustees
before the Plan Commission takes any further action on the subdivision application in
question; or such recommendation may be made at the same time that the Plan Commission
recommends favorably the entire subdivision application subject to the granting of such
variation.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
c. The President and the Board of Trustees shall not approve any recommendation which will
not be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the provisions of this chapter.
Section 29-108 Building and Other Permits. No building permit shall be issued under the
provisions of Chapter 23 for building construction on any lot of any subdivision subject to the
provisions of this Chapter until a certified copy of a duly recorded or registered plat of subdivision
has been filed with the Director of Building. Nor shall any other permits required by the provisions
of this Code be issued until all provisions of this Chapter have been complied with, including but not
limited to, the approval by the Board of Trustees of plans and specifications for required
improvements and the posting of cash bonds, establishment of escrows.
Section 29-109 Illegal Subdividing and Penalties Therefor.
a. Whosoever shall sell, or offer for sale, or lease for a term exceeding five years, any land
subject to the provisions of Section 29-104, which has not been platted, approved and
recorded or registered as required by the provisions of this chapter, such sale, offer or lease
being made for the purpose of subdividing land without complying with the provision of this
chapter, or being in violation of applicable statutes of the State of Illinois, shall be subject to
prosecution therefor by the Village, and if found to be in violation of the provisions of this
chapter or the applicable statutes of the State of Illinois, shall be fined not more than $500 for
each offense.
b. No plat of any subdivision subject to the provisions of Section 29-104 shall be presented for
recording in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, Illinois or for registration
by the Registrar of Titles of Cook County, Illinois until the same has been approved in the
manner prescribed in this chapter.
Section 29-110 Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter,
where no other penalty is specifically provided, shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than
500.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or in
which a violation occurs or continues.
Article II Procedure for Subdivision of Land
Section 29-201 Filing Preliminary Plat.
a. All subdivision of land subject to the provisions of Section 29-104 shall be commenced,
except as otherwise provided in Section 29-105, bythe subdivider filing with the Secretary of
the Plan Commission the following documents:
1. An application form properly completed.
2. Twenty copies of a Preliminary plat of subdivision. (Ord. No. 73-48, April 16, 1973)
3. Evidence of ownership of the land proposed to be subdivided.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
4. When the subdivider does not own the land, written permission from the owner of the
land authorizing the subdivider to subdivide the land under the provisions of this
chapter.
5. In case of development in any of the categories listed in this subparagraph, the
subdivider shall also file with the Secretary of the Plan Commission, the opinion of a
qualified professional traffic engineer approving the design of any off-street parking
that is proposed, the traffic circulation pattern, and the manner of ingress and egress
to such development. The selection of such qualified professional traffic engineer
shall be approved by the Village Manager prior to the submission of such opinion.
The developments for which such approval by a qualified traffic engineer shall be
submitted with the preliminary plat are as follows:
Residential Developments:
R-1, R-2, R-3
R-4, R-5
100 dwelling units or more
48 dwelling units or more
Commercial Developments:
B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4
Drive-in uses in any B District
20,000 square feet or more
All
Industrial Developments:
M-1, M-1A, O & R 75 cars or more parking requirements or
100 or more anticipated employees
Ord. No. 67-83, August 21, 1967)
b. The Preliminary plat, drawn to a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch, shall contain the
following information:
1. The name of the proposed subdivision.
2. A north-point indication, scale, date of preparation of the Preliminary plat, and by
whom prepared.
3. A legal description of land proposed to be subdivided, by section, township and
range, and other terms as used in describing land on the records of the Recorder of
Deeds or Registrar of Titles, Cook County, Illinois.
4. Sufficient information to locate accurately the proposed subdivision in relation to its
general neighborhood, by means of references to streets, railroad lines, recorded
plats, etc. If the foregoing references cannot be made, then a vicinity plat showing
the location of the proposed subdivision, drawn to a smaller scale, shall accompany
the Preliminary plat.
5. The description and location of all survey monuments, existing and to be erected, in
the area of the proposed subdivision.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
6. The boundary lines of the proposed subdivision, drawn to accurate scale and bearing,
and a statement of the total area encompassed by the boundary lines.
7. The location and dimensions of streets, easements, improvements and utilities within
and immediately contiguous to the proposed subdivision, as well as the location and
dimensions of major features such as railroad lines, airports, water courses, lakes and
exceptional topography.
8. The location, dimensions and layout of proposed streets, alleys, and sidewalks of the
proposed subdivision.
9. The layout, number, dimensions and area of each lot of the proposed subdivision.
10. The location, dimensions and layout of all parcels of land intended to be dedicated
for public use, such as parks and other open spaces, or reserved for the use of all
subdivision property owners, together with an indication of the nature of each such
use within the proposed subdivision.
11. The location, dimensions and layout of all public utility easements in the proposed
subdivision.
12. The location and dimensions of all building setback lines in the proposed
subdivision.
13. The names and last known addresses of the owners of the land proposed to be
subdivided, the subdivider and all owners of land immediately adjoining the land
proposed to be subdivided.
Ord. #06-008)
c. The preliminary plat shall not be accepted for filing by the Secretary of the Plan Commission
until a filing fee has been paid to the Director of Finance. Such filing fee shall be computed
at the rate of $10.00 for each lot contained in the proposed subdivision, except that in no
event shall the fee be less than $100.00.
d. Upon filing the preliminary plat, the Secretary of the Plan Commission shall transmit all
copies of the preliminary plat, and accompanying documents to the Plan Commission for
action thereon, and shall also notify the Village Manager and the President and Board of
Trustees of such filing.
Section 29-202 Plan Commission Consideration of Preliminary Plat.
a. The Plan Commission shall review the Preliminary plat and where it deems it necessarymay
require the submission of any or all of the following additional information:
1. Contours at specified intervals.
2. Sketches, blueprints or other pertinent data on the type of structures proposed to be
located on the proposed subdivision.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
3. Location, size and approximate grades of proposed sewers.
4. Cross-sections of proposed streets showing width of roadways and location of
sidewalk and proposed street grades and proposed elevations of lot corners.
5. Proposed location of gas, electric and telephone outlets.
b. When satisfied that sufficient information is presented in the preliminary plat and other
documents as provided above, the Plan Commission shall set the matter promptly for public
hearing, giving at least 15 days prior written notice to the owner of the land proposed to be
subdivided and the subdivider.
In addition to the notice requirements otherwise provided by law, an application for any
public hearing required by this Zoning Ordinance shall, not less than 15 days and not more
than 30 days prior to the date set for the public hearing, serve written notice either in person
or by first-class mail to the last known taxpayers or property owners or owners of record
reflected in the County records of all property within 250 feet in each direction of the
property lines of the subject property for which the public hearing is requested; provided the
number of feet occupied by all public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways shall be
excluded in computing the 250 foot requirements. If any part of a condominium property is
located within 250 feet of the property which is the subject of a hearing, written notification
shall be sent to each taxpayer of record of the condominium as well as to the condominium
association; if written notification is sent to a trust company or lending institution of record,
the notice requirement of this section shall be deemed satisfied. Acopy of the notice with a
copy of the list of addresses shall be mailed to the Planning Department at the time notice is
given to the owners or taxpayers.
The notices herein shall contain the addresses of the location for which the public hearing is
requested, a brief statement of the nature of the request, the name and address of the legal
and beneficial owner of the property, and time and date on which said hearing shall be held.
If, after a bona fide effort to determine such by the applicant, the owner or taxpayer of the
property on which the notice is served cannot be found at his or her last known address or the
mail notice is returned because the owner cannot be found, the notice requirements of this
section shall be deemed satisfied upon filing by the applicant of an affidavit evidencing the
inability to serve such notice.
An applicant for public hearing shall, not less than 15 days prior to the date before the public
hearing, post a readable sign on the adjacent roadway. The sign must be removed no later
than ten days after the first hearing.
The sign required shall contain the current zoning and action requested, date, time and place
where the hearing shall be held, a statement that the hearing is open to the general public, a
statement that further information can be obtained from the Planning Department of the
Village of Arlington Heights and the petitioner, and the phone number of the Planning
Department and the petitioner. The words ‘NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING’ must appear
at the top of the sign in letters no smaller than 1.5”. The date and time of the hearing shall
also be 1.5”. The sign shall meet all other requirements set forth bythe Planning Department.
All costs associated with hearing signs are to be borne by the petitioners.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
The applicant shall furnish, at the time of hearing, a written statement certifying that
applicant has complied with the requirements of this subsection. Attached to the written
statement shall be a list of all property owners notified in accordance with the above, the
returned notices which are undeliverable by the Post Office, a copy of the notice sent to each
of the individuals therein specified, and a witnessed affidavit that the sign was erected
according to Village requirements. Forms of the affidavit shall be made available by the
Planning Department. (Ord. No. 82-59, June 7, 1982)
c. The Plan Commission shall conduct a public hearing, at which time interested persons may
hear and offer evidence in support of or against the preliminary plat.
1. The Plan Commission shall determine, on the basis of all evidence before it, whether
the preliminary plat meets the design standards and requirements of this Chapter, the
Village Comprehensive Plan, the Village Official Map, the Village Zoning
Ordinance, and other applicable provisions of this Code. (Ord. No. 88-095, August
15, 1988)
2. If the foregoing considerations are satisfied, the Plan Commission shall approve the
preliminary plat, endorse its approval on the face of the plat, and forward the plat to
the President and the Board of Trustees.
3. If the Plan Commission determines that the preliminary plat does not satisfy the
foregoing conditions, it may suggest modifications so as to satisfy these conditions,
in which event:
a) The subdivider may amend the preliminary plat to incorporate such
modifications and resubmit the preliminary plat to the Plan Commission,
which shall then grant its approval if the amendments satisfactorily
incorporate the suggested modifications; or
b) The subdivider may reject the suggested modifications, or within the time
allowed for Plan Commission action, may refrain from taking any action
thereon; in either event, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to have been
disapproved and the Plan Commission shall thereupon furnish the required
statement setting forth the reasons for such disapproval.
4. If the Plan Commission determines that the preliminary plat does not satisfy the
foregoing conditions and that modifications would be too extensive or impractical, it
shall disapprove the preliminary plat and immediately notify the subdivider of its
action.
5. The foregoing provisions to the contrary notwithstanding, the Plan Commission shall
approve or disapprove the preliminary plat within 90 days from the date of the filing
of the plat or from the date that the subdivider has submitted the last item of required
data, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent. If the
preliminary plat is disapproved, then within 90 days thereof the Plan Commission
shall furnish to the subdivider a statement in writing setting forth the reason for its
disapproval and specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed
preliminary plat fails to conform to the design standards and requirements of this
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
chapter, the Village Comprehensive Plan, the Village Official Map, the Village
Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable provisions of this Code.
6. The subdivider may appeal to the Board of Trustees the disapproval of the
preliminary plat by the Plan Commission. Such appeal shall be made in writing and
filed with the Village Manager on or after the date the Plan Commission issues its
statement setting forth the reasons for disapproval, provided that such appeal is made
not more than 60 days following such date.
Section 29-203 Consideration of Preliminary Plat by Board of Trustees.
a. 1. Upon the receipt of a Preliminary plat approved by the Plan Commission or upon
filing an appeal from the disapproval of a preliminary plat by the Plan Commission,
the Village Manager shall place the matter upon the agenda not later than the second
next regular meeting of the Board of Trustees, and shall notify the subdivider and the
Secretary of the Plan Commission.
2. The Board of Trustees shall, where the preliminary plat has been approved by the
Plan Commission, accept or reject the preliminary plat within 30 days of the next
regular stated meeting of the Board of Trustees following the date of approval by the
Plan Commission.
3. Where the preliminary plat has received the approval of the Plan Commission, the
Plan Commission shall furnish its written recommendations to the Board of Trustees
prior to the date of the Board's meeting.
b. The Board of Trustees may affirm, overrule or modify determinations and recommendations
of the Plan Commission respecting the approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat.
c. Upon consideration of the recommendation of the Plan Commission, the Board of Trustees
shall approve or disapprove or modify the preliminary plat on the basis of whether such Plat
meets the design standards and requirements of this chapter, the Village Comprehensive
Plan, the Village Official Map, the Village Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable
provisions of this Code. (Ord. No. 88-095, August 15, 1988)
d. If the Board of Trustees approves the preliminary plat, there shall be:
1. A legend endorsed on five copies of such preliminary plat as follows: “THIS IS A
PRELIMINARY PLAT, OF NO LEGAL EFFECT AND NOT TO BE
RECORDED”;
2. Five copies of the preliminary plat signed by the President and attested bythe Village
Clerk;
3. One copy of the signed preliminary plat retained by the Village Clerk;
4. Two copies filed with the Village Manager;
5. One copy filed with the Planning Commission; and
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
6. One copy returned to the subdivider.
Section 29-204 Effect of Approval of Preliminary Plat.
a. Approval of the preliminary plat granted by the Board of Trustees shall be tentative only and
signify merely the general acceptability of the proposed subdivision.
b. Such approval shall be considered permission to prepare detailed plans and specifications for
such proposed subdivision and for all public improvements therein.
c. Such approval shall be effective for no more than 12 months from the date approval was
granted, unless the Board of Trustees grants an extension of time beyond such period.
Detailed requests for extension shall be submitted to the Planning Department. After
appropriate review, Planning Department will transmit the request and its recommendation to
the Village Board of Trustees for final determination. In the event that an additional
extension request is made, that request will also be reviewed by the Plan Commission and
with its recommendation submitted to the Village Board of Trustees. (Ord. No. 91-039, June
3, 1991)
Section 29-205 Installation of Survey Monuments. After approval of the preliminary plat but
before undertaking other measures leading to approval of the final plat, survey monuments and
markers shall be laid out and set according to the following:
a. Permanent monuments shall be placed at all corners and at points tangent to curve lines along
the boundary of the subdivision. Permanent monuments shall be constructed of concrete, the
minimum dimensions of which shall be four by four inches at the top of the monument and
six by six inches at the bottom; such monument shall be a minimum of 36 inches long, with a
copper dowel at least 3/8 of an inch in diameter and 2-1/2 inches in length embedded in the
top of such monument so that the dowel shall be flush with the surface of the monument and
placed in the center of the monument.
b. All corner lots of the subdivision where concrete monuments are not required to be placed
shall be marked by galvanized or wrought iron pipe or iron or steel bars at least 18 inches
long and not less than 1/2 inch in diameter. The top of the pipe or bar shall be set level with
the established grade of the lot.
c. For each 20 acres or fraction thereof in the subdivision, one permanent benchmark shall be
established at a location designated by the Director of Engineering. This benchmark shall be
constructed of concrete, four by four inches at the top, six by six inches at the bottom, and 48
inches in length with a brass plate securely fastened to the surface. The brass plate shall be
inscribed with the number and elevation of the benchmark.
Section 29-206 Preparation of Detailed Plans for Required Improvements. After the installation
of survey monuments and markers as provided in Section 29-205, detailed plans and specifications
shall be prepared for all improvements required to be constructed and installed under the provisions
of this Article V of this chapter.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
Aplan and profile for all streets and alleys in the proposed subdivision shall also be prepared, drawn
to a maximum horizontal scale of 50 feet to the inch. Elevations shall be given in terms of United
States Geodetic Survey datum.
Such plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Director of Engineering for review.
Section 29-207 Preliminary Review of Plans for Required Improvements.
a. The subdivider shall pay a fee for review computed in accordance with the schedule set forth
in Section 20-106. Upon the payment of the aforesaid fee, the Director of Engineering shall
review the plans and specifications for the required improvements to determine their
compliance with the applicable provisions of this Code.
b. Following the aforesaid review by the Director of Engineering, the Village Manager shall
transmit such plans and specifications to the Board of Trustees, along with recommendations
of the Director of Engineering concerning the same.
c. Plans and specifications for required improvements shall be reviewed byappropriate County,
State and Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago officials concerned
with all utility installations set forth in the plans and specifications; and, if satisfactory,
approval from these officials shall be given in writing respecting their particular interests.
d. All fees paid hereunder shall be in lieu of any subsequent fees required by the provisions of
Section 20-106 respecting the issuance of permits allowing the construction of such required
improvements.
Section 29-208 Final Approval of Plans for Required Improvements. If the Board of Trustees
finds that the plans and specifications comply with all the provisions of this Code and substantially
conform to the preliminary plat, it shall grant final approval to such plans and specifications. The
President shall thereupon affix his/her signature to the plans and specifications, as indicating such
approval, and the Village Clerk shall attest such signature. Final approval, however, shall not
constitute acceptance of the improvements by the Village; such acceptance shall be governed by the
provisions of Section 29-505.
Ord. #99-009, #07-019)
Section 29-209 Preparation of Final Plat. After the installation of survey monuments and markers
and after approval of plans and specifications for required improvements, a final plat of subdivision
shall be prepared, based on the preliminary plat, survey monuments and markers, and such plans and
specifications. Atracing of the final plat of subdivision, on a type of material accepted by the Cook
County Recorder’ s Office not to exceed 24 by 36 inches, with the same scale as the preliminary plat,
shall be used as the original copy of such final plat for purposes of formal execution and approval
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The final plat shall show the following additional
information:
a. The date of preparation of the final plat and by whom prepared.
b. The boundary of the plat, based on accurate traverse, with angles and lineal dimensions.
c. All permanent survey monuments, markers and bench marks.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
d. Exact location, width and name of all streets within and adjoining the plat, and the exact
location and widths of all cross walkways.
e. True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or official monuments, not
less than three.
f. Municipal, township, county and section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision
by distances and angles.
g. Radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings and lengths of all arcs.
h. All easements for rights of way established for public use and utilities.
i. All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions given in hundredths of feet.
j. Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of all areas dedicated or reserved for public use, with
the proposed uses indicated thereon; and all areas to be reserved by deed covenant for the
common use of all property owners; together with the proposed uses indicated thereon.
k. The text of protective covenants, approved by the Plan Commission, relating to the proposed
subdivision.
l. An endorsement by the County Clerk in the form acceptable to Cook County, that there are
no delinquent, forfeited, foreclosed or purchased general taxes, or unpaid current general
taxes, against the land proposed to be subdivided.
m. Asummary of all restrictions applicable to any part of such subdivision concerning building
restrictions, use restrictions, building setback lines and similar matters.
n. A deed of dedication in the form set forth in Section 29-217(a).
o. A blank certificate of approval in the form set forth in Section 29-217(b).
p. A certification by a registered surveyor in the form set forth in Section 29-217(c).
q. A notarized statement from the owner indicating the school district in which each tract,
parcel, lot or block lies.
r. A certificate in the form as required by the Illinois Department of Transportation or Cook
County Highway Department, respectively, when anynew street or new driveway will access
one of these Department’ s streets.
s. The parcel index numbers of all lots contained within the plat shall be included on the plat of
subdivision.
t. Ablock stating “Send Tax Bill To: (Name/Address).” The actual name and address shall be
provided by the developer.
Section 29-210 Additional Approvals, Certifications and Documents.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
a. Prior to submitting the final plat for review by the Director of Engineering as provided in
Section 29-211, the following additional approvals and certifications shall be secured and
evidenced in writing as documents supplementing such final plat:
1. The Director of Building shall review the final plat to determine whether it complies
with the provisions of Sections 20-112 and 20-113 relating to street names and street
lot or house numbers. If the Director of Building finds such conformance, he/she
shall indicate in writing his/her approval of the final plat in this respect.
2. Acertification shall be secured from the proper collector that all special assessments
constituting a lien on the whole or any part of the land to be subdivided have been
paid or, in the event that there was a division of payment, that the installments were
paid as set out and approved by the court where such special assessment was
confirmed, or that such division was otherwise lawfully made.
3. Certification shall be made by the owner and all mortgages and lien holders of record
that acknowledgment has been made by them respecting the final plat and respecting
the dedication of all streets and other public areas in the proposed subdivision.
b. The subdivider shall submit as related documents the agreement and surety bond pertaining
to the installation of required improvements pursuant to the provisions of this Section 29-503
a) and (b).
Section 29-211 Review by Director of Engineering. The final plat, plans and specifications and
related documents for required improvements, and other approvals and certifications as required by
the provisions of Section 29-210, shall be submitted for final review to the Director of Engineering,
who shall examine them to determine their conformance with the preliminary plat and with the
provisions of this Code.
If the Director of Engineering determines that such conformance exists, he/she shall approve the final
plat by signing the certificate of approval on the final plat and shall forthwith transmit all documents
to the Plan Commission for its review.
Section 29-212 Submission of Final Plat to Plan Commission . The Plan Commission shall
review the final plat and all accompanying documents and, if found to be in conformance with the
preliminary plat and the provisions of this Code, the Chairman and Secretary of the Plan
Commission shall affix their signatures in the appropriate places on the certificate of approval set
forth on the final plat, and thenceforth transmit the preliminary plat and accompanying documents to
the Board of Trustees.
Section 29-213 Submission of Final Plat and Other Documents to the Board of Trustees. When
the final plat and accompanying documents have been forwarded to the Board of Trustees by the
Plan Commission, the owner and the subdivider shall submit to the Board of Trustees evidence of
the cash deposit in escrow respecting surface improvements as required by the provisions of Section
29-503(c).
Section 29-214 Approval of Final Plat by the Board of Trustees.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
a. The Board of Trustees shall review the final plat together with all accompanying documents
required to be submitted under the provisions of this chapter, and if found to be in substantial
conformance with the preliminary plat, and in full conformance with the previously approved
plans and specifications for required improvements, the Village Comprehensive Plan, the
Village Official Map, and other applicable provisions of this Code, the Board of Trustees
shall approve by resolution the final plat.
b. The Board of Trustees shall act on the approval or disapproval of all final plats within 60
days from the date the final plat is submitted or the date of submission of any requested and
accompanying documents, whichever date is later, unless the 60 day period is extended by
mutual agreement.
c. If the final plat is approved, the President shall sign such final plat in the space provided and
the Village Clerk shall attest such signature.
d. The Village Clerk shall attach to such approved final plat a certified copy of the approving
resolution.
e. If the Board of Trustees fails to act upon the final plat within the time prescribed in
subsection (b) above, the subdivider may, after giving five days written notice to the Board of
Trustees, file a complaint for summary judgment in the Circuit Court of Cook County. Upon
a showing that the Board of Trustees has failed to act within the time prescribed in
subsection (b) above, the court shall enter an order authorizing the Recorder of Deeds of
Cook County to record, or the Registrar of Titles of Cook County to register, as the case may
be, the final plat as submitted to the Board of Trustees.
Section 29-215 Recording of Final Plat.
a. Upon approval by resolution of a final plat, the Village Clerk shall cause the final plat to be
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County or registered bythe Registrar
of Titles for Cook County, Illinois, within six months thereof.
b. If recording or registration is not effected within said six-month period, the approval of the
final plat by the Board of Trustees shall become null and void, in which case deposits,
including those for surface improvements, held by the Village shall be refunded in full to the
depositor, without interest.
c. All costs associated with recording the final plat shall be paid by the owner and/or
subdivider. All linens recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County shall
remain in the custody of the Village Clerk.
Section 29-216 Unit Developments. The foregoing provisions of Section 29-205 through 29-215 to
the contrary notwithstanding, a preliminary plat approved previously may be developed on a unit
basis rather than as a whole provided the following conditions are met:
a. Each unit contains not less than 50 lots.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
b. The approval of the Director of Engineering is secured as to the feasibility of such unit
construction.
c. At least one unit shall be submitted and completed within each calendar year from the date of
the approval of the final plat for such unit, or such other periods of time mutually agreeable
to the subdivider and the Village.
d. All steps required for the approval of final plats, including the recording thereof, shall be
adhered to with respect to each unit so developed.
Section 29-217 Plat Forms. The following forms shall be used to the extent possible as indicated:
a. The Final plat shall contain a deed of dedication substantially as follows:
We, the undersigned, (Names), owners of the real estate shown and
described herein, do hereby lay off, plat and subdivide said real estate
in accordance with the within plat. This subdivision shall be known
and designated as ( Name), an addition to the Village of Arlington
Heights, Cook County. All streets and alleys and public open spaces
shown and not heretofore dedicated are hereby dedicated to the
public. Front and side yard building setback lines are established as
shown on this plat, between which lines and the property lines of the
streets, there shall be erected or maintained no building or structure.
There are strips of ground, (Number) feet in width, as shown on this
plat and marked ‘Easement’ reserved for the use of public utilities for
the installation of water and sewer mains, poles, ducts, lines and
wires, subject at all times to the proper authorities and to the
easement herein reserved. No permanent or other structures are to be
erected or maintained upon these strips of land, but owners of lots in
this subdivision shall take their titles subject to the rights of the
public utilities, and to the rights of the owners of other lots in this
subdivision.
Additional dedications and protective covenants, or private
restrictions, would be inserted here upon the subdivider's initiative or
the recommendation of the Plan Commission or Village Board;
important provisions are those specifying the use to be made of the
property and, in the case of residential use, the minimum habitable
floor area.)
The foregoing covenants (or restrictions), are to run with the land and
shall be binding on all parties and all persons claiming under them
until January 1, 19____ [25 year period is suggested], at which time
said covenants (or restrictions) shall be automatically extended for
successive periods of ten years unless indicated otherwise bynegative
vote of a majority of the then owners of the building sites covered by
these covenants (or restrictions), in whole or in part, which said vote
will be evidenced by a petition in writing signed by the owners and
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
duly recorded. Invalidation of any one of the foregoing covenants (or
restrictions) by judgment or court order shall in no way affect any of
the other various covenants (or restrictions), which shall remain in
full force and effect.
The right to enforce these provisions by injunction, together with the
right to cause the removal, by due process of law, of any structure or
part thereof erected or maintained in violation, is hereby dedicated to
the public, and reserved to the several owners of the several lots in
this subdivision and to their heirs and assigns.
WITNESS our hands and seals this ____ day of ___________,
19____.
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OFCOOK ) SS.
Before me the undersigned Notary Public, in and for the County and
State aforesaid, personally appeared ( Names), and each separately
and severally acknowledged the execution of the foregoing
instrument as his or her voluntary act and deed, for the purposes
therein expressed.
WITNESS my hand and notarial seal this ____ day of 19 _____.
Notary Public”
b. 1. The Final plat shall contain a certificate of approval as follows:
Under the authority provided by 65 ILCS 5/11-12 as amended bythe
State Legislature of the State of Illinois and Ordinance adopted bythe
Village Board of the Village of Arlington Heights, Illinois, this plat
was given approval by the Village of Arlington HeightsANDMUST
BE RECORDED WITHIN SIX MONTHS OF THE DATE OF
APPROVAL BY THE VILLAGE BOARD, OTHERWISE IT IS
NULL AND VOID.
APPROVED by the Plan Commission at a meeting held
Chairman
Secretary
APPROVED by the Village Board of Trustees at a meeting held
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
President
Village Clerk
APPROVED by the Director of Engineering
2. In cases where the subdivision covers land in an unincorporated area
within 1-1/2 miles of the Village limits, the additional certificate
below shall be included:
APPROVED by the County Board of Commissioners of Cook
County, Illinois at a meeting held _______________
President
County Clerk”
c. The Final plat shall contain a certificate signed by an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor in
substantially the following form:
I, (Name), hereby certify that I am an Illinois Registered Land
Surveyor in compliance with the laws of the State of Illinois, and that
this plat correctly represents a survey completed by me on (Date);
that all monuments and markers shown thereon actually exist, and
that I have accurately shown the materials that they are made of.
Signature
SURVEYOR'S SEAL)
Illinois Land Surveyor
No. _________________”
Article III Subdivision Design Standards
Section 29-301 Scope. All subdivisions of land subject to the provisions of Section 29-104 shall
conform to the design standards of this Article.
Section 29-302 Comprehensive Plan and OfficialMap. Subdivisions shall conform to the Village
Comprehensive Plan, the Village Official Map, the provisions of this chapter, and all other
applicable provisions of this Code. (Ord. No. 88-095, August 15, 1988)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
Section 29-303 Land Subject to Flooding.
a. No land subject to periodic flooding or which lacks drainage adequate for maintaining clear
streets shall be subdivided for residential use or any other use incompatible with such
flooding or drainage characteristics.
b. Where the owner or subdivider of land which is subject to periodic flooding or such
inadequate adequate drainage agrees to install at his/her own expense, improvements meeting
the standards and requirements of the Village and of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District of Greater Chicago, designed so as to render the land safe for residential or other
intended occupancy, then and only in that event the provisions of subparagraph (a) above
shall not bar the approval of the subdivision for such intended use.
Section 29-304 Street Layout and Design.
a. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to
the Village Comprehensive Plan and the Village Official Map and shall be considered in
relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience
and safety, and to their relation to proposed uses of the land served by such streets. Where
the Comprehensive Plan or Official Map are not relevant to streets of the proposed
subdivision, the arrangement and design standards of such streets shall conform to all other
provisions of this Code. (Ord. No. 88-095, August 15, 1988)
b. When any parcel is adjacent to an existing right-of-way, which is less than the required width
required by this Chapter or the Village Official Map, the applicant shall dedicate additional
right-of-way to meet the specifications of the table in subsection (l) below. (Ord. No. 88-
095, August 15, 1988)
c. Street arrangements in new and proposed subdivisions shall make provision for the extension
of all existing streets into the area proposed to be subdivided.
d. Where unsubdivided land adjoins the proposed subdivision, provision shall be made for the
extension of streets into the unsubdivided area. Such provisions may include leaving vacant
land which would be required to extend such streets to this area; or, where the subdivision of
such area can be foreseen in the near future, this provision may include street construction to
the boundary of such area.
e. Half streets are prohibited except where the Plan Commission finds that the land adjoining
such half street is unsubdivided and that it will be practicable to require the dedication of the
other half of such street at such time as the adjoining land is subdivided. Where a half street
is approved by the Plan Commission, both halves of such street shall be platted on the plat of
the proposed subdivision.
f. Where a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall
be arranged so as to allow the opening of future streets and further resubdivision in a logical
and orderly manner.
g. Where a proposed subdivision abuts or includes an arterial street or expressway, frontage
drives, combined driveways, or other comparable techniques may be required by the Plan
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
Commission where necessary to separate through traffic from local traffic and to protect
residential properties. (Ord. No. 88-095, August 15, 1988)
h. Where a proposed subdivision contains a railroad right-of-way, public utility right-of-way, or
limited access highway right-of-way, the Plan Commission may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, or where the proposed
subdivision abuts such right-of-way, on that side of such right-of-way. Such parallel street
shall be located at a distance permitting the appropriate use of intervening land for park
purposes in residential districts, or for commercial, business or industrial purposes in
commercial, business or industrial districts, as the case may be. This distance shall also be
sufficient to provide for suitable approach grades and future grade separation with respect to
such street and such right-of-way. Where such right-of-way is under the jurisdiction of the
Division of Highways of the State of Illinois, or the Cook County Department of Highways,
respecting maintenance and upkeep thereof, entrances to such right-of-wayfrom such parallel
street shall not be approved by the Plan Commission unless the subdivider has submitted to
the Director of Engineering and the Plan Commission a written permit issued bythe Division
or Department of Highways approving the construction of such entrances. (Ord. No. 88-095,
August 15, 1988)
i. No strip or area of land in a proposed subdivision shall be reserved along any portion of a
street, half street or alley where the effect thereof prevents access to such street, half street or
alley by adjacent property owners.
j. Cul-de-sacs shall not be longer than 660 feet in low-density developments, 500 feet in
medium density developments, and 300 feet in high-density developments, and shall be
provided at the closed end thereof with a turn-around having an outside roadway diameter
density of at least 80 feet and a right-of-way diameter of at least 100 feet. However, in low
density, built-up areas cul-de-sacs shall be at least 60 feet in diameter with an 80-foot rightof-
way diameter, and in medium density, built-up areas cul-de-sacs shall be 70 feet in
diameter with a 90-foot right-of-way diameter. Where a cul-de-sac is of a temporary nature,
awaiting its extension into adjoining land, a similar turn-around shall be provided, except
that all land in excess of that needed for the street when extended shall be subject to a
temporary easement allowing such turnaround, but terminating when such extension is made.
k. Local streets shall be laid out so that their use by traffic will be discouraged. (Ord. No. 88-
095, August 15, 1988)
l. Minimum width for street rights-of-way shall conform to the following schedule:
Major or primary streets 100' ( located in accordance
with Official Plan)
Secondary arterial streets 80' (located in accordance
with Official Plan)
Collector streets 66' to 80’ ( Located in accordance with
Official Map)
Local and sub- collector streets 66'
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
Where streets adjoining areas zoned for commercial, business or industrial use, or where a
petition for a change in zoning is contemplated to permit commercial business or industrial
use, the above street widths shall be increased by the amount necessary to provide for the free
flow of through traffic without interference from parked or parking vehicles and to provide
for safe parking space for commercial, business and industrial uses. ( Ord. No. 88-095,
August 15, 1988)
m. Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, whenever practical,
align with any existing intersection on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with
centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. (Ord. No. 88-095, August 15, 1988)
n. The intersection of more than two streets at one point shall be avoided except where
otherwise impractical to secure a proper road system. Streets shall intersect one another at an
angle as near to a right angle as possible and in no event shall such intersections be at angles
of less than 60 degrees. Street intersections shall be rounded with a minimum radius of 20
feet measured at the back of the curbs where the intersections are right angle intersections. If
an intersection occurs at other than a right angle, it shall be rounded with a curve of a radius
acceptable to the Plan Commission.
o. When connecting streets deflect from each other at any point by more than 30 degrees, they
shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to ensure adequate sight distance, and of
such greater radius, as the Plan Commission shall determine for special cases. The location
and profile of such streets shall give a clear sight distance of at least 350 feet for all major
arterial streets, 275 feet for all secondary arterial streets, 250 feet for all collector and subcollector
streets, and at least 200 feet on all other streets. In built-up areas the location and
profile of such streets shall give a clear sight distance of at least 200 feet for collector and
sub-collector streets and 150 feet for local streets. (Ord. No. 88-095, August 15, 1988)
p. A tangent at least as long as the width of the street shall be introduced between reverse
curves.
q. Streets shall be named in accordance with the provisions of Section 20-112 of this Code.
r. The minimum centerline radius shall be 830 feet for major arterial streets, 500 feet for
secondary arterial streets, 400 feet for collector streets, 350 feet for sub-collector streets and
250 feet for local streets. In built-up areas, the minimum centerline radius shall be 300 feet
for collector streets, 250 feet for sub-collector streets and 175 feet for local streets. (Ord. No.
88-095, August 15, 1988)
Section 29-305 Alleys.
a. Alleys shall not be permitted in residential districts.
b. In commercial, business and industrial districts, alleys shall be permitted only where
necessary to assure adequate off-street loading and unloading. Such alleys shall have a rightof-
way of not less than 20 feet in width and shall have full access to streets at each end.
Section 29-306 Block Standards.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
a. All blocks shall be so designed as to provide two tiers of lots. Blocks shall be not more than
1800 feet in length or less than 220 feet in width.
b. Blocks may be irregular in shape provided they are harmonious with the overall pattern of
blocks in the proposed subdivision and their design meets the requirements of lot standards,
traffic flow and control considerations, and public land requirements.
c. Blocks intended for commercial, business or industrial use shall be designed for such use and
the plat shall show adequate off-street areas for parking, loading docks and other facilities
that may be required to accommodate motor vehicles.
d. In blocks of 800 feet or more in length, a public crosswalk for pedestrian travel shall be
provided. The crosswalk shall have a right-of-way of not less than ten feet and extend
entirely across the block at approximately the midpoint of the length of the block. A
sidewalk shall be placed along the length of such right-of-wayand constructed in accordance
with the requirements of Chapter 20 of this Code.
e. All blocks in the proposed subdivision shall be numbered.
Section 29-307 Residential Lot Standards.
a. Each residential lot shall have:
1. Its full frontage abutting a street;
2. Lot lines at substantially right angles to straight streets, or radial lines to curved
streets;
3. A minimum width of 70 feet at the building setback line or, in the case of a corner
lot, a minimum width of 90 feet at the building setback line (Ord. No. 73-48, April
16, 1973); and
4. A minimum area of 8750 square feet or, if a corner lot, a minimum area of 9900
square feet.
b. Minimum widths of residential lots, measured at the building setback lines thereof shall be
no less than:
1. 70 feet when the lot contains an area of 8750 square feet or more, but less than
10,000 square feet;
2. 75 feet when the lot contains an area of 10,000 square feet or more, but less than
15,000 square feet;
3. 90 feet when the lot contains an area of 15,000 square feet or more but less than
20,000 square feet;
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
4. 100 feet when the lot contains an area of 20,000 square feet or more, but less than
30,000 square feet;
5. 125 feet when the lot contains an area of 30,000 square feet or more, but less than
one acre;
6. 150 feet when the lot contains an area of one acre or more.
c. Where lots front upon a cul-de-sac or curved street having a radius of 200 feet or less,
minimum lot widths as set forth in subparagraph (b) above shall be measured at the building
setback line along an arc parallel to the right-of-way of the cul-de-sac or curved street. Such
lots shall also be laid out so that their frontage length, as measured on the arc of the right-ofway
line is not less than 50% of the required lot width measured at the building setback line.
d. The area of the street right-of-way shall not be included in calculating the area of the lot with
respect to minimum lot area requirements of this chapter or Chapter 28. Lots shall be
required to have more than the minimum area or dimensions provided for in this Section 29-
307 where such greater area of dimensions is required to meet the yard requirements of
Chapter 28.
e. All lots in the proposed subdivision shall be numbered.
f. There shall be no double frontage lots except where lots abut upon an arterial street or where
the topography of the land prevents reasonable subdivision in smaller units. Double frontage
lots shall not have vehicular access from an abutting arterial street. Moreover, where the
intended rear lot line of a double frontage lot abuts an arterial street, an additional lot depth
of ten feet from the lot depth otherwise required shall be provided in order to accommodate
protective screening between the rear yard area of such lot and such arterial street. In such
cases, the Plan Commission shall require a privacy screening of such nature and type as it
deems appropriate for the circumstances. (Ord. No. 88-095, August 15, 1988)
Section 29-308 Building Setback Lines.
a. A building setback line shall be established for all residential lots and for all commercial,
business or industrial lots immediately adjoining residential lots.
b. The location of building setback lines shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 28. In
addition thereto:
1. Lots adjacent to streets where individual building setback lines have been heretofore
established by ordinance for such specific streets shall conform to the requirements
of such ordinance. (Ord. No. 88-095, August 15, 1988)
2. When not otherwise provided for in this Code, building setback lines shall be
established in accordance with the needs of the area; but in no case shall such
building setback lines be less than 25 feet from the right-of-way, except where all
frontage on one side of street between the intersecting streets is used for commercial,
business or industrial purposes, in which case such building setback line shall be not
less than 20 feet. (Ord. No. 72-115, December 18, 1972)
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
Section 29-309 Easements.
a. Easements of not less than five feet in width nor more than ten feet in width shall be
provided on each side of all rear lot lines, and along side lot lines where necessary for
overhead wires or underground wires, conduits, cable television facilities, storm and sanitary
sewers, gas, water and other mains. Easements of greater width may be required along or
across lots when necessary for the extension of main sewers or other utilities or where both
water and sewer lines are located in the same easement. A two-foot easement shall be
required on one side of and adjacent to an alley to accommodate pole lines. (Ord. No. 82-
116, Oct. 4, 1982)
b. Where the proposed subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or
stream, an easement shall be dedicated a minimum of ten feet in width on each side of such
water course, drainage way, channel or stream where it is necessary to relocate or straighten
such water course, drainage way, channel or stream.
Article IV Dedication of Lands for Parks, Schools and Other Public Areas
Section 29-401 Dedication of Park Lands and School Sites and Other Public Areas or for
Payments of Fees in Lieu Thereof. As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or final
plat of a residential planned unit development, each subdivider or developer will be required to
dedicate land for park and recreational purposes and land for school sites, to serve the immediate and
future needs of the residents of the development, or pay a cash contribution in lieu of actual land
dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the Village in accordance with the following
criteria and formula:
a. Criteria for requiring park and recreational land dedication:
1. Requirement and population ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed development
shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for dedication. The total
requirement shall be 9.0 acres of land per 1,000 of ultimate population in accordance
with the following classifications: (Ord. No. 95-038, June 5, 1995)
Types of Recreation Area Size Range Minimum Acres per 1,000
People
Play Lot Minimum 8,000 square feet Not Applicable
School- Park ( Neighborhood
Playground)
Minimum Park of 5 acres 1.25
Neighborhood Park Minimum 3-1/2 acres 1.0
District- wide Park or Playfield
Minimum 4 acres up to 30
acres
1.25
Community-wide Recreation
Park
Minimum 12 acres up to 30
acres
2.0
9.0 acres of land
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
TOTAL per 1,000 people
2. Location: The Village Comprehensive Plan and Village Official Map shall be used
as a guideline in locating sites. A park site adjoining all elementary school sites of
not less than five acres shall be considered a requirement. Acentral location within
the entire development is most desirable. These sites can be located throughout the
development according to established standard for park area distances. (Ord. No. 88-
095, August 15, 1988)
3. Credit for private open spaces and recreation areas: when subdividers or developers
provide their own open space for recreation areas and facilities, it mayhave the effect
of reducing the demand for local public recreational services. Depending on the size
of the development, a portion of the park and recreation area in subdivisions or
planned unit developments may, at the option of the Village Board, be provided in
the form of “private” open space in lieu of dedicated “public” open space. The extent
of the credit shall be determined by the Village Board, based upon the needs of the
projected residents and in conformance to the total park and recreation land for the
general area, and upon the benefits derived by the subdivider or developer by reason
of increased density based on such open space.
In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will imply a high
degree of quality of improvement and in the installation of recreational facilities,
including equipment by the developer as part of his/her obligation. Detailed plans of
such areas, including specifications of facilities to be installed, must be approved by
the Village and the Park District before any credit is given for private recreation
areas. The subdivider or developer must guarantee that these private recreation areas
will be permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the appropriate legal
documents. When an adjustment for private recreation areas is warranted, it will be
necessary to compute the total parkland dedication that would have been required
from the subdivision or planned unit development and then subtract the credit to be
given.
b. Criteria for requiring school site dedication:
1. Requirement and population ratio. The ultimate number of students to be generated
by a subdivision or planned unit development shall bear directly upon the amount of
land required to be dedicated for school sites. The land dedication requirement shall
be determined by obtaining the ratio of: (a) estimated children to be served in each
school classification over the (b) maximum recommended number of students to be
served in each such school classification as stated herein, and then applying that ratio
to the (c) minimum recommended number of acres for a school site of each such
school classification as stated herein. The product thereof shall be the acres of land
deemed needed to have sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated
increased children in each such school classification.
2. School classifications and size of school site: School classifications and size of
school sites within the Village shall be determined in accordance with the following
criteria:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
School Classification
by Grades
Maximum Number of
Students for Each Such
School Classification
Minimum Number of
Acres of Land for Each
School Site of Such
Classification
Elementary Schools, Grades
Kindergarten thru 5th (K-5) 600 students 10 acres
Junior High Schools
Grades 6th thru 8th ( 6-8) 900 students 18 acres
High Schools,
Grades 9th thru 12th (9-12) 2,300 students 54 acres
Ord. No. 95-038, June 5, 1995)
3. Location: The Village Comprehensive Plan and Village Official Map shall be used
as a guideline in locating sites. Such plan may be supplemented by information from
the affected School District. No land shall be accepted for dedication unless the land
is determined by the Village Board to be suitable for the proposed use. The
subdivider or developer shall be responsible for delivering the site in such condition
as shall render it suitable for the proposed use. The Village Board may require the
land to be conveyed by deed or dedication to the Village or such other public agency
as the Board may determine. If such land is not to be conveyed at the time the
building permit is applied for, the deed for such land and appropriate security for
such conveyance shall be held in escrow until the alternative time set for conveyance.
At such time the security shall be refunded to the subdivider or developer. If
conditions arise which prevent the subdivider or developer from conveying such
land, the deed for such land shall be returned to the title holder and the Village shall
be deemed to have acquired ownership of the security to be used according to
Chapter 29-401 of the Village of Arlington Heights Municipal Code. ( Ord. No. 95-
038, June 5, 1995)
c. Criteria for requiring a contribution in lieu of park and school sites:
1. Small or inappropriate land site: Where the development is small and the resulting
site is too small to be practical or when the available land is inappropriate for park
and recreational purposes or a school site, the Village may require the subdivider or
developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication required. The cash
contribution in lieu of park and recreation or school land dedication shall be held in
trust by the Village and disposed of as described in paragraph i of this section.
2. Criteria Guidelines: Whether the Village Board accepts land dedication or elects to
require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be
determined by consideration of the following:
a) recreational element of the Village Comprehensive Plan;
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
b) topography, geology, access and location of land in the development or
subdivision available for dedication; and
c) size and shape of the subdivision or development and land available for
dedication.
Ord. #05-083)
3. Fair Market Value: The cash contribution in lieu of land shall be based on the “fair
market value” of the acres of land in the area improved as specified herein, that
otherwise would have been dedicated as park and recreation and school sites. It has
been determined that the present “ fair market value” of improved land in and
surrounding the Village is $165,000 and that figure shall be used in making any
calculation herein. The Village Board shall have the power to evaluate this figure
annually and to amend this ordinance as necessary.
a) If the developer objects to the fair market value as determined bythe Village
Board, the Village Board shall select a qualified appraiser to appraise the
property at the developer's expense.
b) If the Village Board is dissatisfied with the appraisal, it may hire an
appraiser, at its own expense, to appraise the property; and the fair market
value shall be based on the average of the two appraisals provided for herein.
4. Criteria for requiring dedication and a fee: A combination of land dedication and
contribution in lieu of land will be necessary when:
a) only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location for a
park or school site. That portion of the land within the subdivision falling
within the park or school location shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid,
and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional
land that would have been required to be dedicated;
b) a major part of the local park or recreation site or school site has already
been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the
development to complete the site. The remaining portions shall be
dedicated, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required.
d. Density formula: The following table of population density shall be used in calculating the
amount of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu thereof unless
a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or developer with the Village Board. In
the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the Table of Estimated
Ultimate Population listed herein, the developer shall submit his/her demographic study
showing the estimated additional population to be generated from the subdivision or planned
unit development. In that event, final determination of the density formula to be used in such
calculations shall be made by the Village Board based upon such demographic information
submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources, which maybe submitted to
the Village Board by the Park District, School District, or others. The Village Board shall
have the power to evaluate this density formula annually and amend the ordinance as
necessary.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
Ord. #05-083)
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
CHILDREN PER UNIT
Type of Unit Preschool
0-4 yrs
Elementary
Grades
K-5
5-10 yrs
Jr.
High
Grades
6-8
11-13
yrs
Total
Grades
K-8
5-13
yrs
High
School
Grades
9-12
14-17
yrs
Adults
18-up)
Total
per
Unit
Detached
Single Family:
2 bedroom
3 bedroom
4 bedroom ( or
more)
102
254
413
122
346
470
041
138
303
163
484
773
020
142
303
1.694
1.921
2.142
1.979
2.801
3.631
Attached
Single Family
Townhouse,
Row House,
Quadriplex,
etc):
1 bedroom
2 bedroom
3 bedroom
4 bedroom (or
more)
0-
092
231
332
0-
095
237
345
0-
077
064
155
0-
172
301
500
0-
037
066
168
1.068
1.776
1.805
2.243
1.068
2.077
2.403
3.243
High Density
16+/ acre)
Apartment:
Efficiency
1 bedroom
2 bedroom
3 bedroom ( or
more)
0-
0-
042
050
0-
002
082
230
0-
001
041
123
0-
003
123
353
0-
001
042
116
1.360
1.749
1.614
2.499
1.360
1.753
1.821
3.018
e. Reservation of additional land: Where the Comprehensive Plan, Village Official Map, or the
standards of the Village call for a larger amount of park and recreational land or school sites
in a particular subdivision or planned unit development than the developer is required to
dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer's contribution shall be reserved for
subsequent purchase by the Village or other public body designated by the Village, provided
that such acquisition is made within one year from the date of approval of the final plat, in
the manner provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. No. 95-038, June 5, 1995)
f. Combining with adjoining developments: Where the subdivision or planned unit
development is less than 40 acres, public open space or a school site which is to be dedicated
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
should, where possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order
to produce usable recreation areas or school sites without hardship on a particular developer.
g. Topography and grading: The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as
its surroundings must be suitable for its intended purposes. Grading on sites dedicated for
park and recreational uses shall not differ greatly from surrounding land.
h. Improved sites: All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of electricity,
water, sewer and streets (including enclosed drainage and curb and gutter) as applicable to
the location of the site, or acceptable provision made therefor. The sidewalks and trees
normally included within the definition of “improved” sites may be deleted due to the delay
time between dedication of any such school site and its construction.
Ord. #00-070)
i. Distribution of contributed funds: The cash contributions in lieu of land, including interest
earned thereon, shall be held in trust by the President and Board of Trustees, for use in
acquisition of land for school, park and other public purposes which will be available to
serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or for
the improvement of other existing school, park, library or other public land which already
serves such needs. Moneys deposited with the Village for the use and benefit of another
government body with the provision of the ordinance shall be paid to that government body
upon request, at the time a designation for the use of the funds is approved by the Village
Board of Trustees. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of land is not expended for
the purpose set forth herein within ten years from the date of receipt, the President and Board
of Trustees shall determine if the original needs still exist. If the needs are determined not to
exist, the cash contribution shall be refunded to the current titleholders of the land originally
owned by the developer who made such contribution.
The Village of Arlington Heights Finance Department, in May and November of each year,
shall inform by mail the applicable school and park district and the Arlington Heights
Memorial Library what amount is due to each entity. Upon receiving verification from each
applicable entity, the Village shall proceed with payment of the funds upon approval by the
Village Board of Trustees as soon as practicable. (Ord. No. 95-038, June 5, 1995)
j. Severability: If any provision of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such partial invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this ordinance, which can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application thereof, and to this extent, the provisions of this
ordinance are declared to be severable. (Ord. No. 81-164, Dec. 21, 1981)
Section 29-402 Limitations on Size of Dedicated Land.
a. In no event shall any owner of land be required to offer for dedication under the provisions of
Section 29-401 an amount of land exceeding 10% of the gross acreage of the proposed
subdivision unless compensation is made for all acreage so in excess of 10%.
b. All areas offered for dedication for public lands in excess of 10% shall be designated on the
final plat and shall be subject to purchase or condemnation by the acquiring agency within
one year from the date of approval of the final plat by the Board of Trustees. If such excess
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
land is not acquired within the prescribed time, then such land may be used by the owner for
his/her own purposes in any manner consistent with all other applicable requirements of this
Code.
Section 29-403 Form and Time of Offer; Acceptance; Rejection.
a. Offers to dedicate land under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to have been
made at the time of the filing of the preliminary plat with the Secretary of the Plan
Commission. Offers to pay sums of money in lieu of land dedication shall be made in
writing and filed with the Secretary of the Plan Commission at the time of the filing of the
preliminary plat. The Plan Commission shall thereupon notify the governing body of the
public agency affected by the offer.
b. The agency shall have 30 days in which to accept the offer, and all offers not accepted by the
end of the 30-day period shall be deemed to have been rejected; provided, however, in cases
involving payment of money in lieu of land dedication, the 30-day period shall commence
from the conclusion of negotiations or rendition of an appraisal, as provided for in Section
29-401(b)(2), whichever event is later. All deeds of dedication shall be in the form set forth
in Section 29-217(a).
c. All offers and acceptances of land dedication or money payments shall be deemed to be
conditioned on the approval of the final plat by the Board of Trustees, and shall be
consummated by the delivery of a deed of dedication, or payment of money, as the case may
be, at the time of such approval. All deeds of dedication shall be in the form set forth in
Section 29-217(a).
d. No plat of subdivision shall be rejected by either the Plan Commission or the Board of
Trustees for failure to dedicate land or pay money in lieu thereof where an offer meeting the
requirements of this chapter was duly made by the owner, but rejected by the interested
public agency.
e. At the time of final plat approval the owner shall provide a deed of conveyance of all land to
be dedicated in a form satisfactory to the Village and the interested public agency. In the
event that the owner shall be unable to provide such deed, the public agency and the owner
may provide to the Village an agreement between the parties setting forth the manner in
which the land is to be conveyed. Such agreement may include the use of escrows or other
suitable instruments, which will guarantee the conveyance of the land required under the
provisions of this article. The terms and provisions of escrow agreements, if mutually
agreeable to the parties, shall be subject to approval by the Village. In the event that the deed
or other agreement is not approved by the Village, no final plat shall be approved unless the
Village Board of Trustees waives the requirements of this article. (Ord. No. 79-153, Oct. 1,
1979)
f. The owner shall be responsible for ensuring that all work to be performed on dedicated
parkland is completed within 90 days of the Village making a demand for such work to be
performed. If such work is not completed within 90 days, the Village mayperform the work
at the owner's expense. (Ord. No. 89-019, March 6, 1989)
Section 29-404 Sites Not Set Forth in the Official Plan or Official Map.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
For purposes of this chapter, there need not be an actual site for schools, parks or other public land
designated in the Village Comprehensive Plan or the Village Official Map, but where the need for
sites arises from additional population attributable, in whole or in part, to the proposed subdivision,
determined by the same criteria used in the determination of other necessary school, park or other
public land in the Village Comprehensive Plan or the Village Official Map, then such land shall be
deemed to have been set forth in the Village Comprehensive Plan or the Village Official Map prior
to the filing of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision. (Ord. No. 88-095, August 15, 1988)
Section 29-405 Park Districts and Park Management.
a. Where land is dedicated under the provisions of this chapter for park sites and is located
immediately outside the limits of a Park District, the owner or subdivider shall petition the
Park District for annexation of the entire proposed subdivision area so that such subdivision
may be annexed to the Park District prior to the approval of the final plat of the proposed
subdivision and sale of lots in the proposed subdivision.
b. Where such dedicated parkland is so located as to prevent annexation to a Park District, the
owner or subdivider shall establish a trusteeship within the proposed subdivision. Such
trusteeship shall have limited power of assessment over the subdivision for the purpose of
maintaining all dedicated parklands. The trusteeship shall also provide that the Board of
Trustees will be empowered to place such park sites in a Park District at such time as
annexation becomes possible, in which event the trusteeship shall cease.
Section 29-406 Unit Developments. Where the proposed subdivision is being developed on a unit
basis under the provisions of Section 29-216, land dedication or payment in lieu thereof may be
made on a corresponding unit basis, in the proportion that each unit bears to the total subdivision.
Ord. #00-070)
Section 29-407 Library Services Contribution Fee. As a condition of approval of a final plat of
subdivision, each subdivider will be required to pay a cash contribution in accordance with the
following criteria and formula:
a. Criteria for requiring a cash contribution for library services.
1. Criteria guideline: Density formula. The Table of Estimated Ultimate Population
Per Dwelling Unit set forth in Section 29-401d. shall be used in calculating the
amount of library service cash contribution required unless a written objection is
filed thereto by the subdivider with the Village Board. In the event a subdivider
files a written objection to the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling
Unit listed herein, the subdivider shall submit his/her own demographic study
showing the estimated additional population to be generated from the subdivision.
In that event, final determination of the density formula to be used in such
calculations shall be made by the Village Board based upon such demographic
information submitted by the subdivider and from other sources, which may be
submitted to the Village Board by the Library Board or others. The Village Board
shall have the power to evaluate this density formula annually and amend the
ordinance as necessary.
Ord. #05-083)
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
2. Amount of library services contribution fee. The amount of the library services
contribution fee is $119.28 per patron, calculated in accordance with the Table of
Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit set forth above.
3. Held in trust. The cash contribution shall be held in trust by the Village for the
Arlington Heights Memorial Library and disposed of in accordance with Section 29-
401i.
Article V
Installation of Required Improvements
Section 29-501 Required Improvements. The developer of a proposed subdivision shall install or
cause to be provided the following facilities:
a. All roads, alleys, curbs, gutters and road drainage facilities, in accordance with the standards
set forth in Section 20-108 of this Code.
b. All sidewalks located within public areas, in accordance with the standards set forth in
Section 20-109 of this Code.
c. A water supply system for each lot of the proposed subdivision, in conformance with the
requirements of Chapters 21 and 24 of this Code. In addition thereto, such water supply
system shall be connected to the Village water system at the most advantageous point, taking
into account the size of the Village water main at such point and the expected demands of the
proposed subdivision. Dead-end water mains shall be avoided.
d. Fire hydrants of the type and quality specified in standards developed by and on file with the
Director of Engineering. The placement and method of installing such fire hydrants shall be
in accordance with the standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and shall be
subject to the inspection and approval of the Director of Engineering.
e. Asanitary sewer system for each lot meeting all specifications of Chapters 22 and 24 of this
Code and the regulations of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago.
Such sanitary sewer system shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system of the Village at
such point or points as the Director of Engineering shall determine, based upon the location
and size of the Village sanitary sewer system in relation to the estimated flow of the sanitary
sewer system of the proposed subdivision.
f. A storm sewer system, separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system, meeting all
specifications of Chapters 22 and 24 of this Code. Such storm sewer system shall be
connected to an existing storm sewer system of the Village where available; if such
connection is unavailable, other adequate means for the discharge of such storm system shall
be provided by the developer.
g. A street lighting system meeting the requirements of Chapter 25 of this Code.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
h. Street signs of such location, type and size as approved by the Village Manager, giving due
regard for the prevailing type, size and pattern of location used throughout the Village, in
accordance with the provisions of Section 20-112.
i. Landscaping of all public areas, including the preservation of existing vegetation, grading
and seed thereof, screening, and the planting of trees, in accordance with the standards of
Sections 20-501 through 20-514 and Section 28-6.16 of this Code. (Ord. No. 91-087, August
19, 1991)
j. All original utility distribution lines for telephone and electric service to be installed shall be
placed underground within easements or dedicated public ways. The installation of such
facilities shall be made in compliance with applicable orders, rules and regulations of the
Illinois Commerce Commission now or hereafter effective and the owner or subdivider of
any property to be served from the underground installations shall be responsible for
compliance with the rules and regulations now and hereafter effective and filed with the
Commission pursuant to the Illinois Public Utilities Act, of any public utility whose services
will be required with respect to the provision of such underground facilities. (Ord. No. 67-
133, Dec. 18, 1967)
Section 29-502 Exceptions for Existing Improvements.
a. When the proposed subdivision or resubdivision concerns an area presently having any or all
required improvements set forth in Section 29-501, where such improvements meet the
requirements of Section 29-501, no further provision must be made by the developer to
duplicate the improvements. However, where existing improvements do not so meet the
requirements of Section 29-501, the developer shall repair, correct or replace such
improvements so that all improvements will then meet the aforesaid requirements of Section
29-501.
b. Where the proposed subdivision is a resubdivision or concerns an area presently abutting or
containing any existing public street of less than 50 feet in width or a roadway of less than 20
feet in width, the land shall be dedicated so as to provide a minimum street width of 66 feet
and the developer of the proposed subdivision shall provide an additional roadway pavement
meeting the minimum standards set forth in Section 20-108 of this Code. The Director of
Engineering shall determine what adjustment to make where the aforesaid widenings merge
with existing streets, which are of a small width at the boundary of such proposed
subdivision. The Director of Engineering may also require lanes to be painted on such
widened streets, designating driving and parking areas. (Ord. No. 89-064, August 7, 1989)
Ord. #06-059)
Section 29-503 Agreement, Bond and Deposit Guaranteeing Installation of Required
Improvements.
a. Upon final approval of plans and specifications for required improvements, the owner and
the subdivider of the land proposed to be subdivided shall enter into an agreement with the
Village whereby the owner and the subdivider agree to install such required improvements at
their own expense, in accordance with the approved plans and specifications within the time
prescribed by the provisions of this Code. Such agreement shall be conditioned upon the
approval of the final plat of subdivision.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
b. Simultaneously with the execution of the agreement provided for in subparagraph (a) above,
the owner and the subdivider of the land proposed to be subdivided shall deposit in escrow
with the Village Clerk, a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit, surety bond or letter of
commitment issued by a bank, savings and loan association, surety, or insurance company,
deemed sufficient by the Village in the amount of the cost, as estimated by the Director of
Engineering, of the installation of the required improvements aforesaid, conditioned upon the
approval of the final plat, and further conditioned upon the installation of such required
improvements within two years from the date that the final plat is approved by the Board of
Trustees.
c. Prior to the submission of the final plat to the Board of Trustees, in accordance with the
provisions of Section 29-213, the subdivider shall deposit in escrow with the Village Clerk a
cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit, surety bond or letter of commitment issued by a bank,
savings and loan association, surety, or insurance company, deemed sufficient bythe Village
in the amount of 15% of the cost of all surface improvements theretofore approved by the
Board of Trustees. The cost of such surface improvements shall be estimated bythe Director
of Engineering. The subdivider shall agree that the deposit in escrow may be held by the
Village for a period of 18 months after the final completion of the work for the purpose of:
1. Guaranteeing and securing the correction of any defect in material or workmanship
furnished for the surface improvements, latent in character and not discernible at the
time of final inspection or acceptance by the Village; and
2. Guaranteeing against any damage to the improvements by reason of the settling of
ground, base or foundation thereof. Such escrow agreement shall also provide that, if
such defects have developed, then the cash deposit or equivalent may be applied by
the Village for any amounts incurred in correcting such defects; and that the balance
of such deposit, if any, held at the end of such 18-month period shall be returned by
the Village to the depositor, or paid to the order of the depositor, without interest.
Section 29-504 Inspection. All improvements required by the provisions of this Article shall be
inspected by the Director of Engineering during the course of construction and at completion. Such
inspection may include television inspection of all new sewer installations. Fees and costs connected
with inspections shall be paid by the subdivider.
Section 29-505 Acceptance of Required Public Improvements by the Village. Upon completion
of all improvements required by the provisions of this Article, a final inspection thereof shall be
made by the Director of Engineering and, if the improvements are found to be in conformance with
the requirements of this Code, the Director of Engineering shall so certify to the Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees shall, by passing a resolution, thereupon formally accept such improvements,
at which time they shall become the property of the Village.
Article VI Contributions for Connection to Existing Public Facilities
Section 29-601 General Requirements; Costs. Where a proposed subdivision consists of land not
annexed to the Village, and such land has not borne any of the costs of installation of a public water
system or public sewer system, the facilities of which are to be used by such subdivision, the
SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
subdivider shall pay a fee or fees, as the case may be, for a connection or connections to such water
and/or sewer system, or any extensions thereof, which fee or fees shall be computed as follows:
a. For connecting to existing water mains as aforesaid or any extensions thereof, an amount
equal to $10.00 for each lot within such subdivision.
b. For connecting to existing sewer mains as aforesaid, or any extensions thereof, an amount
equal to $50.00 for each lot within such subdivision.
Section 29-602 Partial Contributions. Where only part of the land contained within a proposed
subdivision is subject to the provisions of Section 29-601, contribution fees as provided in that
section shall be limited to only as much of such land as is subject to the provisions of Section 29-
601.
Section 29-603 Time of Payment.
a. The fees payable under the provisions of this article shall be due and payable when the final
plat of subdivision has been approved under the provisions of this chapter.
b. Where a subdivision is being developed on a unit basis, fees payable under the provisions of
this article shall be payable only on such unit basis at the time of approval of the final plat for
each respective unit.
Section 29-604 Contribution Fees Additional to all Other Fees and Charges. The fees payable
under the provisions of this Article shall be in addition to all fees and charges payable for any
inspection, license, permit or other service fees provided in other provisions of this Code respecting
such proposed subdivision; moreover, fees charged hereunder shall be considered a charge for the
privilege of using the existing water systems and sewer systems installed in the Village.
Article VII Real Estate Protection for Purchasers From Subdivision Sellers
Section 29-701 Purpose. The purpose of this Act is to promote fair dealing in the sale of residential
real estate.
Section 29-702 Short Title. This act shall be know and may be cited as the “Consumer Real Estate
Protection Act.”
Section 29-703 Subdivision Seller. Subdivision seller means any person who is the beneficial
owner of more than six subdivision lots located in the same subdivision or condominium
development and who holds such lots for the purpose of selling in the ordinary course of his/her
trade or business dwelling units constructed or to be constructed thereon.
Section 29-704 Liberal Construction. This act shall be liberally construed and applied to promote
its purposes.
Section 29-705 Exemptions. The provisions of this Act do not apply to property principally used
for agricultural purposes; to public or private school dormitories, fraternity houses, convents,
monasteries, orphanages, mental institutions, penal institutions, or seminaries, to publicly-licensed
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
nursing homes, public or private hospitals, shelter care homes, or similar institutions; or to any
dwelling unit subject to taxation pursuant to the “ Hotel Operators Occupation Tax Act,” approved
July 6, 1961, as amended. The provisions of this Act also do not apply to sales by receivers, trustees
in bankruptcy or any public officers under judicial process, or to any sales by public auction.
Section 29-706 Severability. If any provision or close of this Act or application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity does not affect other provisions or
applications of the Act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to
this end the provisions of this Act are held to be severable.
Section 29-707 Effective Date. This Act takes effect on and applies to transactions entered into and
events occurring after that date.
Section 29-708 Scope of Regulation. Any subdivision seller must display, in two prominent
locations in any and all salesrooms, a zoning map which clearly shows the present zoning of all the
surrounding property in an area of 1,000 feet measured from the boundaries of the subject property,
the map to be either the official current zoning map or maps of the Village of Arlington Heights,
surrounding municipalities, and the County of Cook or amap submitted bythe subdivision seller and
approved by the Village Planner.
1. The act, use or employment by any subdivision seller of any deception, fraud, false pretense,
false promise, misrepresentation, or the concealment, suppression, or omission of any
material fact with the intent that others rely upon such concealment, suppression or omission,
in connection with the sale, offer to sell or advertisement of any subdivision lot held for sale
by such person in the ordinary course of business, whether or not any person has in fact been
misled, deceived or damaged thereby, is an unlawful real estate practice. However, nothing
herein contained applies to the owner or publisher of newspapers, magazines, publications or
printed matter wherein such advertisement appears, or to the owner or operator of a radio or
television station which disseminates such advertisement when the owner, publisher or
operator has no knowledge of the intent, design or purpose of the advertiser. Nothing herein
contained applies to any advertisement, which is subject to and complies with the rules and
regulations of, and the statutes administered by the Federal Trade Commission. For the
purposes hereof, the term “ advertisement” includes the attempt by publication,
dissemination, solicitation or circulation, to induce any person to enter into any obligation or
acquire any title or interest in connection with the purchase of any subdivision lot.
2. Any contract for sale for property by a subdivision seller subject to this article shall contain
the specific recital that the subdivision seller has complied with each of the provisions of this
article, which recital shall be warranted by the seller. Said contract shall also provide that the
purchaser by execution of the contract acknowledges that he has had the opportunity to
examine the map referred to in Section 29-708 of this Article.
Section 29-709 Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this ordinance
shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each such offense.
1. Nothing within this ordinance shall be construed to prevent any person from making a
complaint or prosecuting his/her own claim under this ordinance. (Ord. No. 72-108, Dec. 4,
1972)
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 09/19/16
CHAPTER 30 SIGNS
Article I General Provisions
Section 30-100 Intent and Purpose
Section 30-101 Definitions
Section 30-102 Permits Required
Section 30-103 Exemptions
Section 30-104 Application for Sign Permit
Section 30-105 Illuminated Signs: Approval by Electrical Inspector
Section 30-106 Issuance of Permit
Section 30-107 Inspection
Section 30-108 Unsafe and Unlawful Signs
Section 30-109 Removal of Signs for Businesses No Longer on Premises
Section 30-110 Date of Installation and Voltage to be on Sign
Section 30-111 Painting Required Every Two Years
Section 30-112 Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirements
Section 30-113 Face of Sign Shall be Smooth
Section 30-114 Glass: Limitations
Section 30-115 Reflectors, Spotlights and Floodlights: Limitation and Prohibition
Section 30-116 Illumination: Hours of Operation
Section 30-117 Illumination Standards for Signs Installed after March 1, 1982
Section 30-118 Obstruction to Doors, Windows or Fire Escapes
Section 30-119 Signs Not to Constitute Hazard to Use of Pedestrian or Vehicular
Thoroughfare
Section 30-120 Prohibited Signs
Section 30-121 Legal Non-Conforming Signs
Article II Zoning Districts
Section 30-201 Downtown District ( B-5) Sign Requirements
Section 30-202 Office Transitional (O-T) & Office Research (O-R) District Signage
Provisions
Section 30-203 Residential (R) Districts Signage Provisions
Section 30-204 Business ( B) and Manufacturing ( M) District Signage Provisions
Section 30-205 Institutional (I) Districts Signage Provisions
Section 30-206 Public Lands ( P-L) Districts Signage Provisions
Section 30-207 Automobile Service Stations Standards
Section 30-208 Drive- through Restaurant Signage
Article III Ground Signs
Section 30-301 Location
Section 30-302 Number
Section 30-303 Dimensions
Section 30-304 Construction
Section 30-305 Manual Change Bulletin Boards
Article IV Wall Signs
Section 30-401 Location
Section 30-402 Number
Section 30-403 Dimensions
Section 30-404 Construction
SIGNS
REVISED 11/20/17
30-2
Section 30-405 Manual Change Bulletin Boards
Article V Banners
Section 30-501 Location and Dimensions
Section 30-502 Number
Section 30-503 Signage
Section 30-504 Permits and Inspections
Article VI Temporary Signs
Section 30-601 Temporary Signs
Section 30-602 Authorization Required for Posting of Temporary Signs in the Public
Rights-of-Way
Section 30-603 Removal Requirement for Temporary Signs
Section 30-604 Removal of Signs
Article VII Electronic Message Signs
Section 30-701 Electronic Message Signs
Section 30-702 Conditional Review Process and Criteria
Section 30-702 Applications
Section 30-704 Notification Requirements
Section 30-705 Standards for Electronic Message Signs
Article VIII Other Advertising Structures
Section 30-801 Canopies, Awnings and Marquees
Section 30-802 Street Clocks
Section 30-803 Sandwich Board Signs (B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4 Zoning Districts)
Article IX Variations
Section 30-901 Variations
Section 30-902 Standards
Section 30-903 Petitions
Section 30-904 Notification Requirements
Article X Penalties
Section 30-1001 Penalties
Section 30-1002 Revocation of Permits
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-3 REVISED 04/04/16
Article I General Provisions
Ord. #16-006)
Section 30-100 Intent and Purpose.
a. The purpose of this Chapter is to create the framework for a comprehensive balanced
system of signage, to promote communication between people and their environment and
to avoid the usual clutter that is potentially harmful to traffic and pedestrian safety, property
values, business opportunities, and the community appearance. This Chapter is adopted
for the following purposes:
1. to preserve, protect and promote public health, safety and welfare;
2. to preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility of signs with
surrounding land uses;
3. to enhance the physical appearance of the Village by preserving the scenic and
natural beauty of the area while recognizing evolving trends in graphic design and
technology in signage;
4. to enhance the overall improvement of major thoroughfares and intersections
through well designed signage;
5. to enhance the Village’ s economy, business and industry by promoting the
reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs, and encouraging better
communication between an activity and the public it seeks with its message;
5. to create an equitable, consistent and fairly applied set of standards to all businesses
and establishments;
6. to protect the general public from damage and injury, which may be caused by the
faulty and uncontrolled construction and use of signs within the Village;
7. to protect pedestrians and motorists within the Village from injury caused by
distractions, obstructions and hazards created by certain signs;
8. to protect the public investment in streets and highways by reducing distraction
which may increase the number and severity of traffic accidents;
9. to encourage sound practices and lessen the objectionable effects of competition
with respect to size and placement of signs;
10. to authorize the use of signs which specifically:
a. are compatible with their surroundings;
b. are appropriate for the activity of displaying the sign;
c. express the identity of individual activities and the community as a whole;
d. are legible in the circumstances in which they are seen.
SIGNS
30-4 REVISED 11/20/17
Ord. #16-006, # 14-056, #14-022, #10-001, #07-043, #07-039, #17-042)
Section 30-101 Definitions.
a. Unless otherwise expressly stated the following words or terms shall, for the purposes of
this Chapter, have the meanings set forth in this Section.
1. Approved combustible material. Any material more than 1/20 of an inch in
thickness, which burns at a rate of not more than 2-1/2 inches per minute when
subjected to the A.S.T.M. (American Society for Testing Materials) standard test
for flammability in sheets of 0.06 inches in thickness.
2. Awning. A roof like shelter made of canvas or other non- rigid material, stretched
over a frame and extended over a doorway or window. The awning is supported
entirely from the exterior wall of the building and provides protection from the
weather.
3. Banner. A small decorative temporary canvas sign installed on a light pole for the
purpose of advertising seasonal messages, graphics, and/ or shopping center or
community events.
4. Blade Sign. A sign that is mounted so that it is perpendicular to the face of the
building and projects out. Blade signs are permitted in the B-5 zoning district only.
5. Canopy. A structure other than an awning made of cloth or other material, with a
frame, which is wholly or partially supported by columns, poles or braces extending
from the ground.
6. Certificate of Approval. An approval issued by the Village which indicates that a
proposed sign is in conformance with this Chapter, and therefore eligible for a sign
permit.
7. Civic Events Sign. A sign installed by the Village on public property for the
purpose of advertising public service information.
8. Curb line. Back of the curb.
9. Directional Sign. An auxiliary sign provided for the sole purpose of providing
directional information to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
10. Downtown District. The area zoned B-5, approximately bordered by Sigwalt Street
on the South, Eastman Street on the North, Arlington Heights Road on the East and
Chestnut Avenue on the West.
11. Drive-through Clearance Bar. A stand-alone structure that alerts a vehicle operator
of any height restrictions they may encounter on the site.
12. Drive-through Digital Order Screen. A sign associated with a drive-through
restaurant that uses electronic means such as combinations of LEDs, fiber optics,
light bulbs or other illumination devices to display order information for the
customer and/ or person to person ordering.
13. Drive- through Menu Board. A sign display associated with a restaurant drivethrough,
either located on a wall or as a ground sign, which displays the varieties
of food and drink available to the customer at that restaurant location only.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-5 REVISED 11/20/17
14. Drive-through Pre-Sell Menu Board. Generally, a smaller version of the drivethrough
menu board which is located in proximity to but in advance of the drivethrough
menu board and displays the food and drink options available to the
customer at that restaurant location only.
14.5 Electronic Message Sign. A portion of a monument style ground sign on which the
message, copy, graphics, or display can be changed by remote or automatic means,
used to advertise a business, goods, and/ or services that are available on the property
on which the sign is placed.
15. Emergency Signs. Any sign solely for the purpose of indicating emergency relief
facilities, including but not limited to, Hospital, Fire Station and Police signs.
16. Facing. The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message is
displayed or illustrated on the sign.
17. Flashing Sign. Any illuminated sign on which each artificial light unit or externally
mounted light source is not maintained in a stationary condition or constant in
intensity and color at all times when such sign is illuminated.
18. Free- standing canopy. Any self- supported canopy constructed of metal or other
incombustible or fire resistant materials, whether or not attached to another
structure, such as commonly found over gasoline service areas at service stations
and other drive through facilities.
19. Gross Surface Area of Sign. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
of a geometric shape which encloses the extreme limits of characters, lettering,
illustrations, ornamentation, or other figures together with any material, or color
forming an integral part of the display. Structural supports with no sign copy shall
not be included in the gross surface area; however, if any portion of the required
structural support becomes enclosed for decorative or architectural purposes, it will
then be included in the total gross surface area of the sign.
A simple geometric shape will be drawn around the extreme limits to determine the gross surface
area.
SIGNS
REVISED 04/04/16
30-6
20. Ground Sign. Any free standing sign, except temporary signs, placed upon the
ground or supported by uprights or braces placed in the ground, and not attached to
any building, fence or other permanent structure.
21. Illegal Signs. Any sign not installed in conformance with this Chapter or approved
variation.
22. Illuminated Sign. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outline
illuminated by electric light, luminous tubes, or any other means of illumination
either internal or external to the sign structure.
23. Incombustible Material. Any material which will not ignite at or below a
temperature of 1200 degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at
that temperature.
24. Install. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix, or the painting of a
sign, not in accordance with an existing sign permit.
25. Legal Non- conforming. Any sign, which is not in conformance with this Chapter
but was lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this Chapter.
26. Manual Change Bulletin Board. A portion of a ground sign or wall sign used to
advertise a sale, event or a product utilizing manual change text affixed to a
background or manual change printed sign panels.
27. Marquee. A permanent roof like structure made of durable, rigid material
extending from the entrance of the building over a pedestrian or vehicular
thoroughfare. A marquee is supported by the exterior wall of the building and
contains manual change copy.
28. Menu Board. A sign for which the sole purpose is to list the items available for
consumption at a restaurant.
29. Monument Sign. A low ground sign displayed on a decorative structure of brick,
wood or metal which is intended to serve as an entry feature or a focal point of a
development.
30. Municipal Signs. Signs whose sole purpose is indicating municipal regulations,
including but not limited to, no parking, street and clearance signs.
31. Neon Gas Tube Illumination. Illumination effected by a light source consisting of
a neon tube, which is bent to form letters, symbols or other shapes.
32. Parking Accessory Sign. An auxiliary sign provided in a parking or service area
for the sole purpose of providing directional information to pedestrians or vehicular
traffic.
33. Pedestrian Thoroughfare. Any sidewalk or route, public or private, which is open
to the use of pedestrian travel.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-7 REVISED 04/04/16
34. Permittee. Person in possession, charge or control of any sign.
35. Person. Any natural person, partnership, trust, corporation or association.
Whenever used with respect to any penalty, the term " person," as applied to
partnerships or associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to trusts or corporations, shall mean the trustees or officers thereof.
36. Plaque Sign. A sign that is mounted flush at the base of the building or on an
architecturally significant area near the base of the building. Plaque signs are
permitted in the B-5 zoning district only.
37. Portable Sign. Any sign designed to be moved from place to place, which is not
permanently affixed to the ground, a building or other structure.
38. Promotional Signs. A temporary sign installed for a short fixed period of time for
the purpose of promoting a special event or sale.
39. Public Right-of-Way. A strip of land under the jurisdiction of a public entity for the
purpose of providing a route of access for the general public and/ or utilities.
40. Removable Hanging Sign. A removable fabric sign hung from a bracket that is
fixed to the building. Removable hanging signs are permitted in the B-5 zoning
district only.
41. Retractable Canopy or Awning. Any canopy or awning made of cloth or metal,
with metal frames attached to a building, and so installed as to permit its being
retracted when not in use.
42. Roof Sign. Any sign installed, constructed and maintained upon, over or projecting
above in any way, the roof or roofline of any building or structure.
43. Sandwich Board Sign. A sign set on the ground ( without attachment to the ground)
in an ‘A’ frame configuration with two panels hinged at the top. Sandwich board
signs are permitted in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 and B-5 zoning districts only. A sign
permit shall only be required for sandwich board signs in the B-5 District.
44. Sandwich Board Sign, Sculptural. A sign set on the ground (without attachment to
the ground) that is sculptural in form, such as a human figure, sculpture art or other
object, and contains an integral sign panel on one or two sides. Sculptural sandwich
board signs are permitted in the B-5 zoning district only.
45. Sign. Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, used to advertise,
identify, display or attract attention to a person, establishment, product, service or
event by any means including, without limitation, words, letters, numerals, figures,
designs, symbols, colors, illumination, whether affixed to a building or structure or
otherwise installed on the premises visible to the general public. A sign shall
include writing, representation, or other figure of similar character within a building
only when located in a window. "Sign" shall not include any display of official,
court or public office notices, nor shall it include the flag, emblem or insignia of a
nation, governmental unit, school or religious group.
SIGNS
30-8 REVISED 04/04/16
46. Signable Area. That portion of a building face designated for signage including but
not limited to the cornice, transom, mansard or storefront glass. The guiding
principal in determining signable area will be the architecture of the building. The
signable area must be a continuous space, unbroken by setbacks or architectural
details.
On contemporary buildings, signage is generally located on the sign frieze above the doorways,
on the glass storefront or on the cap as an identification tag for the entire building.
On traditional buildings, signage is generally located on the cornice, transom, storefront glass, or
as a small tablet on the columns or keystone of the building.
47. Street Clocks. Any time piece installed on the exterior of any building or structure,
maintained for the purpose of advertising a place of business or for the convenience
of the public, which overhangs a pedestrian or vehicular thoroughfare.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-9 REVISED 04/04/16
48. Structural Support. Any battens, nailing strips, and platforms, which are necessary
to support or affix a sign to a site or building.
49. Tablet. A small bronze or cut masonry sign, affixed to the exterior of a building,
for the purpose of indicating an occupant of the building or the date in which the
building was erected.
50. Temporary Sign. A non-permanent sign installed, affixed or maintained on a
premises for a short, fixed, period of time.
51. Traffic Signs. Any sign listed in the " Rules of the Road" for the sole purpose of
indicating traffic regulations.
52. Vehicular Thoroughfare. Any roadway, parking lot or drive open to the use of
vehicular traffic.
53. Wall Sign. A sign which is placed flat against, or no more than 12 inches from, an
exterior wall or mansard roof of a building.
54. Window Sign. A sign that is installed, painted upon, printed, affixed to, etched or
placed against a window or door of a building for purposes of viewing from outside
the premises, not including merchandise located in a window for display.
Ord. #04-059, # 07-039)
Section 30-102 Permits required. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to install, alter, relocate or maintain within the Village, any sign as defined
in this Chapter, without first obtaining a sign permit from the Director of Building and making
payment of the appropriate fee. In the Downtown District, all applications for sign permits shall
be submitted to the Department of Building and routed for review to the Department of Planning
and Community Development. In all districts, all illuminated signs shall, be subject to all the
applicable electrical provisions of this Chapter and the fees required thereunder.
Section 30-103 Exemptions. No permit shall be required for the following signs, provided
however, said signs shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter concerning construction,
location and maintenance. Refer to Article VI for requirements of temporary signs.
a. Real Estate Signs. Real estate signs, not exceeding eight square feet in gross surface area,
which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the real property upon which said sign is located.
No more than one sign of this type shall be installed per street frontage without a permit,
and such sign shall be maintained for no more than seven days after the sale, rental, or lease
of the property upon which it is displayed.
b. Occupational signs. Occupational signs denoting only the name and profession of the
occupant of a building or portion thereof, and not exceeding one square foot in area.
c. Tablets in building walls. Signs or tablets containing only names of buildings and/ or date
when the building was installed when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of
bronze or other incombustible materials.
SIGNS
30-10 REVISED 12/03/18
d. Traffic, Municipal signs and Emergency signs. Traffic or other municipal signs, legal
notices, railroad crossing signs, danger and such temporary emergency or non- advertising
signs designed for public safety or convenience as approved by the Village Manager.
Regulatory signs shall be installed in conformance with the current edition of the Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices as authorized by the Village Board of Trustees.
Ord. #01-054, # 10-001, # 18-045)
e. Window Signs. Window signs posted in public view shall not exceed 40% of the individual
window pane through which or on which they are seen. The window sign shall be contained
within the individual window. Window signs shall not be combined together to form larger
signs.
Within 45 days after the effective date of this Section, the Village shall notify each owner
with signage in violation of the requirements of this Section stating that their signage
violates this provision and that all non-conforming window signage existing on the
effective date of this Section shall be removed or made to conform within one year after
receiving notification. Any person who has received a notice of violation may appeal the
notice by filing a written notice of appeal to the Design Commission no later than 30 days
after the date of the notice. The Design Commission will review the appeal and their
recommendation will be forwarded to the Village Board of Trustees where the appeal may
be granted, denied or modified.
The following are design considerations for window signs: high quality graphics that
promote a cohesive and tasteful display are encouraged; carefully constructed artistic
signage is encouraged to brand the store and maintain the identity of the retail center; low
quality paper banners and vinyl stick- on lettering are discouraged; and window signs
placed on the exterior of the window are encouraged to be the thickness of one layer of
paint or film.
Ord. #04-059)
Section 30-104 Application for Sign Permit. Application for sign permit shall be made on forms
provided by the Building Department and shall contain or have attached thereto, the following
information:
a. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the person installing the sign.
b. Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or
installed upon.
Tablets can be installed on
a building to indicate the
name of the structure or
the date on which it was
installed. These are most
commonly carved in stone
or cast in bronze.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-11 REVISED 04/04/16
c. Position of the sign in relation to buildings or structures on the lot illustrating all necessary
dimensions upon a plat of survey.
d. Blue prints or ink drawings of the plans and specifications and methods of construction
and attachment to the building, other structure or in the ground.
1. The design and size, structural details, materials and colors, and placement on the
premises of a proposed sign or sign structure;
2. Current color photographs showing existing signs on the premises and adjacent
property, and the date on which said photographs were taken; and
3. Statement denoting the aggregate size of all signs existing on the premises at the
time of making such application.
e. As required by the Director of Building, a copy of stress sheets and calculations showing
that the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount
required by this and all other applicable provisions of this Chapter.
f. Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which or on which the
sign is to be installed, if the applicant is not the owner.
g. Any other information as the Director of Building shall require to show full compliance
with this Chapter.
Section 30-105 Illuminated Signs: Approval by Electrical Inspector. Acopy of the application
for a sign permit to install a sign in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used, shall
be submitted to the Electrical Inspector, who shall examine the plans and specifications to
determine if all wiring and connections comply with the applicable provisions of this Chapter. No
permit for a sign including electrical wiring and connections shall be issued without an electrical
permit.
Ord. #04-059, # 07-039)
Section 30-106 Issuance of Permit.
a. If the Directors of Planning and Community Development and Building determine from
the plans, specifications and other data submitted that the proposed sign will comply with
all applicable provisions of this Chapter, if a Certificate of Approval has been issued for
any sign in the Downtown District, and if the Electrical Inspector has approved any
electrical wiring or connections for the proposed sign, a sign permit shall be issued.
b. If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been completed within six months after
the date of issuance of the permit, the permit shall become null and void.
Ord. #02-018, # 16-044)
Section 30-107 Inspection. The Director of Building shall inspect annually, and at such other
times as he deems necessary, each sign which extends over or which can topple upon a pedestrian
or vehicular thoroughfare for the purpose of ascertaining whether the sign is secure or whether it
is in need of removal or repair.
Ord. #04-059, #16-044)
Section 30-108 Unsafe and Unlawful Signs. If the Director of Building finds that any sign is
SIGNS
REVISED 09/19/16
30-12
unsafe, not secure, or a menace to the public safety, or has been constructed or installed or
maintained in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, he or she shall give written notice to the
permittee. If the permittee fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with this Chapter within
20 days after receipt of the notice, the sign may be removed by the Director of Building at the
expense of the permittee or the owner of the property on which it is located. The Director of
Building may cause any sign which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be repaired or
removed summarily and without notice, at the expense of the permittee or the owner of the property
on which it is located. Any expenses for the repair or removal, if not paid within 30 days after the
Village has issued a statement therefor, shall be a lien upon the real property on which the sign is
or was located. Notice of the lien may be filed by the Village in the offices of the Cook County
Recorder or the Registrar of Titles. The Village is not responsible for the condition or storage of
signs removed after the 20-day notice period.
Ord. #04-059, # 16-044)
Section 30-109 Removal of Signs for Businesses No Longer on Premises. Any sign and its
support structure, now or hereafter existing, which advertises a business no longer being
conducted, or a product no longer being sold, shall be taken down and removed by the owner,
agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or premises upon which the
sign is found within 30 days of the discontinuance of the business on the premises. If the owner,
agent or person having the beneficial use of the subject premises fails to remove the sign and
support structure after written notification from the Director of Building, mailed by certified mail,
return receipt requested, within the time specified in the notice or such reasonable time to which
the period may be extended by the Director of Building, the Director is hereby authorized to cause
removal of such signs and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner, agent or person
having the beneficial use of the building, structure or premises to which such sign is attached. Any
expense not paid within 30 days after the Village has issued a statement therefor shall be a lien
upon the real property on which the sign was located. Notice of the lien may be filed in the offices
of the Cook County Recorder or the Registrar of Titles.
Ord. #04-059, # 16-044)
Section 30-110 Date of Installation and Voltage to be on Sign. Every sign shall have located
in a conspicuous place, in legible letters, the date of installation, and the voltage of any electrical
apparatus used in connection therewith. A compliance statement must be submitted to the
Department of Building within ten days of installation.
Ord. #16-044)
Section 30-111 Painting Required Every Two Years. The permittee of any sign shall, at least
every two years, paint all parts and supports of the sign, unless they are galvanized or otherwi se
treated to prevent rust or rotting. Painting is for maintenance purposes only and must be done in
compliance with the existing sign permit.
Ord. #16-044)
Section 30-112 Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirements. Any signs shall be designed
and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot of net
surface area and constructed to receive dead loads as required in the building provisions of this
Chapter.
Ord. #16-044)
Section 30-113 Face of Sign Shall be Smooth. All signs which are constructed less than five
feet from a pedestrian thoroughfare shall have no nails, tacks, wires or other hazardous projections,
except that electrical reflectors and devices may extend over the top and in front of such signs.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-13 REVISED 09/09/16
Ord. #16-044)
Section 30-114 Glass: Limitations. Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass.
Ord. #16-044)
Section 30-115 Reflectors, Spotlights, and Floodlights: Limitation and Prohibition.
a. Reflectors, spot lights, and flood lights shall be permitted on ground signs, and wall signs,
provided that the illumination shall concentrate upon the sign and shall be so shielded or
otherwise optically controlled so as to provide glare less illumination in such a manner as
not to create a nuisance on adjacent property or public right- of-way.
b. No sign, which extends over the public right- of-way shall be wholly or partially illuminated
by floodlights or spotlights, unless such lights are completely concealed from view from
the street level.
Ord. #04-059, # 16-044)
Section 30-116 Illumination: Hours of Operation. Illuminated signs located on a lot adjacent
to or immediately across the street from any residential district shall be turned off at all times
between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. that the business is not in operation, unless the
permittee shall show good cause to the Director of Building as to why the sign should not be turned
off.
Ord. #16-044)
Section 30-117 Illumination Standards for Signs Installed after March 1, 1982.
a. In no case shall the lighting intensity of any internally illuminated sign exceed 250 foot
candles when measured, flush and in contact with the face of the sign, with Weston foot
candle meter, model 614, or similar apparatus capable of making comparable
measurements.
Ord. #04-059)
b. Before a sign is illuminated for regular use, the sign shall be certified by the sign installer
to be in compliance with all provisions of this Chapter. Such written certification shall be
filed with the Director of Building within seven days after the sign is installed.
Ord. #16-044)
Section 30-118 Obstruction to Doors, Windows or Fire Escapes. No sign shall be installed,
relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to, or egress from, any door, window or fire
escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
Ord. #16-044)
Section 30-119 Signs Not to Constitute Hazard to Use of Pedestrian or Vehicular
Thoroughfare. No sign shall be installed or maintained in such a manner as to obstruct free and
clear vision, distract the attention of the driver of any vehicle by reason of the position, shape or
color thereof, or impede travel by pedestrians or bicyclists.
a. No sign shall be installed or maintained so as to be likely to interfere with, obstruct the
view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
b. No sign shall make use of the words " stop," " go," " look," " slow," " danger," or any other
similar word, phrase, symbol or character, or employ any red, yellow, orange, green or
other colored lamp or light in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
SIGNS
30-14 REVISED 09/19/16
c. A sign extending over a vehicular thoroughfare must have 12 feet of clearance. A sign
extending over a pedestrian thoroughfare must have eight feet of clearance.
12 feet of clearance must be provided under
signs where vehicles may pass.
8 feet of clearance must be provide under
and signs where pedestrians may pass.
Ord. #16-044)
Section 30-120 Prohibited Signs. The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or maintain any fluttering, undulating,
swinging, rotating or otherwise moving sign, any flashing sign or sign with moving or
rotating lights, or any sign creating the illusion of movement.
All flashing, moving, rotating
undulating, swinging or
blinking signs are strictly
prohibited in the Village.
b. It shall be unlawful to paint or cause to be painted, any sign, advertising, wording or symbol
on any wall, fence, canopy or any structure. Painted signs will be allowed only on the
surface of the sign face, which shall be separate from and removable from a wall.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 07/16/07
30-15
Signs painted on fences,
walls, canopies, or other
structures are strictly
prohibited in the Village. All
signs must be able to be
easily removed from the
surface to which they are
attached.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any sign on any public right- of-way, except as
may be specifically authorized by ordinance or allowed under permit issued by the Director
of Public Works. The Village Manager is authorized to have removed any sign installed
in violation of this Section and to store it for 30 days following written notice to the owner
of the sign, during which time it may be reclaimed by the owners. Any signs remaining
unclaimed after the expiration of the reclamation period may be disposed of at the
discretion of the Village Manager.
Ord. #07-043)
d. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or maintain any sign, which is attached to a
building or other structure and extends beyond the line of the building or structure or
beyond the surface of that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached by
more than 12 inches, with the exception of blade signs as permitted in the B-5 zoning
district.
e. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or maintain a roof sign.
All signs which are placed
upon or project above the roof
of a building, are strictly
prohibited in the Village.
SIGNS
30-16 REVISED10/ 18/04
f. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or maintain any sign advertising a business or
services, which is not located on the same property as the sign.
g. It shall be unlawful for any person to place a portable sign, as defined in this Chapter, on
any property within the Village of Arlington Heights.
h. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or trailer on a public right -of-way,
public property or private property, which has attached thereto or located thereon any sign
or advertising device for the basic purpose of providing advertisement of products or
services or directing people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property
or any other premises. This Section is not intended to prohibit signs placed on or affixed
to vehicles and trailers, where the sign is incidental to the primary use as a vehicle or trailer.
It is unlawful to park any vehicle or trailer, on public or private property, which contains signage
for the purpose of advertising a product or service or directing people to a business or activity.
i. No person shall place on or suspend from any building or structure, utility pole, street
lighting pole, fence, street sign, tree, ground or other devices, any goods, ware,
merchandise or other advertising object or structure designed to direct attention to a
location, product or event, other than a sign as defined and regulated by this Chapter.
All portable signs are
prohibited throughout
the Village.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-17 REVISED 12/03/18
j. It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign any obscene, indecent or
immoral matter.
Ord. #18-045)
k. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or to display around the perimeter of windows,
doors or similar building features, strings of LED (light emitting diode) lighting, neon tube
lighting, rope lighting, or other similar lighting if such lighting is visible from the public
right of way.
Within 45 days after the effective date of this Section, the Village shall notify each owner
with lighting in violation of the requirements of this Section stating that thei r lighting
violates this provision and that all perimeter lighting existing on the effective date of this
section shall be removed within one year after receiving notification. Any person who has
received a notice of violation may appeal the notice by filing a written notice of appeal to
the Design Commission no later than 30 days after the date of the notice. The Design
Commission will review the appeal and their recommendation will be forwarded to the
Village Board of Trustees where the appeal may be granted, denied or modified.
Ord. #16-044)
Section 30-121 Legal Non- Conforming Signs. A lawfully established sign, which becomes nonconforming
with respect to this Chapter on the effective date thereof or as a result of any
subsequent amendment thereto may remain except as provided in this Section. A sign illegal at
the time of the adoption of this ordinance shall not become a non-conforming sign by reason of
such adoption, but shall remain an illegal sign.
a. When the business or organization which the non- conforming sign serves is discontinued,
such sign shall be made to conform to the regulations of this Chapter or be removed.
b. When a sign or portion thereof, is non-conforming, it shall not be enlarged, added to, or
otherwise altered in any manner, except as may be required by law, unless it is made to
conform with the regulations of this Chapter.
c. Repairs necessary in the ordinary course of operation for a non-conforming sign shall be
permitted, except that no structural alterations shall be permitted, unless such structural
change is for the purpose of conforming with the regulations of this Chapter.
d. A non-conforming sign, which becomes damaged, destroyed, or deteriorates to the extent
of 50% or its replacement value shall be removed, not restored, unless it is made to conform
with the regulations of this Chapter.
e. A non-conforming sign shall not be moved in whole or part to any other location on the
lot, except as required by law, unless every portion of the sign has been made to conform
to all of the regulations of this Chapter.
All miscellaneous attention
getting devices like pennants,
character balloons and
spotlights are prohibited
by code.
SIGNS
30-18 REVISED 12/03/18
Article II Zoning Districts
The standards listed under each of the following sections pertain only to that zoning district.
Unless specifically regulated in this Article, the standards outlined in the rest of this Chapter
dealing with issues such as permitting, temporary signage, construction standards, safety
standards, variations, etc. apply to all signs, regardless of the zoning district.
Ord. #07-039, # 01-054, #04-059, # 07-039, # 18-045)
Section 30-201 Downtown ( B-5) District Sign Requirements. All requirements outlined in this
Section, pertain only to properties located within the limits of the B-5 Downtown District. All
signs to be installed in the Downtown District must also meet all other applicable requirements
outlined in this Chapter, such as construction, permits, maintenance, etc.
The boundaries of the Downtown District are indicated by a dashed line on the above map.
In the Downtown District, an application for a sign permit shall also be considered an application
for a Certificate of Approval. It shall be submitted to the Building Department and then forwarded
to the Department of Planning and Community Development for submission to Staff or the Design
Commission, as appropriate, for their review.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-19 REVISED 07/02/07
Upon receipt of a sign permit application for a sign, awning or canopy, the Director of the
Department of Planning and Community Development shall cause the application to be reviewed
by appropriate staff for compliance with all applicable regulations of this Chapter as well as the
applicable Design Guidelines. If it is determined by staff that the requested sign, awning or canopy
meets such regulations and guidelines, then the Director shall issue a Certificate of Approval and
send a copy to the Building Department.
If the requested sign, awning or canopy does not appear to meet such regulations and/or guidelines,
then the Director shall forward the application to the Design Commission. The Design
Commission shall hold public meetings and determine whether to issue a Certificate of Approval
for such signs.
a. The Commission, if requested by a prospective applicant, shall give preliminary
consideration to a specific project before a formal application is filed by providing
recommendations pertaining to the purpose and criteria of this Chapter as may be
appropriate to guide the prospective applicant in the development of a plan for signage.
They shall act in an advisory capacity only with regard to preliminary consideration.
b. The Commission, prior to making its decision, may make recommendations to the
applicant as to changes in the signage plans, which, in its judgment, would tend to
effectuate the general purpose of this Chapter.
c. The Commission shall hold a meeting as soon as practicable after receipt of an application.
The applicant may make a presentation at that meeting. Notice of meetings and agenda
items shall be posted on the Village’ s website.
d. After a review of the documents, applicable Code provisions and other information
provided by the applicant, the Commission shall make a determination as to whether to
grant a Certificate of Approval. If at least two of the members agree that a certificate
should be issued, the Commission shall issue a Certificate of Approval and send a copy to
the Director of Building. The Director shall not issue a sign permit for a sign in the B-5
Zoning District unless a Certificate of Approval has been issued or the time limits have
expired, as set forth below. If a majority of the members agree that a Certificate should
not be issued, the Commission shall send the Director and the applicant a notice that the
application has been denied containing the reasons for the denial.
e. The Commission may make recommendations for changes to the signage plan instead of
denying a Certificate of Approval. If recommendations are made, the applicant shall notify
the Commission in writing of the acceptance or rejection of the recommendations. If the
applicant accepts the recommendations, the Commission shall issue a Certificate and send
a copy to the Director of Building. If the applicant rejects the Commission’s
recommendations, the Commission shall send the Director and the applicant a notice that
the application has been denied containing the reasons for the denial.
f. Upon receipt of a notice of denial, the applicant may appeal the denial to the Village Board.
The Commission’ s notice of denial shall be forwarded to the Village Board.
g. All meetings may be continued, regardless of the time limits of the preceding subsection,
at the discretion of the Commission, with the consent of the applicant.
SIGNS
30-20 REVISED 10/18/04
h. The Commission shall consider the following guidelines, exhibits and sign code, when
reviewing applications for Certificates of Approval within the Downtown District:
1. Prohibited Signs: In addition to the signs in Section 30-121, the following signs
are also prohibited in the Downtown District:
a) Back lit awnings - awnings that have lights attached to the building or
awning behind them, so that the lights illuminate the awnings, except for
awnings over entrances with no more than 1-foot candle at the sidewalk;
b) Strings of light bulbs, flags, pennants, streamers and the like used other than
as traditional holiday decorations;
c) Marquees - unless in conjunction with a theater;
d) Exterior neon gas tube or similar types of illumination signs.
2. Design Standards
a) Materials: The major consideration in selecting sign materials is
compatibility with the building’ s overall architecture and compatibility with
adjacent buildings and the streetscape. The number of colors used in the
sign shall be limited. Sign lighting shall be restrained. Mat erials that
project a low quality, mass-produced image ( for example, product
sponsored signs) are prohibited.
The major consideration in selecting a sign is compatibility with the architecture of the building.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-21 REVISED 12/03/18
Ord. #18-045)
b) Message: Simplicity is the key to legibility and elegance. Bold, simple
lettering and recognized symbols are recommended. The words used on a
sign should be limited to the name of the business and other pertinent
information related to its operation, products produced or sold or service
rendered; signs should not be used for product advertising. On awnings,
lettering shall not project above or beyond the physical dimensions of the
awning; it shall not exceed 20% of the awning surface, and it shall only
denote name, address, products produced or sold or services rendered,
and/or logo of the business.
Signage on awning cannot project above
or beyond the physical dimension of the
awning and the sign shall not cover
more than 20% of the surface area.
Awnings should be compatible with the
architecture of the building.
3. Wall Signs:
a) Size: The size of each wall sign should be in proportion to the storefront
and the building facade as a whole. A ratio of one square foot of sign area
SIGNS
30-22 REVISED 12/03/18
or each linear foot of storefront shall determine the maximum signable area.
Over-size signs, which utilize the entire upper facade as a backdrop will not
be permitted.
b) Location: Wall signs fit best on the sign frieze, which separates the
storefront's display windows from the upper facade. Whenever possible,
the signs within a block face should be mounted at approximately the same
height to create a unifying horizontal element. The wall sign shall be
designed to be an integral part of the building on which it is mounted. Wall
signs shall be harmonious with adjacent signs and structures. No signs shall
be permitted to cover or interfere with architectural details or windows.
Ord. #07-043, # 18-045)
Wall signs above the second floor ceiling line are not permitted in the B-5
zoning district.
Ord. #18-045)
c) Number: Each business shall be permitted no more than one wall sign for
each street it fronts on.
Ord. #18-045)
4. Window Signs: Signs can also be placed on glass windows, with permanent signage
not to exceed 20% of the individual window pane through which or on which they
The size of a wall sign is determined by
the length of the store frontage. You
are permitted one square foot of
signage for each lineal feet of frontage.
Wall signs should be designed to be an
integral part of the building and should
never interfere with the architectural details
of the structure.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-23 REVISED 12/03/18
are seen. The window sign shall be contained within the individual window.
Window signs shall not be combined together to form larger signs. At no time shall
the total of temporary and permanent window signage exceed more than 40% of
the glass area.
Within 45 days after the effective date of this Section, the Village shall notify each
owner with signage in violation of the requirements of this Section stating that their
signage violates this provision and that all non-conforming window signage
existing on the effective date of this Section shall be removed or made to conform
within one year after receiving notification. Any person who has received a notice
of violation may appeal the notice by filing a written notice of appeal to the Design
Commission no later than 30 days after the date of the notice. The Design
Commission will review the appeal and their recommendation will be forwarded to
the Village Board of Trustees where the appeal may be granted, denied or modified.
The appropriate type and location of signage on a building is determined by the architecture.
Ord. #11-022)
5. Ground Signs: The following rules shall apply:
a) A ground sign is allowed only where the parcel size is 25,000 square feet or
greater; and
b) The parcel must have an area with a 20-foot setback for ground sign
placement; and
c) The area under the sign must be landscaped two feet out from the sign face,
or proportional amounts of landscaping on site, as may be approved by the
Director of Planning and Community Development; and,
SIGNS
30-24 REVISED 05/19/14
d) The ground sign shall not be taller than six feet and greater than 30 square
feet. In cases where the grade has been artificially raised such as through
berming or planters, the height of the artificial grade will be considered part
of the sign itself and therefore included in the calculation for the total height
of the sign.
Exception: for parcels located on Arlington Heights Road or Northwest
Highway that meet the requirements of Article III of this Chapter, the sign
shall be no taller than ten feet and no greater than 35 square feet.)
e) Ground signs for automobile service stations shall not be taller than ten feet
or larger than 35 square feet, and the price sign shall comprise no more than
50% of the actual sign area.
f) A ground sign in the downtown is encouraged to be designed to match the
architecture and detailing of the development or be in keeping with the
character of the downtown. A ground sign with a base of high quality
durable material is encouraged. Landscaping around the base of the sign is
encouraged to have year round color to be comprised of evergreens, drought
tolerant perennials and annuals.
Ord. #07-043, # 14-022)
6. Blade Signs.
a) Number. Each business shall be permitted no more than one blade sign for
each street it fronts on.
b) Location. Blade signs shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet
above a pedestrian thoroughfare and shall not be any higher than 15 feet
above the pedestrian thoroughfare. A two-sided blade sign is permitted to
be mounted perpendicular to the storefront.
c) Message. Only the name and/ or logo of the business and/ or the type of
business, is permitted on a blade sign.
d) Projection. Blade signs shall not project more than 40 inches maximum to
the outside face of the sign from the building, which shall include a four
inch minimum clearance between the inside face of the sign and the
building.
e) Square Footage. A maximum of six square feet shall be allowed.
f) Brackets. Brackets and/ or hardware for the sign may not extend more than
four inches from the outside face of the sign. Blade signs may be attached
to the building wall, or suspended from an awning or building overhang.
Hardware and brackets must be of permanent, professional construction.
Clothes hangers and other non- permanent means of attachment are not
permitted.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-25 REVISED 05/16/11
g) Design Considerations. Blade signs shall be a minimum of 1/8 inch
thickness, with dimensional graphics of a minimum of 1/8 inch thickness or
a substantial quality rigid material. Low quality vinyl letters will not be
permitted, however, computer generated, high quality letters will be
reviewed on a case- by-case basis. Hardware and brackets for the blade
signs shall match the storefront color or match the downtown site
furnishings. The overall sign shall be in harmony with the branding of the
store and maintain the identity and character of the downtown. External
illumination for signs is permitted, however, neon signs and internal
illumination are not allowed. Fixture and wattage shall be submitted for
review and approval and shall relate to the signage.
Ord. #11-022)
7. Corner Projecting Blade Signs.
a) To qualify for this type of sign, the building that the sign is to be mounted
on shall define the corner and have frontages on two public rights- of-way;
b) That the corner projecting blade sign shall only be for a single identity
tenant that is located on the corner;
c) The corner building shall have an entrance at or adjacent to the corner;
d) That a petitioner seeking this type of sign shall forego all other wall signs
on the building in exchange for the ability to have a 45 degree projecting
sign;
e) A ratio of one- half foot of sign area for each linear foot of storefront shall
determine the maximum signable area;
f) Each corner is only permitted one corner projecting blade sign;
g) An eight foot clearance needs to be maintained from the pedestrian
thoroughfare and shall not be higher than the top of the second story ceiling
line of the building or the roof top, whichever is lower;
h) Only the name or the logo is permitted;
i) The sign shall not project more than 48 inches maximum to the outside face;
j) That the design, alignments and amount of proportion for this type of sign
must be compatible with the architecture of the building. The sign shall be
of a high quality, durable material and construction;
k) The sign must be reviewed by the Design Commission.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-26 REVISED 05/19/14
Ord. #07-043, # 11-022)
8. Plaque Signs.
a) Number. Each business shall be permitted no more than two plaque signs
for each street it fronts on.
b) Location. A plaque sign shall be mounted flush at the base of a building or
on an architecturally significant area near the base of the building.
c) Message. Only the name and/or logo of the business is permitted on the
sign.
d) Square Footage. A maximum of one and one- half square feet is allowed
per sign.
e) Design Considerations. Plaque signs shall be a minimum of 1/8 inch
thickness, with dimensional graphics of a minimum of a 1/4 inch thickness.
Low quality vinyl letters shall not be permitted, however, computer
generated, high quality letters will be reviewed on a case- by-case basis.
Hardware and brackets for the blade signs shall match the storefront color
or match the downtown site furnishings. The overall sign shall be in
harmony with the branding of the store and maintain the identity and
character of the downtown.
Ord. #07-043, # 10-001, # 11-022, # 14-022)
9. Each business shall be allowed only two of the following four types of signs:
a) wall sign;
b) awning sign;
c) blade sign;
d) plaque sign;
Each business shall be allowed to display at one time, only one of the two types of
signs:
e) sandwich board sign;
For corner projecting blade signs, the square footage
allowed would be 50% of the linear feet of the storefront,
for example: x + y = square footage of corner projecting
2 blade sign.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-27 REVISED 05/19/14
f) removable hanging sign.
Ord. #10-001, # 11-022)
10. Menu Board. Each restaurant is permitted to have one menu board. A menu board
may be no larger than six square feet, may be internally illuminated, and must be
mounted on a wall near the main entrance of the restaurant. A menu board may not
be freestanding.
Ord. # 04-078, # 07-043, #11-022)
11. Civic Events Sign. May be no taller than ten feet or larger than 78 square feet. It
must be located in a fully landscaped area with a minimum ten foot setback.
Ord. #14-022)
12. Sandwich Board Sign/ Sculptural Sandwich Board Sign. The following provisions
pertain to Sandwich Board and Sculptural Sandwich Board signs.
a) Number. Each business shall be permitted one sandwich board sign per
street frontage or per entry.
b) Size:
i. The signage area shall be a maximum of six square feet on each face
of the sign.
ii. The overall sign size shall not exceed 27” wide and 42” tall.
iii. Sculptural sandwich board signs shall not exceed six feet in height
and three feet in width. The signage area shall not exceed 27” wide,
42” tall, and six square feet on each face of the sign. Design
Commission approval is required for all sculptural sandwich board
signs.
c) Location:
i. Sandwich board signs shall only be located on sidewalks contiguous
to the business being advertised. They shall not extend beyond the
length of the business frontage.
ii. In no event shall the sandwich board sign reduce the open portion of
the public sidewalk to less than five feet clear of all obstructions
i.e., street lighting, benches, trees, trash receptacles, etc.).
d) Message:
i. The message on a sandwich board sign may include the name of the
business, products produced or services rendered, and other
pertinent information related to the business’ operation. The
business name shall be limited to 33% of the overall sign area.
ii. Professionally printed, computer generated messages are allowed.
iii. Hand written messages are allowed if in a neat and legible manner
on a dark color background.
SIGNS
30-28 REVISED 05/19/14
iv. White erasable boards are not allowed.
v. Manual change bulletin board signs are not allowed.
e) Construction:
i. Sandwich board signs must be free standing and constructed of
wood or metal, or similar appropriate material as approved by
Village staff.
ii. Pre- engineered plastic sandwich board signs are discouraged.
iii. Decorative sandwich board signs which complement the business
type or building architecture are encouraged.
iv. Signs must be weighted in order to ensure that they do not fall into
the public way. Signs must be maintained in an upright position at
all times.
v. Signs are not allowed to be illuminated.
f) Hours of Display.
i. Sandwich board signs may only be displayed during open business
hours.
ii. Sandwich board signs are not permitted on a public sidewalk during
times of snow and inclement weather.
g) Liability. All applicants are required to complete a hold
harmless/indemnification agreement.
Ord. #14-022)
13. Removable Hanging Signs.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-29 REVISED 05/19/14
a) Number: Each business shall be permitted no more than one removable
hanging sign.
b) Location:
i. Removable hanging signs shall maintain a minimum clearance of
four feet above a pedestrian thoroughfare and shall not be higher
than 15 feet above the pedestrian thoroughfare;
ii. Mounting brackets and flag poles must maintain a minimum
clearance of seven feet above the pedestrian thoroughfare.
c) Size: Removable hanging signs can be no larger than three square feet.
d) Projection:
i. Removable hanging signs shall not project more than 24 inches from
the building to the outside face of the sign.
ii. Brackets and/ or flag poles shall not extend more than four inches
beyond the edge of the sign.
e) Message: The name of the business, logo of the business, type of business,
seasonable décor, and/ or “ OPEN” shall be permitted on a removable
hanging sign.
f) Materials/ Design Considerations:
i. Removable hanging signs must be made of a weather- resistant and
fade-resistant fabric.
ii. Mounting brackets shall be permanently mounted to the building,
with the hanging sign being removable, such as a flag pole and
mounting bracket.
iii. Clothes hangers and other similar means of attachment are not
permitted.
g) Hours of Display:
i. Removable hanging signs may only be displayed during open
business hours.
ii. Removable hanging signs must be removed during times of windy
and inclement weather.
h) Liability. All applicants are required to complete a hold
harmless/indemnification agreement.
SIGNS
30-30 REVISED 12/03/18
Section 30-202 Office Transitional ( O-T) & Office Research ( O-R) District Signage
Provisions. Only the following signs are permitted in O-T & O-R Districts. All requirements and
restrictions outlined in this Section, pertain only to properties zoned O-T or O-R.
a. Only one freestanding monument sign shall be permitted for each Planned Unit
Development. The size of the sign shall be a maximum of 24 square feet unless located on
a roadway with a speed of 40 miles per hour or greater in which case the size of the sign
shall not exceed 48 square feet in area. All freestanding signs must be designed to be
compatible with the architectural style of the development.
Ground signs for O-T
Districts should be low key
and compatible with the
architecture of the
building.
b. Signs shall not exceed seven feet above the level of the adjacent grade. In cases where the
grade has been artificially raised through berming or planters, the height of the grade will
be considered part of the sign itself, and, therefore, included in the calculation for the total
height of the sign.
c. One nameplate, per occupant, a maximum of one square foot, is permitted to identify
entrances in multiple tenant buildings. No more than six nameplates shall be permitted at
any entrance.
Ord. #16-006, #04-059, #10-001, #18-045)
Section 30-203 Residential (R) Districts Signage Provisions. Only the following signs are
permitted in Residential Districts. All requirements and restrictions outlined in this Section pertain
only to those properties zoned Residential.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-31 REVISED 12/03/18
a. For each dwelling unit, one name plate not exceeding one square foot in area, indicating
the name of occupant.
b. Ground signs accessory to a permitted non-residential use, provided that the height of such
sign shall not exceed six feet and the surface area of such sign shall not exceed 25 square
feet. Signs located on a roadway with a speed limit of 40 miles per hour or greater may be
up to 48 square feet in area. A manual change bulletin board may be incorporated as part
of the ground sign, but the bulletin board may not exceed 75% of the permitted sign size
or 30 square feet, whichever is less. The area of the manual change bulletin board shall
not increase the overall permitted sign size. All signs must be designed to be compatible
with the architectural style of the development. Refer to Article III of this Chapter for
additional requirements for ground signs.
c. Wall signs accessory to a permitted non-residential use, provided that the size of such sign
shall not exceed 25% of the signable area or a maximum of 45 square feet, which ever is
less. One wall sign is permitted per street frontage. One additional wall sign, 20 square feet
maximum, shall be permitted at a main building entrance which does not have street
frontage. Total number of wall signs shall not exceed three. All signs shall be comprised
of separate individual letters with or without a logo or emblem, and must be designed to be
compatible with the architectural style of the development. Internal illumination is
prohibited but external illumination is permitted. For purposes of this Section, backlit halo
type, reverse channel lighting is not considered internal illumination. Refer to Article IV,
Sections 30-401 and Sections 30-404 for additional applicable requirements.
d. Signs or tablets, a maximum of one square foot, bearing names of buildings and/or date of
the building’ s installation, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of
bronze or other incombustible material.
e. Real estate signs, not exceeding eight square feet in area, per face, which advertise the sale,
rental, lease or management of the premises upon which the signs are located.
f. Traffic and directional signs, and such other non- advertising signs designed for the public
safety and convenience, as may be authorized by the Board of Trustees.
g. Signs accessory to parking areas. Signs directing and guiding vehicular ingress and egress
to public or private off-street parking areas shall not exceed two square feet in sign surface
area.
No more than two such signs shall be allowed at each entrance to or exit from the parking
area. One sign having no more than six square feet of surface area may be maintained on
each street side of such parking areas for the purpose of designating the conditions of use
or identity of the parking area. Signs accessory to parking areas must be set back at least
three feet from the public right- of-way and shall be located so as not to obstruct the view
of either drivers or pedestrians.
h. Development identification signs which display the name of the project shall be permitted.
Permanent ornamental signs or entry gates shall be permitted only at one point of ingress
to the development from each adjacent street, with one sign on each side of the point of
ingress being allowed. Such signs shall be limited to the name of the subdivision or
development and shall be no more than 25 square feet in area and six feet in height.
SIGNS
30-32 REVISED 04/04/16
i. Temporary Signs for real estate, construction, or subdivisions, when installed in
accordance with Article VI of this Chapter.
Section 30-204 Business (B) and Manufacturing (M) District Signage Provisions . Only the
following signs are permitted in a Business ( B) or Manufacturing ( M) Districts. All requirements
and restrictions outlined in this section, pertain only to properties zoned for Business or
Manufacturing.
a. Any wall, ground, banner, directional, temporary sign or other advertising structure which
identifies the occupant of a building or buildings, or which pertains to a use within the
buildings or upon the premises, provided that the sign complies with that section of this
Chapter pertaining to that type of sign.
Section 30-205 Institutional (I) Districts Signage Provisions. All requirements and restrictions
outlined in this Section, pertain only to properties zoned Institutional. Only the following signs
are permitted within Institutional Districts.
a. Any wall, ground, directional, temporary sign or other advertising structure which
identifies the occupant of a building or buildings, or which pertains to a use within the
buildings or upon the premises, provided that the sign complies with that section of this
Chapter pertaining to that type of sign.
Section 30-206 Public Lands ( P-L) Districts Signage Provisions. Only the following signs are
permitted within and Public Lands Districts.
a. All signs permitted in a Residential District.
Development identification signs should
be decorative features which help improve
the aesthetics of the entrance to a property.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 01/04/10
30-33
Section 30-207 Automobile Service Stations Standards. For automobile service stations, only
the following permanent business and identification signs are permitted, subject to the
requirements of this Chapter. The total surface area of signage added together including ground,
wall and canopy, shall not exceed 240 square feet for single frontage stations or 320 square feet
for corner stations.
a. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs are permitted only as outlined in the Article VI of this
Chapter.
Ord. #10-001)
b. Ground Sign. One ground sign ( double sided) for each principle building, mounted on a
pole or other supporting structure not exceeding 16'6" in height and 80 square feet in area.
The sign may consist of the oil company name, logo, and a manual change bulletin board
for the advertising of services or products and electronic or manual change price
information. In no instance, shall the gasoline portion of the sign comprise more than 50
percent of the sign area and/or the manual changeable copy portion of the sign comprise
more than 20 percent of the sign area. A second ground sign, in accordance with the above
provisions, will be permitted on a corner lot of two arterial roads, provided the two ground
signs are separated by a minimum distance of 250 feet as measured along the right- of-way
line.
Service station ground
signs should combine
the company name and
logo the gasoline
prices in a unified
aesthetically pleasing
manner.
c. Wall Sign. One wall sign per street frontage, no larger than 25% of the signable area or
150 square feet, whichever is less.
Signs to be placed on public
land near a residential area
should be low key and
compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood.
SIGNS
30-34 REVISED 04/04/16
d. Canopy Sign. Signs attached to the vertical fascia of a canopy can only consist of the name
or logo of the oil company and shall not exceed 25%of the signable area.
The above photo is an example of excessive service station signage strictly prohibited in the
Village.
Ord. #16-006)
Section 30-208 Drive- through Restaurant Signage.
a. General Provisions.
1. Dimensions. No drive- through sign shall exceed seven feet in overall height.
2. Message. Drive- through signs may only feature products sold on the premises.
3. Advertising. No additional advertising or attachments shall be permitted on the
digital order screen, drive-through menu boards and pre-sell menu boards, speaker
bollard, canopies, clearance bar or exterior of the structure.
4. Location.
a. All drive- through signage may only be located along approved and
operating drive-through lanes.
b. Speaker bollards, menu boards, pre-sell menu boards and digital order
screens shall be located 15 feet minimum from any residential property line.
c. Drive through menu boards, pre- sell menu boards and digital order screens,
shall be located in the side or rear yards, away from the primary street
frontage.
d. Drive- through menu boards, pre- sell menu boards and digital order screens
shall not be oriented towards the public right-of-way.
e. All directional signage located within the drive-through facility shall
comply with Chapter 30, Article III, Section 30-302b.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-35 REVISED 04/04/16
5. Illumination. Signs may be internally or externally lit but the light shall be
contained to the drive-through lane only, and in accordance with Sections 30-117
and 30-118 of this Code.
6. Landscaping. All free standing signs shall be located within a landscaped area,
separated from and protected from vehicular circulation or parking areas.
b. Drive-through Menu Boards.
1. Number. One drive-through menu board is allowed per drive-through lane.
2. Dimensions. Drive-through menu boards shall not exceed 49 square feet in size.
3. Digital Order Screens. Drive-through menu boards may include a digital order
screen that complies with the regulations outlined in Section 30-208d of this Code.
c. Drive- through Pre- sell Menu Boards.
1. Number. One drive- through pre- sell menu board is allowed per drive- through lane.
2. Dimensions. Drive- through pre- sell menu boards shall not exceed 24 square feet
in size.
3. Location. Drive-through pre-sell menu boards should be located in close proximity
to the drive- through menu board.
d. Drive- through Digital Order Screens.
1. Number. One digital order screen display is allowed per drive- through lane.
2. Dimensions. Digital Order screens shall not exceed two square feet in size.
3. Display. When not engaged, the digital order screen shall have a non -glare,
unobtrusive static display.
e. Other allowed drive-through structures.
1. Speaker Bollard: One speaker bollard is allowed per drive-through lane. The
speaker bollard may include a digital order screen. No business or product signage
shall be permitted on the speaker exterior. The sound from the speaker shall not be
audible at or beyond the property line, and the speaker shall be equipped with an
adjustable volume control.
2. Clearance Bar: One clearance bar structure is allowed per drive-through lane. A
clearance bar shall not include business or product signage and shall be of a simple
design that complements the building design and signage.
3. Canopy: One canopy is allowed per drive-through lane and shall not display
business or product signage or additional advertising. Canopies shall be of a simple
design that complements the building design and signage.
SIGNS
30-36 REVISED 07/02/07
Article III Ground Signs
Section 30-301 Location.
a. No ground sign, except for those permitted in Article II of this Chapter, shall be installed
in any zoning district.
Ord. #07-039)
b. No ground sign shall be nearer a public right- of-way than the following:
Commercial B-1 - B-4 3 feet
Downtown B-5 3 feet
Manufacturing M-1 & M-2 15 feet
Institutional I 15 feet
Office Transitional O-T & O-R 15 feet
Public Lands P-L 15 feet
Residential R 15 feet
c. If a ground sign is to be placed within 12 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines
on a corner lot, it must allow for proper visibility into the intersection. Therefore, a sign
must have open space from three feet from grade to ten feet from grade.
Sign placed within twelve feet of an
intersection must provide for proper
visibility.
The area three feet to ten feet from grade
must remain unobstructed.
d. No ground sign shall be closer than six feet from any building or other structure.
e. The area under a ground sign must be landscaped a minimum of two feet out from the
signs’ base.
f. Monument signs are ground signs displayed on a decorative wall or structure, which does
not exceed six feet in height. If the proposed monument sign conforms with the height
standards and does not obstruct visibility, it will be exempt from the setback requirements
of this Section. Only that area designated for signage and not the decorative structure will
be factored into the square footage of the sign.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-37 REVISED 10/18/04
Monument signs are low ground
signs used to enhance the
entrances to a property.
Section 30-302 Number.
a. No more than one ground sign shall be installed per frontage of a building or buildings,
which share a common wall. If a building has more than one frontage, an additional ground
sign may be permitted, provided that there is a minimum of 800 feet of separation between
the ground signs as measured along the right-of-way line. If a building is located on a
through lot, it will be permitted one ground sign on each frontage, provided that there is a
minimum of 600 feet of separation between the signs.
b. A directional ground sign, indicating the location of the parking area as well as the sponsor,
shall be limited to one sign per parking entry drive. This sign shall be no taller than three
feet and no larger than six square feet, placed in a landscaped area, and in no way obstruct
the vision of drivers.
Corner lots may have a second ground sign,
provided that there is a minimum separation
of 800 lineal feet.
Through lots may have a second ground
sign, provided that there is a minimum of
600 lineal feet of separation between them.
SIGNS
REVISED 04/04/16
30-38
Prohibited Directional Sign Permitted Directional Sign
Section 30-303 Dimensions.
a. No ground sign shall have a height more than 16 feet 6 inches above the level of the
adjacent grades on which the sign is located and upon which the sign faces; in cases
wherethe grade has been artificially raised through berming or planters, that height will be
considered part of the sign itself and, therefore, included in the calculation for the total
height of the sign.
b. Ground signs supported above the ground level in an area where pedestrians may
reasonably be expected to pass beneath or within two feet shall have no less than eight feet
of open space between the ground and bottom of the sign and if vehicles may reasonably
be expected to pass beneath or within two feet, the sign shall have no less than 12 feet of
open space between the ground and the bottom of the sign structure.
c. Except for signs regulated by zoning district in Article II, the maximum allowable area of
a ground sign is determined on the basis of the width and posted speed limit of the public
right- of-way abutting the property on which the sign is located as set forth in TABLE A.
TABLE A
POSTED SPEED LIMIT
WIDTH OF PUBLIC
RIGHT- OF-WAY
35 MILES PER HOUR OR
LESS
OVER 35 MILES PER
HOUR
UP TO 66 FEET 40 SQ. FT. TOTAL SIGN
AREA PER FACE
60 SQ. FT. TOTAL SIGN
AREA PER FACE
OVER 66 FEET 66 SQ. FT. TOTAL SIGN
AREA PER FACE
80 SQ. FT. TOTAL SIGN
AREA PER FACE
Section 30-304 Construction. All ground signs shall have a facing of incombustible or approved
combustible material; provided, however, that combustible structural trim may be used thereon.
Ord. #16-006, #10-001)
Section 30-305 Manual Change Bulletin Boards.
a. The manual change bulletin board shall be incorporated into a ground sign or monument sign
as the lower portion of the overall sign. In no instance shall the manual change bulletin board
portion of the sign comprise more than 50% of the sign area. Messages on manual change
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-39 REVISED 10/18/04
bulletin boards and changeable printed panels shall be limited to information related to the
business operation, products produced or sold or service rendered on-site. No off premises
advertising is permitted.
b. The following are design considerations for these signs: high quality sign that is attractive and
contributes to the sign and overall character of the corridor; overall legibility of text and
cohesiveness to the overall sign should be considered; consider using one consistent font color
and type that creates a high contrast against the background or field area; the font should create
a legible message; and it is preferred that the text be balanced, either centered, or right or left
justified.
Article IV Wall Signs
Section 30-401 Location.
a. No wall sign, except for those permitted in Article II of this Chapter, shall be erected
installed in any zoning district.
Each business establishment is permitted one wall sign per street frontage
b. No sign shall cover wholly or partially any opening, nor project beyond the ends or top of
the wall to which it is attached.
c. No sign shall extend more than 12 inches beyond the wall or structure to which it is
attached, and if attached to a wall or other structure so as to be suspended above a vehicular
thoroughfare, such sign shall be attached at a height of not less than 12 feet or if
it is suspended above a pedestrian thoroughfare, such sign shall be attached at a height of
not less than eight feet.
SIGNS
30-40 REVISED 12/03/18
Ord. #04-059, # 18-045)
Section 30-402 Number.
a. Each business establishment shall be permitted one wall sign per street frontage it faces,
provided, however, that an additional wall sign shall be permitted on an additional wall
which fronts on a privately-owned parking area for a building which serves more than one
establishment.
b. Multi- story buildings. For multi- story buildings with a shared common entrance, only one
wall sign is allowed at the top of the building per building per street frontage. A business
establishment located on the ground floor of a multi- story building that has a separate
dedicated main entrance (not a shared common entrance) shall be permitted one wall sign
per street frontage. That wall sign must be mounted directly above/ adjacent to their ground
floor space, and an additional wall sign shall be permitted on an additional wall which
fronts on a privately- owned parking area for a building which serves more than one
establishment. No business shall be permitted more than two wall signs.
Section 30-403 Dimensions.
a. A wall sign to be installed on a wall with openings shall be no larger than 25% of the total
signable area, or a maximum of 150 square feet, whichever is less. If the building wall that
the sign is to be installed on is setback from the right- of-way more than 150 feet, the
petitioner shall be allowed one additional square foot of signage for each lineal foot beyond
the 150 foot setback, but in no instance shall the sign exceed 25% of the signable area.
If a building is setback from the property line more than 150 feet, the wall sign is permitted to be
one square foot larger for each foot of setback beyond 150 feet, but in no instance can the sign
exceed 25% of the signable area.
b. A second wall sign displayed adjacent to a parking lot serving that building shall be no
larger than 25% of the total signable area, or 60 square feet, whichever is less.
c. A wall sign displayed on a wall without openings shall be no larger than 15% of the total
area of the wall on which the sign is displayed or 150 square feet, whichever is less. If the
building wall that the sign is to be installed on is setback from the right- of-way more than
150 feet, the petitioner shall be allowed one additional square foot of signage for each lineal
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-41 REVISED 04/04/16
foot beyond the 150 foot setback, but in no instance shall the sign exceed 15% of the
signable area.
d. Directional wall signs, indicating the location of a parking area, shall be limited to one sign
per parking lot. They shall be no more than six square feet must be attached directly to a
wall surface of the building behind or adjacent to the parking area.
e. A wall sign placed on a mansard facade shall be no larger than 25% of the total signable
area or 150 square feet, whichever is less. In no instance shall the sign project above the
mansard facade. If the mansard facade that the sign is to be installed on is setback from
the right- of-way more than 150 feet, the petitioner shall be allowed one additional square
foot of signage for each lineal foot beyond the 150 foot setback, but in no instance shall
the sign exceed 25% of the signable area.
Section 30-404 Construction.
a. All wall signs shall have facing of noncombustible or approved combustible material.
b. All wall signs of solid face construction shall be safely and securely attached to the building
wall by means of metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws of not less than 3/8 inch in
diameter embedded in the wall at least five inches; provided, however, that such signs may
rest in or be bolted to strong, heavy metal brackets or saddles set not over six feet apart,
each of which shall be securely fixed to the wall as hereinbefore provided. In no case shall
any wall sign be secured with wire, strips of wood or nails.
Ord. #16-006, #10-001)
Section 30-405 Manual Change Bulletin Boards.
a. The manual change bulletin board shall be incorporated into a wall sign as a portion of the
overall wall sign. In no instance shall the manual change bulletin board portion of the sign
comprise more than 50% of the sign area, or exceed a maximum of 30 square feet, whichever
is less. Messages on manual change bulletin boards and changeable printed panels shall be
limited to information related to the business operation, products produced or sold or service
rendered on-site. No off premises advertising is permitted.
b. The following are design considerations for these signs: high quality sign that is attractive and
contributes to the sign and overall character of the corridor; overall legibility of text and
cohesiveness to the overall sign should be considered; consider using one consistent font color
and type that creates a high contrast against the background or field area; the font should create
a legible message; and it is preferred that the text be balanced, either centered, or right or left
justified.
Article V Banners
Section 30-501 Location and Dimensions
Ord. #01-054)
a. Banners are only permitted in the B-1, B-2 and B-3, B-4 and B-5 zoning districts and only
for developments classified as a shopping center or planned unit development.
SIGNS
30-42 REVISED 11/05/01
b. A banner may only be displayed on a light pole and may not extend higher than that pole.
The lower bracket used to display the banner must be installed at a height of at least eight
feet if in an area where pedestrians may reasonably be expected to pass under or within
two feet of, or 12 feet if it is an area where vehicles will pass under or within two feet of.
Banners must be mounted to allow a minimum of 12 feet clearance over vehicular thoroughfares
and eight feet over pedestrian thoroughfares.
Ord. #01-054)
c. Banners shall only be displayed on privately owned light standards ( poles) located in the
parking lots, plazas or along the driveways of the center. In no instance shall a banner be
installed closer than three feet from the property line or extended between two poles.
d. Display brackets must be removed when not in use or folded against the pole.
Section 30-502 Number.
a. Each individual banner shall be considered a single banner for purposes of this Chapter.
Two banners displayed on a single light standard shall be considered two banners. No
more than two banners shall be displayed on a single light pole and in no instance shall a
banner be installed closer than 100 feet from any other pole on which a banner is mounted.
b. Banners may not exceed 21 square feet per face and shall have no more than two sign faces.
Only the area of the actual banner itself shall be counted in determining the area of the sign
face.
Section 30-503 Signage. Banners of the type permitted by this Chapter may display the name
and/ or logo of the Center, the address or location of the Center, seasonal messages or graphics,
and information announcing Village wide events. Not more than 25% of the area of the banner
face may display the name or logo of the Center; however, in no instance may the banner be used
to display the name, logo, or specific promotion of an individual business within the Center.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-43
Banners which advertise a specific store's sales or event are strictly prohibited in the Village.
Section 30-504 Permits and Inspections.
a. An annual sign permit shall be required for the installation of banners. During that oneyear
period, the petitioner may rotate or change the banners as often as desired, provided
that they are installed and constructed in accordance with this Chapter.
b. Banners which display a seasonal message or event must be removed within 30 days after
the passing of the event or season. When not in use, the permittee shall remove the brackets
or fold the brackets against the pole.
c. All banners must be maintained in a safe and aesthetically pleasing condition. Banners,
which become illegible, or are damaged or otherwise are in poor condition, must be
removed. The Director of Building shall notify the permittee of the violation and the
banner shall be replaced or repaired as necessary. If, within 15 days, the violation has not
been repaired, the Director shall revoke the permit for said sign.
Article VI Temporary Signs
Section 30-601 Temporary Signs. Temporary Signs may be posted on property in all zoning
districts of the Village, subject to the following requirements and those applicable provisions stated
elsewhere in this Chapter.
a. The total square footage for temporary signs posted on a single-family lot in an R district
shall not exceed eight square feet. The total square footage for temporary signs posted on
a lot in any other district, in the aggregate, shall not exceed 64 square feet, with no
individual sign exceeding 32 square feet. The total square footage for temporary signs
posted on a development site in an R district shall not exceed 32 square feet, with no
individual sign exceeding 16 square feet.
b. No temporary sign shall obstruct or impair access to a public sidewalk, public or private
street or driveway, traffic control sign, bus stop, fire hydrant, or any other type of street
furniture, or otherwise create a hazard, including a tripping hazard.
c. A temporary sign shall be designed to be stable under all weather conditions, including
SIGNS
30-44 REVISED 11/20/17
high winds.
d. No temporary sign shall be illuminated or painted with light- reflecting paint.
e. A temporary sign shall only be posted with the consent of the property owner or occupant.
f. A temporary sign shall not advertise or promote any commercial enterprise or event not
conducted on the same lot.
g. Temporary signs shall not be posted on trees, utility poles, fences and any other structures
within the rights- of-way.
Ord. #04-059)
Section 30-602 Authorization Required for Posting of Temporary Signs in the Public Rightsof-
Way. Temporary signs shall not be posted in the public rights- of-way without first obtaining a
permit from the Director of Building.
Section 30-603 Removal Requirements for Temporary Signs. All other temporary signs,
including those announcing garage sales and special events to occur on one or more particular
dates, shall be removed within seven days of the conclusion of the sale or event that the sign is
promoting. For real estate signs, the determining event shall be the closing on the sale of the
property.
Section 30-604 Removal of Signs.
a. The person who has posted or directed the posting of a temporary sign is responsible for
the removal of that sign in accordance with this Chapter.
b. If that person does not remove the temporary sign in accordance with this Article, then the
property owner or occupant of the building lot where the sign is posted is responsible for
the sign’ s removal.
c. The Village Manager or designee is authorized to remove any temporary signs posted in
violation of this Article. Such signs shall be deemed a public nuisance and the Village
Manager or designee may abate that nuisance in accordance with the nuisance abatement
procedures of Chapter 19 of the Municipal Code.
d. The Village Manager or designee may immediately remove temporary signs posted on
public property or rights- of-way in violation of this Article and file a civil complaint
against the person who posted the sign to recover the cost of removing the sign.
Ord. #17-042)
Article VII Electronic Message Signs
Section 30-701 Electronic Message Signs. Electronic Message Signs may be permitted but only
in designated major arterial commercial corridors as identified in the maps attached at the end of
this Article and in accordance with the regulations set forth in this Article.
Section 30-702 Conditional Review Process and Criteria. All applications for an Electronic
Message Sign shall be submitted to the Design Commission for review. The Design Commission
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-45 REVISED 11/20/17
shall hold public meetings to evaluate whether the proposed Electronic Message Sign meets the
criteria set forth below. The Design Commission shall make a recommendation which will be
forwarded to the Village Board of Trustees, where the request may be granted, denied or modified.
a. The Electronic Message Sign will not create a traffic hazard or demonstrable negative
impact on nearby properties or be detrimental to the safety of persons residing or working
in the vicinity; and
b. The Electronic Message Sign will serve the best interests of the Village, and will be
desirable for the public convenience; and
c. The design of the Electronic Message Sign is compatible with the essential character of the
locality, such as the sign enclosure, materials and scale; and
d. The business demonstrates a valid need for an Electronic Message Sign. The business must
explain how the sign will be used, and why their business needs an Electronic Message
Sign.
Section 30-703 Applications.
a. All applications for Electronic Message Signs shall be submitted to and reviewed by the
Design Commission.
b. With the application, the Petitioner must submit one copy of the following information to
the Department of Planning and Community Development along with electronic pdf files:
1. A letter requesting the Electronic Message Sign stating the criteria for which an
Electronic Message Sign must comply and how the proposal meets those;
2. Plat of Survey;
3. A detailed site plan including building locations, driveways, yards, setbacks, the
proposed sign location and any existing signage with dimensions;
4. Color photographs of subject property and surrounding properties including
existing ground signs;
5. Detailed drawings of the proposed sign, fully dimensioned and drawn to scale,
including fully dimensioned scaled drawings and photographs of all existing
signage;
6. Manufacturer’ s product data and specifications for the Electronic Message Sign,
including written certification verifying auto- dimming function set to . 3
footcandles maximum above ambient lighting conditions;
7. Written list of all sign materials;
8. Samples of major sign materials including colors, textures and finishes being
proposed;
SIGNS
30-46 REVISED 11/20/17
9. At least three full color representative images illustrating the types of
advertisements to be displayed on the sign;
10. Landscape Plan indicating the proposed landscaping located a minimum of two feet
out from the sign base. The plan must be drawn to scale and list the species,
quantity, and size of the proposed plant materials;
A copy of the recommendation of the Design Commission will be forwarded to the Village
Board.
Section 30-704 Notification Requirements.
a. An applicant for an Electronic Message Sign shall serve written notice, either in person, by
certified mail, or by similar delivery service which provides proof of service, on the last
known taxpayers and/ or property owners of record as reflected in the county records, of all
property within 250 feet in each direction of the property lines of the subject property for
which approval of an Electronic Message Sign is being requested; provided the number of
feet occupied by all public roads, alleys and other public ways shall be excluded in
computing the 250 feet. Such notice must be served not less than seven days and not more
than 30 days prior to the date set for the meeting of the Design Commission to review the
request for an Electronic Message Sign. If any part of a condominium property is located
within this distance, written notification shall be made to the condominium association. If
no such association exists, the applicant must notify each individual taxpayer of record in
the condominium property. If, after a bona fide effort to determine such by the applicant,
the owner of the property on which the notice is to be served cannot be found, the notice
requirements of this Section shall be deemed satisfied.
The required notices shall contain the address of the location for which the Electronic
Message Sign is requested, a brief statement of the nature of the request, the name and
address of the legal and beneficial owner of the property, and time and date on which the
meeting shall be held. Not less than one day prior to the meeting date, the applicant shall
furnish a written statement certifying that he or she has complied with the requirements of
this subsection. Attached to the written statement shall be a list of all property owners
notified in accordance with the above, the receipts of the certified mail or the signatures of
the property owners acknowledging the personal visit of the applicant, the returned notices
which were undeliverable by the post office, along with a copy of the notice sent to each
of the individuals therein specified.
b. Not less than 15 days prior to the date of the Design Commission meeting at which the
request for an Electronic Message Sign is to be discussed, the Applicant shall post a
readable sign on the site where the Electronic Message Sign is intended to go. The Notice
sign must be posted on private property adjacent to the roadway. This sign must be removed
no later than ten days after completion of the final meeting. The required sign shall contain
the current action requested, the date, time, and place where the meeting shall be held, a
statement that further information can be obtained from the applicant and the Planning
Department of the Village of Arlington Heights. The words " NOTICE OF PUBLIC
MEETING" must appear at the top of the sign in letters no smaller than 1.5 inches. All
costs associated with the sign are to be borne by the Petitioner. See the following exhibit
for an example of a notice sign.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-47 REVISED 11/20/17
NOTICE OF PUBLIC MEETING
MEETING FOR: CONDITIONAL REVIEW FOR AN
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN
MEETING LOCATION: ARLINGTON HEIGHTS
MUNICIPAL BUILDING
33 South Arlington Heights Road
DATE: ( Fill in meeting date) TIME: ( Fill in meeting time)
PUBLIC ATTENDANCE AND COMMENTS INVITED
FOR DETAILS CALL:
Fill in Petitioner’ s or Village of Arlington Heights
name and phone number Department of Planning & Community
Development
847- 368- 5200
Section 30-705 Standards for Electronic Message Signs. The following standards apply to all
Electronic Message Signs:
a. Ground Signs Only. Electronic Message Signs are only permitted on monument style,
ground signs and the ground sign cannot be taller than ten feet. All other requirements for
ground signs as set forth in this Chapter shall apply, unless a more specific requirement is
listed in this Article, in which case the requirement in this Article applies.
b. Display. Only high resolution, full color electronic displays are allowed, and must be
maintained in “ like new” operating condition, or cease operation of the sign.
c. Size. Electronic Message Signs must be incorporated as part of a conventional monument
style ground sign which displays the business name or use. The electronic portion of the
sign must be the lower portion of the sign. The maximum size of an Electronic Message
Sign shall be no more than 33% of the allowable ground sign size as set forth in the table
below. The maximum allowable area of a ground sign is determined on the basis of the
width and posted speed limit of the public right- of-way abutting the property on which the
sign is located as set forth in the table below:
POSTED SPEED LIMIT
WIDTH OF PUBLIC
RIGHT- OF-WAY
35 MILES PER HOUR OR
LESS
OVER 35 MILES PER
HOUR
UP TO 66 FEET 40 SQ. FT. TOTAL SIGN
AREA PER FACE
60 SQ. FT. TOTAL SIGN
AREA PER FACE
OVER 66 FEET 66 SQ. FT. TOTAL SIGN
AREA PER FACE
80 SQ. FT. TOTAL SIGN
AREA PER FACE
d. Quantity. Only one electronic message sign per property is permitted.
e. Spacing. There must be a minimum 300 feet spacing between Electronic Message Signs
on the same side of any street.
SIGNS
30-48
f. Separation from Residential. Electronic Message Signs are not permitted within 300 feet
of any property being used for a residential use.
g. Orientation. All Electronic Message Signs must be oriented perpendicular to the roadway
to minimize the impact on properties directly across the street from the location of the sign.
h. Operational Standards. The following operational standards apply to all Electronic
Message Signs:
1. The sign shall have static display only. No scrolling, fading, flashing, animation, or
video is permitted, nor is any sound permitted.
2. Messages must be displayed for a minimum of 10 seconds.
3. The sign must use auto-dimming photocell technology so that the display
brightness automatically adjusts based on ambient lighting conditions. Brightness
shall be limited to .3 footcandles maximum above ambient lighting conditions at
the established measurement distance based on the size of the sign, using the
following formula:
For example, for a ground sign that measures a total of 40 square feet, of which
13.2 square feet is an Electronic Message Sign, the lighting conditions will be
measured at 36 feet from the sign.
Written certification from the manufacturer must be provided with the application
which verifies the auto- dimming function in accordance with the requirements in
this
paragraph. Verification of compliance with the brightness standard will be
accomplished using a footcandle illuminance meter based on procedures as
established by the International Sign Association.
4. Off-premises advertising is not allowed.
5. All Electronic Message Signs are only permitted to be illuminated the same hours
that the business the sign represents is open.
Designated Commercial Corridors for Electronic Message Signs
Map 1: Dundee Road Corridor
DUNDEE ROAD
ROUTE 53Map 2:R and Road, Palatine Road, and Arlington Heights Road
Corridors PALATINE
ROAD ARLINGTON
HEIGHTS ROADINDICATES
PERMITTED LOCATIONS FOR
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE
SIGNS MAP LEGEND ARLINGTON
HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE 30-49 REVISED
Designated Commercial Corridors for Electronic Message Signs
INDICATES PERMITTED
LOCATIONS FOR
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGNS
MAP LEGEND
Map 3: Algonquin Road, Golf Road, and Arlington Heights Road Corridors
GOLF ROAD
SIGNS
30-50 REVISED 11/ 20/17
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-51 REVISED 12/03/18
Ord. #17-042)
Article VIII Other Advertising Structures
Section 30-801 Canopies, Awnings and Marquees
Canopy Awning Marquee
a. Location and Dimensions.
Ord. #97-006)
1. Canopies, awnings and marquees, shall be constructed and installed so that the
lowest portion of the projecting frame thereof shall not be lower than seven feet
above a pedestrian thoroughfare or lower than 12 feet above a vehicular
thoroughfare. The depending skirt shall not be lower than six inches below the
canopy, awning or marquee.
2. No canopy, awning, or marquee shall extend beyond a point two feet behind the
curb line.
3. No door canopy, awning, or marquee shall be wider than the entrance or entrances
of the building from which it extends, plus five feet on either side thereof.
Ord. #04-059)
b. Construction.
1. Canopies, awnings, or marquees may be constructed of cloth, metal or other
approved material. All frames and supports shall be of metal, shall be designed to
withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot, and shall be
approved by the Director of Building.
2. Marquees must meet all applicable building codes with regards to materials, roof
drainage, and structural. It must be supported solely by the building, and is not
permitted to be installed on a building of wood frame construction.
Ord. #18-045)
c. Signage.
1. Canopies and Awnings. Except for the name or logo of the owner and the business,
industry or pursuit conducted within the premises, and/or products produced or sold
or services rendered, no sign may be painted or otherwise permanently placed on a
canopy or awning. Signage shall not project above or beyond the physical
dimensions of the awning and shall not exceed 20% of the awning surface.
SIGNS
30-52 REVISED 12/03/18
Signs on awnings can cover no more
than 20% of the awning surface.
2. Marquees. Signage on marquees is subject to the following conditions:
a) No temporary sign shall be attached to, hung from or placed upon the roof
of any marquee.
Ord. #10-001)
b) Manual change bulletin boards must be placed directly upon the vertical
hanging fascia of the marquee and may not overhang or project above or
below in any way.
c) No sign shall extend lower than 12 feet above a vehicular thoroughfare or
eight feet above a pedestrian thoroughfare.
3. Free- Standing Canopies. No sign, including temporary signs, shall be suspended
from or placed upon the roof of any freestanding canopy. Other than safety and
directional information, signs on a freestanding canopy shall be limited to the name
and logo of the owner and the business, industry or pursuit conducted on the
premises and shall be painted or illuminated on the vertical fasci a of the canopy.
The sign shall not exceed ten square feet in surface area.
d. Permits and Inspections. Canopies, awnings, and marquees shall be subject to all
applicable permits and annual inspections required in Article I of this Chapter.
Section 30-802 Street Clocks.
a. Location and Dimensions.
1. Street clocks supported on any building or structure shall not be less than 15 feet
above the sidewalk, and shall not project from the face or wall of the building or
structure beyond a point two feet behind the curb line.
2. No street clocks shall be installed on any public right- of-way without the consent
of the Village Board of Trustees.
3. The dial of street clocks shall not be more than 42 inches in diameter.
b. Construction.
1. All street clocks shall be constructed entirely of noncombustible material.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-53 REVISED 11/20/17
2. Any transparent material forming a part of a street clock or the sign thereon shall
be safety glass, plate glass at least 1/4 inch thick or an approved plastic securely
held in place.
3. Any cover or service opening of a street clock shall be securely fastened by metal
hinges.
c. Clocks installed on the exterior wall of any building or structure, shall comply with the
regulations for wall signs in this Chapter.
d. Clocks supported on a pole or column shall comply with the regulations for ground signs
in this Chapter.
e. Signs where the current time and/or temperature is indicated by intermittent lighting shall
be permitted if the lighting changes are limited to the numerals indicating the time and/ or
temperature and are not more frequent than every 15 seconds.
f. Except for the name or logo of the owner and the business, industry or pursuit conducted
within the premises, no sign may be painted or otherwise permanently placed on a street
clock.
g. Street clocks shall be subject to the permits and annual inspection requirements of Sections
30-103, 30-109 and 30-105.
Ord. #14-056)
Section 30-803 Sandwich Board Signs ( B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4 Zoning Districts).
a. Number.
1. Each business shall be permitted one sandwich board sign per street frontage or per
entry, up to a maximum of two sandwich board signs per business.
b. Size.
1. The signage area shall be a maximum of six square feet on each face of the sign.
2. The overall sign size shall not exceed 27” wide and 42” tall.
c. Location.
1. Sandwich board signs shall only be located on private property and must be within
10 feet of the building entrance. They are not allowed within the public right- ofway
or in parking lots. They shall not extend beyond the length of the business
frontage.
2. Sandwich board signs shall not constitute a hazard to use of pedestrian or vehicular
thoroughfare ( refer to Section 30- 120). Five feet clearance must be maintained on
all pedestrian walks, and clearance in front of doors shall be maintained.
d. Message.
SIGNS
30-54 REVISED 11/20/17
1. The message on a sandwich board sign may include the name of the business,
products produced or services rendered, and other pertinent information related to
the business’ operation. The business name shall be limited to 33% of the overall
sign area.
2. Professionally printed, computer generated messages are allowed.
3. Hand written messages are allowed if in a neat and legible manner on a dark color
background.
4. White erasable boards are not allowed.
5. Manual change bulletin board signs are not allowed.
e. Construction.
1. Sandwich board signs must be free standing and constructed of wood or metal, or
similar appropriate material as approved by Village staff.
2. Plastic sandwich board signs are discouraged.
3. Signs must be weighted in order to ensure that they do not fall. Signs must be
maintained in an upright position at all times.
4. Signs are not allowed to be illuminated.
f. Hours of Display.
1. Sandwich board signs may only be displayed during open business hours.
Ord. #04-059, # 17-042)
Article IX Variations
Section 30-901 Variations. In cases where there are particular or peculiar hardships in carrying
out the literal provisions of this Chapter, the applicant shall apply to the Design Commission for a
variation from such provisions. The Design Commission recommendation will be forwarded to
the Village Board of Trustees, where a variation may be granted, denied or modified, provided that
any variation granted, will be in harmony with the general provisions of this Chapter.
Section 30-902 Standards. The Design Commission and the Village Board of Trustees will base
their recommendation for a variation on the following facts:
a. the particular difficulty or peculiar hardship is not self-created by the Petitioner; and
b. the granting of the variation shall not create a traffic hazard, a depreciation of nearby
property values or otherwise be detrimental to the public health, safety, morals and welfare;
and
c. the variation will serve to relieve the applicant from a difficulty attributable to the location,
topography, circumstances on nearby properties or other peculiar hardship; and not merely
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-55 REVISED 11/20/17
serve to provide the applicant with a competitive advantage over similar businesses; and
d. the variation will not alter the essential character of the locality; and
e. the applicant' s business cannot reasonably function under the standards of this Chapter.
Section 30-903 Petitions.
a. All petitions for variations from the provisions of this Chapter shall be submitted to and
reviewed by the Design Commission.
b. If the petitioner desires to pursue the variation, the petitioner must submit 22 copies of the
following information to the Department of Planning and Community Development:
1. A letter requesting the variation and stating the standards for which a variation may
be granted and how this proposal meets those;
2. Detailed sign drawings;
3. Elevation drawings showing the sign placement on the building or site;
4. Plat of Survey showing proposed sign location; and
5. Photograph of the building and/or site location.
A copy of the recommendation of the Design Commission will be forwarded to the Village
Board of Trustees along with the applicant' s information listed above.
c. If a variation is denied by the Village Board, a petition for a similar sign variation may not
be submitted within one calendar year from the date of the Village Board denial.
Ord. #10-001)
Section 30-904 Notification Requirements.
a. An applicant for sign variation shall, not less than seven days and not more than 30 days
prior to the date set for the meeting of the Design Commission to hear the variation, serve
written notice, either in person or by certified mail, on the last known taxpayers and/or
property owners of record as reflected in the county records, of all property within 100 feet
in each direction of the property lines of the subject property for which a variation is being
requested; provided the number of feet occupied by all public roads, alleys and other public
ways shall be excluded in computing the 100 feet. If any part of a condominium property
is located within this distance, written notification shall be made to the condominium
association. If no such association exists, the applicant must notify each individual
taxpayer of record in the condominium property. If, after a bona fide effort to determine
such by the applicant, the owner of the property on which the notice is to be served cannot
be found, the notice requirements of this Section shall be deemed satisfied.
The required notices shall contain the address of the location for which the sign variation
is requested, a brief statement of the nature of the request, the name and address of the legal
and beneficial owner of the property, and time and date on which the meeting shall be held.
SIGNS
30-56 REVISED 11/20/17
The applicant shall furnish, at the time of the meeting, a written statement certifying that
he or she has complied with the requirements of this subsection. Attached to the written
statement shall be a list of all property owners notified in accordance with the above, the
receipts of the certified mail or the signatures of the property owners acknowledging the
personal visit of the applicant, the returned notices which were undeliverable by the post
office, along with a copy of the notice sent to each of the individuals therein specified.
b. An applicant for a variation shall, not less than 15 days prior to the date of the Design
Commission meeting at which the variation is to be discussed, post a readable sign on
private property adjacent to the roadway. This sign must be removed no later than ten days
after completion of the final meeting. The required sign shall contain the current action
requested, the date, time, and place where the meeting shall be held, a statement that further
information can be obtained from the applicant and the Planning Department of the Village
of Arlington Heights. The words "NOTICE OF PUBLIC MEETING" must appear at the
top of the sign in letters no smaller than 1.5 inches. All costs associated with the sign are
to be borne by the Petitioner. See the following exhibit for an example of a notice sign.
NOTICE OF PUBLIC MEETING
MEETING FOR: (Fill in sign variation)
MEETING LOCATION: ARLINGTON HEIGHTS
MUNICIPAL BUILDING
33 South Arlington Heights Road
DATE: (Fill in meeting date) TIME: (Fill in meeting time)
PUBLIC ATTENDANCE AND COMMENTS INVITED
FOR DETAILS CALL:
Fill in Petitioner’ s or Village of Arlington Heights
name and phone Department of
number Planning & Community Development
368-5200
Ord. #04-059, # 17-042)
Article X Penalties
Section 30-1001 Penalties Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
fined not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation continues or occurs.
Section 30-1002 Revocation of Permits. In addition to issuing a citation and proceeding to seek
a fine for a violation of any provision of this Chapter, the Director of Building is hereby authorized
to revoke any permit issued by him upon the permittee' s failure to comply with the provisions of
this Chapter within such reasonable time as established by the Director of Building in a written
notice to the permittee, delivered personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, which
notice shall specify the particulars in which the sign fails to comply with the provisions of this
Chapter. Upon revocation of the permit, maintenance of the sign shall be unlawful, and the
permittee shall remove the sign. Upon the permittee' s failure to remove the unlawful sign, the
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
30-57 REVISED 11/20/17
Director of Building may cause the sign to be removed, in accordance with the procedures
established in Section 30-109.

ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
REVISED 04/16/18
CHAPTER 28 ZONING REGULATIONS
Section 28-1 Title
Section 28-2 Intent and Purpose
Section 28-3 Definitions
Section 28-4 Rules
Section 28-5 Use Districts
5.1 Establishment of Zones
5.1-0.00 One Family Dwelling District (R-E)
5.1-1 One Family Dwelling District (R-1)
5.1-2 One Family Dwelling District (R-2)
5.1-3 One Family Dwelling District (R-3)
5.1-4 Two Family Dwelling District (R-4)
5.1-5 Multiple Family Dwelling Districts (R-5)
5.1-6 Multiple Family Dwelling District (R-6)
5.1-7 Multiple Family Dwelling District (R-7)
5.1-8 Institutional District (I)
5.1-9 Office Transitional (O-T)
5.1-10 Business District Limited Retail (B-1)
5.1-11 General Business District (B-2)
5.1-12 General Service, Wholesale and Motor Vehicle District (B-3)
5.1-13 Limited Service District (B-4)
5.1-14 Downtown District (B-5)
5.1-15 Research, Development, and Light Manufacturing District (M-1)
5.1-16 Limited Heavy Manufacturing District (M-2)
5.1-17 Public Land District (P-L)
5.1-18 Overlay Zoning District – Council Trail/Arlington Heights Road
5.1-19 Overlay Zoning District – Euclid Avenue-Rohlwing Road
5.1-20 Overlay Zoning District – Hickory Kensington Area
5.1-21 Outdoor Eating Cafes on Private Property
5.1-22 Outdoor Eating Cafes on Public Property
5.1-23 Outdoor Sale of Christmas Trees in a Residential District
5.1-24 Administrative Occupancy Requirement for Community Residence, Large
5 to 8 persons)
5.2 Minimum Areas for Zoning Districts
5.3 Development Standards
5.3-1 Minimum Lot Size and Minimum Lot Width
5.3-2 Table of Floor Area Ratio, Building Coverage, Height
5.3-3 Maximum Floor Area Calculation for One-Family Dwelling Districts
5.4 Table of Required Minimum Yards
5.5 Permitted Uses
5.5-1 Permitted Use Table: Residential, Commercial, Manufacturing/Processing,
Institutional and Other Uses
5.5-2 Permitted Use Table: Solar Energy Systems
Section 28-6 General Provisions
6.1 Interpretation
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-2 REVISED 04/16/18
6.2 Scope of Regulations
6.3 Access to Public Street
6.4 Permits
6.5 Accessory Structures
6.6 Bulk Regulations
6.7 Buildings on a Zoning Lot
6.8 Rezoning of Public and Semi-Public Areas
6.9 Enforcement of Development Schedule
6.10 Height of Structures
6.11 Vision Clearance
6.12 Traffic Engineering Approval
6.13 Fence Permit Required
6.14 Non-Commercial Antenna Structures and Earth Stations (Refer to Ch. 23)
6.15 Landscaping
6.16 Home Occupation
6.17-1 Performance Safety and Bulk Regulations for Geothermal Energy Systems
6.17-2 Performance Safety and Bulk Regulations for Geothermal Solar Systems
Section 28-7 Non-Conforming Use and Buildings
7.1 Continuation of Non-Conforming Uses and Building
7.2 Change of Non-Conforming Use
7.3 Discontinuance of Non-Conforming Use
7.4 Enlargements of Non-Conforming Uses and Buildings
7.5 Repairs and Alterations of Non-Conforming Uses and Buildings and Structures
7.6 Damage or Destruction
7.7 Moving
7.8 Termination of Non-Conforming Uses, Buildings, and Structure
Section 28-8 Special Uses
8.1 Purpose
8.2 Authority
8.3 Conditions and Approval
8.4 Procedure
8.5 Determination
8.6 Ordinance Required
8.7 Special Use Waiver for Restaurants
Section 28-9 Planned Unit Development
9.1 Intent
9.2 Qualifications Required for a Planned Unit Development
9.3 General Requirements for Planned Unit Developments
9.4 Requirements for Planned Unit Developments Using Private Roadways
9.5 Variations
9.6 Procedures for Approving of Planned Unit Development
9.7 Conceptual Planned Unit Development Submission and Review
9.8 Submission for Planned Unit Development Approval
9.9 Review of the Plan Material
9.10 Public Hearing before the Plan Commission
9.11 Approval of Planned Unit Development Ordinance
9.12 Enforcement of Development Schedule
9.13 Permit Requirements for Planned Unit Developments
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-3 REVISED 04/16/18
Section 28-10 Off Street Parking and Loading
10.1 Off-Street Parking and Loading
10.2 Additional Regulations – Parking
10.3 Location of Accessory Off-Street Parking Facilities
10.4 Schedule of Parking Requirements
10.4-1 Residential Uses
10.4-2 Retail – Commercial and Services Uses
10.4-3 Wholesale, Storage & Production
10.4-4 Community Service Uses
10.4-5 Miscellaneous Uses
10.5 Parking in the Downtown District
10.6 Additional Regulations – Off-Street Loading
10.7 Schedule of Loading Requirements
10.8 Schedule of Bicycle Parking Requirements
Section 28-11 Zoning Board of Appeals
11.1 Zoning Board of Appeals
11.2 Appeal
11.3 Application
11.4 Departmental Review
11.5 Public Hearing Notification Requirements
11.6 Determination
11.7 Limitation on Requests for Variations
Section 28-12 Plan Commission
12.1 Plan Commission
12.2 Land Use Variations
12.3 Application
12.4 Departmental Review
12.5 Public Hearing Notification Requirements
12.6 Determination
Section 28-13 Design Commission
13.1 Design Commission
13.2 Design Review
13.3 Application
13.4 Departmental Review
13.5 Design Commission Meeting
13.6 Notice by Sign
13.7 Issuance of a Certificate of Approval
13.8 Enforcement of a Development Schedule
13.9 Amendments
13.10 Appeal
Section 28-14 Changes and Amendments
14.1 Requirement for Public Hearing
14.2 Published Notice
14.3 Written Notice
14.4 Notice by Sign
14.5 Certification of Notice
14.6 Protect Against Amendment
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-4
REVISED 09/03/02
Ord. #02-066)
Section 28-1 – Title. This Ordinance shall be known, referred to and cited as “ The 2002
Comprehensive Amendment of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Arlington Heights.”
Section 28-2 - Intent and Purpose. This Ordinance is adopted for the following purposes:
2.1 To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the
people;
2.2 To divide the Village into zones or districts restricting and regulating therein the location,
erection, construction, alteration and use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business
and manufacturing and other specified uses:
2.3 To protect the character and the stability of the residential, business and manufacturing areas
within the Village and to promote the orderly and beneficial development of such areas;
2.4 To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to property;
2.5 To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the area of open spaces
surrounding buildings, necessary to provide adequate light and air and to protect the public
health;
2.6 To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for residential, business,
manufacturing or other uses within such areas;
2.7 To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall conform therein;
2.8 To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of development or
intended uses within specified zoning districts;
2.9 To prevent additions to, or alteration or remodeling of, existing buildings or structures in
such a way as to avoid the restriction and limitations imposed hereunder;
2.10 To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public health, safety, convenience
and general welfare by providing for the off-street parking of motor vehicles and the loading of
commercial vehicles;
2.11 To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in the interest of the
public health, safety, comfort and general welfare;
2.12 To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures, so far as is
possible and appropriate in each district, by regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to
the land surrounding them;
2.13 To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the Village;
2.14 To provide for the gradual elimination of non-conforming uses of land, buildings and
structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable development in
each district; and,
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-5 REVISED 04/16/18
2.15 To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as
provided herein.
Ord. #17-027, #18-010)
Section 28-3 Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have
the meanings set forth in thisSection.
1. Accessory Structure. An Accessory Structure is one which meets all of the following
criteria:
a. Is subordinate to and serves a principal building; and
b. Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building served; and
c. Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal
building; and
d. Is located in the rear yard and on the same zoning lot as the principal building served ,
except as otherwise indicated in this Code.
2. Acupuncture. A medical practice or procedure that treats illness or provides local
anesthesia by the insertion of needles at specified sites on the body.
3. Adult Business. Any or all of the following businesses:
a. Adult Bookstore - A business establishment having a substantial or significant portion
of its stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale, rent or other distribution, and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to “ Specified Sexual Activities” or “ Specified
Anatomical Areas.”
b. Adult Live Entertainment Establishment - A nightclub, theater, or other business
establishment, which permits live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers,
go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “ Specified Sexual Activities” or
Specified Anatomical Areas.”
c. Adult Theater - A business establishment in an enclosed building that as a substantial or
significant portion of its business regularly features for presentation films, motion
pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, or other visual representation or recordings of
any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure,
depiction or description of “Specified Anatomical Areas” or the conduct or simulation of
Specified Sexual Activities.”
4. Alley. A public or private thoroughfare not more than 30 feet wide which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
5. Amusement Facility. A facility that provides indoor activities for kids or adults including
video arcades, games or other recreational type amusements such as play equipment,
trampolines, laser tag, etc. Large facilities are 5,000 square feet or larger; Small facilities are
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-6 REVISED 06/19/17
less than 5,000 square feet.
6. Animal Hospital. A place where animals are given medical or surgical treatment and the
boarding of animals is limited to short term care incidental to the hospital use.
7. Antenna Structure. Any structure, mast, pole, tripod or tower utilized for the purpose of
either transmission or reception purposes, or both:
a. A Commercial Antenna is any antenna structure that is intended for transmitting or
receiving television, radio or telephone communications, excluding those used
exclusively for dispatch communication.
b. A Non-Commercial Antenna is any antenna that is used for private radio and/or
television reception, for licensed amateur operators, citizens band facilities, and
governmental and non- profit organizations.
8. Apartment. A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure, which is arranged,
designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit and which includes
permanently installed complete kitchen and bathroom facilities in each apartment.
9. Automobile Repair.
a. Major Repair is work that is of a significant nature, such as engine rebuilding or major
reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including
body, frame or fender straightening or repair; and overall painting of vehicles.
b. Minor Repair is work that is not of a significant nature, including incidental repairs,
replacement of parts, and motor service to motor vehicles, but not including any
operation specified as Major Repair in paragraph a above.
10. Automobile Service Station. Any building or premises used for dispensing, sale or offering
for sale at retail to the public, gasoline stored only in underground tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil
or grease for the operation of automobiles and including the sale and installation of tires,
batteries and other minor accessories and service for automobiles, but not including major
automobile repairs; and including washing of automobiles where no production line methods are
employed.
11. Awning. A roof like shelter extended over a doorway or window, which is supported entirely
from the exterior wall of the building and provides protection from the weather.
12. Basement. A story having all or part of its height below grade.
13. Block. A tract of land bounded by streets or, in lieu of streets, by public parks, cemeteries,
railroad rights-of-way, lines of waterways, or a corporate boundary line of
the Village.
14. Buildable Area. The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum open space
requirements of this Code have been complied with.
15. Building. Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-7 REVISED 06/19/17
entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space or by walls in which there are no
communicating doors, windows or openings; and which is designed or intended for the shelter,
enclosure or protection of persons, animals or chattels. Any structure with interior areas not
normally accessible for human use, such as oil tanks, water tanks, and other similar structures,
are not considered as buildings.
16. Building Height. The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level or its equivalent
established grade opposite the middle of the front of the building to the highest point of the roof
in the case of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between
eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided that where buildings are set back from
the street line, the height of a building may be measured from the average elevation of the
finished lot grade at the front of the building.
17. Building Line. The line nearest the front of and across a zoning lot, establishing the
minimum open space to be provided between the front line of a building or structure and the
street right-of-way line.
18. Building Lot Coverage. The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or
buildings and accessory buildings.
19. Bulk. The three-dimensional space within which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot
and which is defined by maximum height regulations, yard setbacks, and sky exposure plane
regulations.
20. Business Establishment. A separate place of business having the following three
characteristics:
a. The ownership and management of all operations conducted within such establishment
are separate and distinct from the ownership and management of operations conducted
within other establishments on the same or adjacent zoning lots.
b. Direct public access to such “ business establishment” is separate and distinct from direct
access to any other “ business establishment.”
c. There is no direct public access from within such establishment to any other such
establishment.
Where adjacent places of business lack any one of the above-listed characteristics with respect to
one another, they shall then be considered as a single business establishment for the purposes of
this Chapter.
21. Camper Trailer (Pop-up). A partially collapsible structure designed to provide temporary
living quarters primarily for recreational use, constructed with integral wheels to make it mobile
and/or towable by motor vehicle.
22. Canopy. A structure other than an awning with a frame, which is wholly or partially
supported by columns, poles or braces extending from the ground.
23. Care Facility. A facility providing care to individuals. There are three primary types of care
facilities:
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-8 REVISED 06/19/17
a. Ambulatory - A facility which provides care to individuals without hospitalization or
other institutionalization.
b. Extended Care or Skilled Nursing Home - A facility or part of a facility which is
licensed or approved to provide health care under medical supervision for 24 or more
consecutive hours to two or more patients.
c. Intermediate - A facility which provides, on a regular basis, health-related care and
services to individuals who do not require the degree of care and treatment which a
hospital or skilled nursing facility is designated to provide but who, because of their
mental or physical condition, require care and services which can be made available to
them only through institutional facilities such as these.
24. Catering Establishments. A facility whose primary purpose is to provide food, generally in
large quantities, for banquets or for special events which are held off the premises not including
a carry-out restaurant or a sit-down restaurant.
25. Commercial Recreation Facilities. Physical recreation establishments such as tennis or
racquet clubs or gymnasiums or fitness facilities.
26. Commercial School. A school which principally offers, for profit, specific courses of
instruction in business, trade, industry or other trained skills, but does not offer academic
instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the School Code of Illinois.
27. Community Center. A building for recreational, educational, or entertainment purposes.
28. Community Residence. A group home or specialized residential care home serving persons
with disabilities which is licensed, certified, or accredited by appropriate local, state or national
bodies. A Community Residence is deemed Small when the number of unrelated disabled
persons living in the residence is less than five and deemed Large when the number of unrelated
disabled persons living in the residence is between five and eight.
Community Residence does not include a residence which serves persons as an alternative to
incarceration for a criminal offense, or persons whose primary reason is substance abuse.
29. Conference Room/Meeting Hall. A facility with space available for lease by private parties
primarily for meetings.
30. Construction Yard. An establishment with space used for bulk storage of landscape and
building material, heavy construction equipment and machinery, and which may include the
provision of services, the fabrication of building related products, the operating of machinery,
and the construction yard’ s business office.
31. Contractor’s Design Showroom. A room or group of rooms used for conducting
administrative, clerical and general office affairs, which includes a design showroom but does
not include on-site storage of contractor’ s vehicles, equipment and materials.
32. Contractor’s Office. A room or group of rooms used for conducting administrative, clerical
and general office affairs but not including design showrooms or any on-site storage of
contractor’ s vehicles, equipment and materials.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-9 REVISED 06/19/17
33. Contractor’s Shop. An establishment used for conducting administrative, clerical and
general office ( business) affairs, indoor repair, maintenance and/or storage of a contractor’ s
vehicles, equipment and materials, and may include the contractor’ s business office and may
include a design showroom.
34. Convenience Store. A small retail establishment solely for the purpose of selling food,
tobacco, periodicals, beverages, and other household items, in limited size and produce choices
with the intent of quick service. Reheating and/or selling of already prepared/prepackaged food
for consumption off the premises does not make a Convenience Food Store a restaurant.
35. Court. An open area unobstructed from the ground to the sky. An Inner Court is bounded on
more than three sides by the exterior walls of one or more buildings. An Outer Court is bounded
on not more than three sides by the exterior walls of one or more buildings.
36. Curb Level. The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center
of such front. Where a building faces on more than one street, the “ curb level” shall be the
average of the levels of the curbs at the center of the front of each street. Where no curb
elevation has been established, the mean level of the land immediately adjacent to the building
shall be considered the “ curb level”.
37. Day Care Center. Any institution or place in which are received three or more children,
apart from their parents or guardian, under the age of six years, for care during part or all of a
day between 6:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M. The term is further construed to include similar units
operating under any other name whatsoever with or without stated educational purposes.
This definition does not include “ Group Care Home”, “ Group Day Care Home”, “ Foster Family
Home”, “ Centers for Mental Retarded”, licensed by the State of Illinois, bona fide kindergartens
or “ Day Nursery Schools”, established in connection with grade schools supervised or operated
by a private or public Board of Education or approved by the State Department of Public
Instruction.
38. Day Care Facility. Any facility operated for the purpose of providing care, protection and
guidance to more than eight adults during only part of a 24-hour day. This term excludes public
and private educational facilities or any facility offering care to individuals for a full 24-hour
period.
39. Day Care Home. A facility located in a single-family detached residence which receives no
more than eight children for care during the day. The maximum of eight children includes the
family’s natural or adopted children under age 16 and those children who are in the home under
full-time care.
40. Deck. A raised platform over 16” above grade directly attached to the principal building.
The height of any deck shall not exceed the height of the first full story above grade.
41. Dormitory. A building or portion thereof, which contains living quarters for students, staff
or members of an accredited college, university, boarding school, theological school, hospital,
religious order or comparable organization; provided that the building is owned and managed by
the organization and contains common cooking and eating areas.
42. Drive-Through Facility. A facility, establishment, or portion thereof, such as a bank or
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-10 REVISED 06/19/17
restaurant, that is designed, intended or used for ransacting business with customers who remain
in their vehicles.
43. Driveway. A private motor vehicle access way between the roadway and a parking area
within a lot. A Shared Driveway is a private roadway providing access from a street to two or
more dwellings on the same lot.
44. Dwelling. A building or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential
occupancy, including one-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, and multiple-family
dwelling units, but not including hotels or motels. Kitchens and bathrooms must be permanently
installed. An Attached Dwelling is one which is joined to another dwelling or dwellings at one or
more sides by a party wall or walls and designed exclusively for the occupancy by one family. A
Detached Dwelling is one which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot designed
exclusively for occupancy by one family. There may be One-Family Dwellings, Two Family
Dwellings or Multiple-Family Dwellings. A Multiple Family Dwelling consists of a building or
portion thereof designed or altered for occupancy by three or more families living in individual
apartments with separate kitchen and bath facilities for each apartment.
45. Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy by one family for
living purposes and having its own permanently installed cooking and sanitary facilities. An
Efficiency Dwelling Unit is one which consists of not more than one habitable room together
with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities.
46. Earth Station. Any disc antenna with an essentially solid surface, whether flat, concave, or
parabolic, which is designed for receiving television, radio, or data microwave signals from
satellites. There are two kinds of Earth Stations:
a. Commercial Earth Station is any earth station used in conjunction with communication
facilities for use in commerce or industry.
b. Non-Commercial Earth Station is any earth station used for private radio and television
reception only.
47. Floor Area (For determining off-street parking and loading requirements). The sum of the
gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, or portion thereof, devoted to such
use, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls
separating two buildings.
48. Floor Area (For determining compliance with dwelling standards). The floor area shall be
measured from the interior walls, excluding utility rooms, cellars, basements, open porches,
breezeways, garages, and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods of
living, eating or sleeping purposes. Enclosed spaces intended for habitable rooms which are to be
completed within a reasonable time may be considered in computing such floor area.
49. Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.). The total floor area of the building or buildings on that zoning
lot divided by the area of such zoning lot, or in the case of planned unit developments, by the net
site area. F.A.R. is measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline
of walls separating buildings.
For determining floor area ratio, the floor area of a building is the sum of the gross horizontal
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-11 REVISED 06/19/17
areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings.
The “ Floor Area” of a building shall include basement floor area when more than one-half of the
basement height is above the established curb level or above the finished lot grade level where
curb level has not been established; that floor area of attached and/or detached garage in excess
of 400 square feet for a single family residential unit; elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
floor space used for mechanical equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof; penthouses;
attic or volume space having headroom of seven feet or more; interior balconies and mezzanines;
and enclosed porches, and floor area devoted to accessory uses. However, any space, except a
single-family attached or detached garage, that is devoted to off-street parking or loading shall
not be included in “Floor Area.”
In determining the floor area ratio for lots having detached garages, 100% of the total floor area
of the detached garage shall be excluded from the FAR calculation if there are no other garages
on site, if the structure is architecturally compatible with the principal dwelling unit, and if 50%
or more of the existing homes that both front on the same side of the street and are contained
between two adjacent streets which intersect that street also have detached garages.
50. Food Store. A place of business where food such as meats, dairy products, frozen foods,
produce, and dry goods are sold for retail trade.
51. Foot Massage. A place of business which provides any method of pressure on or friction
against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external
soft parts of the foot, ankle and lower leg below the knee only, to be performed in an open space
as opposed to individual rooms.
52. Frontage. All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets ( crossing
or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead -ended, then all
property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street.
53. Garage. A building or structure or part thereof used or intended to be used for the parking
and storage of vehicles.
54. Garage, Private Customer and Employee. A structure (above or below ground) which is
accessory to a commercial, institutional or manufacturing establishment, building or use utilized
for the parking and storage of vehicles operated by the customers, visitors, and employees of
such building.
55. Garden Center. A place of business where plants, nursery products, fertilizers, potting soil,
tools, and garden utensils are sold to the customer.
56. Gazebo or Pergola. An accessory building that is a detached, covered, freestanding, open air
structure.
57. Geothermal Energy System. A renewable energy system using equipment that circulates
relatively constant ground temperatures throughout buildings using an underground based piping
system and a heat pump.
58. Grade. The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-12 REVISED 06/19/17
a. For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at the
center of the wall adjoining the street.
b. For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average of the elevation of
the sidewalk at the center of all walls adjoining street.
c. For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of the finished surface
of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet from a street line shall be
considered as adjoining the street. Where no sidewalk exists, the grade shall be established by
the Village Engineer.
59. Health Clubs. A facility designed for the major purpose of physical fitness or weight
reducing which includes, but is not limited to, such equipment as weight resistance machines,
whirlpools, saunas, showers, and lockers. This shall not include municipal or privately owned
recreation buildings.
60. Home Occupation. A use of a dwelling unit carried on by members of the immediate family
residing on the premises.
61. Hospital/Health Care Facility. An institution providing primary health services and medical
or surgical care to persons, primarily as in-patients suffering from illness, disease, injury, and
other physical or mental conditions and including as an integral part of the institution, related
facilities such as laboratories, out-patient facilities or training facilities.
62. Hotel. A building primarily designed for transient occupancy containing lodging rooms or
suites accessible from a common hall or entrance, providing living, sleeping and bathroom
facilities. A central kitchen, meeting rooms, dining rooms and recreation rooms may also be
provided.
63. Impervious Surface Coverage. Any hard-surfaced, man-made area that does not readily
absorb or retain water, including but not limited to buildings, patios, paved parking and driveway
areas, walkways, sidewalks and paved recreation areas ( e.g. basketball court, tennis court,
swimming pool).
64. Incidental Use. A use which is associated with and subordinate to the principal permitted
use.
65. Kennel. Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which more than four dogs, cats, and other
household domestic animals, over four months of age, are kept, or on which more than two such
animals are boarded for compensation or kept for sale.
66. Lodging Room. A room rented in a facility having three or more rented rooms as sleeping
and living quarters, but without cooking facilities and which may have individual bathrooms. In
a suite of rooms without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping accommodations
shall be counted as one “ lodging room” for the purposes of this Code.
67. Lot. A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision or as
otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. The following are the
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-13 REVISED 06/19/17
different types of lots:
a. Corner Lot. A parcel of land situated at the intersection of two or more streets or
adjoining a curved street at the end of a block.
b. Reversed Corner Lot. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of another lot.
c. Double Frontage Lot. A lot having frontage on two non-intersecting streets.
d. Flag Lot. A substandard lot of record that does not have its full “ frontage” abutting a
street. The lot width shall be measured at the required setback line for the building.
e. Interior Lot. A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
f. Substandard Lot of Record. Any lot lawfully existing at the time of adoption or
amendment of this Zoning Code that is not in conformance with the dimensional and/or
area provisions of this Zoning Code.
g. Through Lot. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets but
which is not a corner lot.
h. Zoning Lot. A tract of land which is designated or required as a tract to be used to attain
compliance with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located, or developed
or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. A “zoning lot” may or may not
coincide with a lot of record.
68. Lot Area. The area bounded by the lot lines, the right-of-way line of any street adjoining the
lot, and the centerline of the right-of-way of any private access road adjoining the lot. For the
purpose of determining the lot area per dwelling unit, the total lot area shall be measured with the
exclusion of land in the public or private streets right-of-way and land dedicated for park or
school purposes.
69. Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured
within the lot boundaries.
70. Lot Frontage. The frontage of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a public street
excluding lot access areas.
71. Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the
lot depth at the established front building line.
72. Manufacturing. The mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into
new products including the assembling of components, parts, the manufacturing of products and
the blending of materials.
73. Marquee or Canopy. A roof-like structure of a permanent nature that projects from the wall
of a building and overhangs the public way.
74. Massage/Accu-Pressure Establishment. A place of business which provides any method of
pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-14 REVISED 06/19/17
stimulating of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical
or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils,
powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations used in this practice, under such
circumstance that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom treatment is provided, or
some third party on such person’ s behalf, will pay money or give other consideration or any
gratuity therefore.
75. Motel. A building or buildings designed for transient occupancy containing lodging rooms or
suites accessible through a common hall or separate outside entrances, providing living, sleeping,
and bathroom facilities. No room shall be equipped with kitchen facilities.
76. Motor Home. A portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a selfpropelled
vehicle.
77. Nameplate. A sign indicating the name and/or address of a building, or the name of an
occupant thereof and/or the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
78. Non-Conforming Building. A building or structure, or portion thereof, lawfully existing at
the time of the adoption of this Code, which was designed, erected or structurally altered for a
use that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
79. Non-Conforming Use. A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the time of
adoption of this Code but which no longer conforms with the use regulations or the district in
which it is located.
80. Nursing Home. An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide
full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who by reason of advanced age, chronic
illness or infirmity are unable to care for themselves.
81. Medical or Dental Laboratory. A place of business devoted to the testing and analysis for
the medical profession or to the preparation of dentures and similar items for dental preparation.
82. Off-Street Loading Space. An open, hard-surfaced area of land other than a street or a
public way, the principal use of which is for the standing, loading and unloading of motor trucks,
tractors and trailers to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys.
83. Office, Medical or Dental. The office of a member of the medical or dental profession
requiring licensing by the State and maintenance of professional standards applicable to the field
for which services are provided on an out-patient basis.
84. Office, Non-Medical and Non-Dental. A use or structure other than a medical use where
business or professional activities are conducted and/or business or professional services are
made available to the public, including, but not limited to, tax preparation, accounting,
architecture, legal services, real estate and securities brokering, and professional consulting
services. “ Office” shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in a zoning
district as a permitted or special use.
85. Overlay Zoning District. An overlay-zoning district is a mapped area with restrictions
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-15 REVISED 06/19/17
beyond those in the underlying zoning. An overlay district is used to achieve planning
objectives, which may not be achieved through the underlying zoning. Where conflicts arise
between the overlay district and the underlying zoning, the overlay district restrictions apply.
86. Parcel Delivery and Pick-Up Service. An establishment where parcels, not exceeding 120
inches in length or girth and not exceeding 125 pounds, are being received for the shipment and
delivery to other destinations or are available for pick- up after arriving from other locations.
87. Parking Area. An open or covered, hard-surfaced area, other than street, alley or public
right-of-way, used for the parking of vehicles.
a. A Private Parking Area is for private vehicles only, of occupants of the building or
buildings for which the parking area is developed and is accessory.
b. A Public Parking Area is for the storage of vehicles of occupants of the building or
buildings for which the parking area is developed and is accessory.
88. Patio. A level landscaped and/or surfaced area.
89. Pawn Shop/Cash Converter Facility. A building or use, the principal purpose of which is
the lending of money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or dealing in the purchase of
personal property on condition of selling the same back at a stipulated price.
90. Personal Trainer. A physical fitness trainer who provides individual fitness counseling.
91. Pervious Surface. A surface that presents an opportunity for precipitation to infiltrate into
the ground.
92. Pet Grooming Establishments. Any place or establishment, public or private, where
animals are bathed, clipped, or combed for the purpose of enhancing their aesthetic value and/or
health and for which a fee is charged.
93. Pet Shops and Supply Stores. A retail sales establishment primarily involved in the sale of
domestic animals, such as dogs, cats fish, birds, reptiles, and related pet supplies, but excluding
exotic animals and farm animals such as horses, goats, sheep and poultry.
94. Physical Rehabilitation Center. A facility licensed by the State of Illinois providing
treatment on an out-patient basis to remove or reduce the risk of injury, impairment, functional
limitation or disability, including the promotion and maintenance of fitness, health and wellness
through a rehabilitation plan of therapeutic intervention.
95. Pickup Camper. A structure designed for recreational use, designed primarily to be mounted
on a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a
temporary dwelling.
96. Playhouse. A freestanding structure, with a maximum height not to exceed 12 feet in a side
yard and 15 feet in a rear yard.
97. Porch. A covered protection from a wall of a building that may or may not use columns or
other ground supports for structural purposes and which is primarily used to provide an extension
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-16 REVISED 06/19/17
of the living area.
98. Portico. A roofed structure projecting from the building which has no enclosures of any kind
and which has an entry surfaced area that does not exceed eight feet in width and does not extend
more than four feet out from the building.
99. Principal Building. A building in which the residence or permitted primary use of the lot is
conducted.
100. Principal Use. The main use of land or buildings, as distinguished from a subordinate or
accessory use, to which premises are devoted comprising at least 80% of the floor area and the
primary purpose for the premises.
101. Private Roadway. The paved area, exclusive of sidewalks, driveways or related uses, on
private property, used or intended to be used for circulation, passage or travel of motor vehicles
from a street to two or more adjacent parcels.
102. Public Utility. Any person, firm, corporation or municipal department duly authorized to
furnish, under public regulation, to the public, electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph,
transportation, cable television, water, and other data transmission services.
103. Railroad Right-of-Way. A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track
operation, but not including depots, loading platforms, stations, train sheds, warehouses, car
shops, car yards, locomotive shops or water towers.
104. Research Laboratory. A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing
but which does not include manufacturing, assembly or packaging of products.
105. Repair, Major. Includes any action which fixes, mends, or restores products other than
motor vehicles:
a. Major Repair is repair of products such as furniture, refrigerators, or similar products
which generally require storage yards or storage area
b. Minor Repair is repair of products such as shoes, watches, jewelry, and electronics
106. Restaurant. Any building or part thereof where food is cooked or prepared for
compensation, for the general public and for immediate consumption on or off the premises.
107. Restaurant-Amusement Device Arcade. An establishment primarily devoted to the sale of
food and beverage and partially devoted to the use of more than ten coin -operated amusement
devices.
108. School. An institution conducting regular academic instruction at the kindergarten,
elementary, middle school and high school levels.
a. Public School. A public institution which offers general academic instruction equivalent
to the standards prescribed by the School Code of Illinois.
b. Private School. A non-public institution which offers programs accepted by the State of
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-17 REVISED 06/19/17
Illinois in lieu of public instruction.
109. Salon. Any establishment where cosmetology services are provided including hair care, nail
care, and skin care on a regular basis for compensation.
110. Seating Area. Areas used to consume food or beverages on the customer side and which
provide access to areas such as buffets, bars, or serving tables.
111. Sheltered Care. An establishment licensed to provide assistance, supervision or oversight
to residents, usually short term. A sheltered care home may not provide skilled or intermediate
nursing services nor care for those cases for which hospitalization is generally required.
112. Solar Energy System. A renewable energy system consisting of a collection of parts
including any base, mounts, tower, solar collectors and accessory equipment such as utility
interconnections and solar storage batteries in such a configuration as necessary to convert solar
radiation into thermal or electrical energy. There are three types of Solar Energy Systems:
a. Roof Mounted. A renewable energy system consisting of equipment installed on the roof
of a principal or accessory building located between the eave and ridge used for the
conversion of sunlight into a usable form of electrical energy or to heat water.
b. Wall Mounted. A renewable energy system consisting of equipment installed on a wall
of a principal or accessory building below the eave, or where there is a flat roof the space
below the top of a parapet, used for the conversion of sunlight into a usable form of
electrical energy or to heat water.
c. Ground Based. A renewable energy system consisting of equipment used for the
conversion of sunlight into a usable form of electrical energy placed on the ground of a
zoning lot and which is not attached to any principal or accessory building.
113. Storage Facility. A place where goods, materials, or personal property is placed and kept
for more than 24-consecutive hours.
114. Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface
of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and
the ceiling next above it. Any portion of a story exceeding 14 in height shall be considered as an
additional story for each 14 or fraction thereof.
115. Story, Half. That portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof, the wall plates of
which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not more than four and one-half feet above the
finished floor of such story. In the case of one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and
multiple-family dwellings less than three stories in height, a half story in a sloping roof shall not
be counted as a story for the purposes of this Code. In the case of multiple-family dwellings three
or more stories in height, a half story shall be counted as a story.
116. Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is
attached to something having location on the ground, including a fence or freestanding wall,
television antenna towers, earth stations, or other devices receiving electronic signals. A sign,
billboard or other advertising medium, detached or projecting, shall be construed to be a
structure.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-18 REVISED 06/19/17
117. Structural Alterations. Any change except those required by law or ordinance, which
would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing
walls, columns, beams or girders, not including openings in bearing walls as permitted by other
ordinances.
118. Travel Trailer. A rigid, non-collapsible structure designed to provide temporary living
quarters primarily for recreational use, constructed with integral wheels to make it mobile land/or
towable by a motor vehicle.
119. Tree House. An accessory structure which utilizes one or more trees for structural support
and/or incorporates the tree into the design.
120. Used Car Lot. A zoning lot on which used cars are displayed for sale or trade.
121. Vehicle. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported
or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
a. Commercial Vehicle. Any type of vehicle used or maintained for commercial purposes,
primarily to transport material or operate a power attachment or tool, such as a snowplow
or any vehicle containing cargo for commercial purposes. For purposes of this Chapter,
any vehicle with advertising or a business designation affixed to it shall be considered a
commercial vehicle.
b. Recreational Vehicle (RV). An RV shall include, but not be limited to, camper trailer
pop-up), motor home, off-road vehicle, open trailer, pickup camper, snowmobile, travel
trailer and water craft.
122. Trailer. Any motorized or non-motorized vehicle intended to carry or store a recreational
vehicle. An open trailer or a trailer not carrying or storing an RV shall be considered an RV for
the purposes of this Code.
123. Window Wells. A space maintained between a below grade window and the surrounding
soil. The window well provides drainage or air or light around the window and in some cases, an
egress route from the structure.
124. Yard. An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or group of
buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level upward, except as
otherwise permitted in this Code, and which extends along a lot line and at right angles thereto to
a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is
located. The following are the specific definitions for each type of yard:
a. Exterior Side Yard. That part of the yard on a corner lot, lying between the exterior side
lot line and the nearest line of the principal building and extending from the front yard (or
from the front lot line, if there is no required front yard) to the rear yard (or from the rear
lot line, if there is no required rear yard). On a corner lot, the larger of the two lot
dimensions adjacent to the street shall be considered the exterior side yard.
b. Front Yard. A yard extending across the full width of the zoning lot and lying between
the lot line which fronts on a street and the nearest line of the principal building. On a
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-19 REVISED 06/19/17
corner lot, the smaller of the two dimensions adjacent to a street shall be considered the
front yard.
c. Rear Yard. A yard extending across the full width of the zoning lot and lying between
the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building.
d. Side Yard. That part of the yard lying between the nearest line of the principal building
and a side lot line, and extending from the front yard (or from the front lot line, if there is
no front yard) to the required rear yard (or from the rear lot line, if there is no required
rear yard).
Section 28-4–Rules. In the construction of this Code, the rules contained in this Section shall
be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise:
4.1 Rules.
4.1-1 Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular
number shall include the plural number, and the plural, the singular.
4.1-2 The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
4.1-3 The word “may” is permissive.
4.1-4 The word “lot” shall include the words “ plot”, “ piece”, and “ parcel”; the word “building”
includes all other structures of every kind regardless of similarity to buildings; and the phrase
used for” shall include the phrases “ arranged for”, “ designed for”, “ intended for”, “ maintained
for”, and “ occupied for”.
4.1-5 Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this Code, its meaning
shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof.
4.2 Zoning Maps. The boundaries of the Districts are shown upon the map, which is hereto
attached and made a part of this Chapter, which map is designated as “ Zoning Map”. The
Zoning Map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of
this Chapter and have the same force and effect as if the Zoning Map and all the notations,
references and other information shown thereon are a part of this Chapter and have the same
force and effect as if the Zoning Map and all the notations, references, and other information
shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein, the original of which Zoning Map is
proposed, attested and is on file in the office of the Village Clerk of the Village of Arlington
Heights, Illinois.
4.3 New or Annexed Land. All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the Village of
Arlington Heights shall be classified in the R-1 one-family dwelling district except if said land
has previously been subdivided in lots of area or dimension less than that required in the R -1
district, in which event said land shall be classified in the R-3 one-family dwelling district. Said
zoning classification or annexation may be changed by ordinance after public hearing as set forth
in Section 4.3-1.
4.3-1 In the event owners of property sought to be annexed desire a zoning classification other
than “ R-1" a petition shall be submitted for the zoning classification desired simultaneously with
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-20 REVISED 04/16/18
petition for the annexation. The Board of Trustees shall refer said petition for zoning
classification to the Plan Commission for proceedings to be held by the same in the manner and
form as provided in Section 12 of this Chapter. Action on the petition for annexation shall be
deferred until action is taken by the Board of Trustees on the recommendation of the Plan
Commission.
4.3-2 Any area proposed for annexation to the present corporate limits of the Village shall be
accompanied by a petition for the annexation of the same territory to the Arlington Heights Park
District, unless the territory is already entirely within said Park District.
4.4 Zoning of Streets, Alleys, Public Ways, and Railroad Rights-of-Way. All streets, alleys,
public-ways, and railroad rights-of-way; if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be
deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets,
public-ways and railroad rights-of-way. Where the centerline of a street, alley, public-way or
railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise
specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such
center line.
4.5 Boundary Lines. Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary line of any use
district as shown on the zoning maps incorporated herein, the following rules shall apply:
4.5-1 Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets, alleys, or similar rightsof-
way, they shall be construed as following the centerlines thereof. In the case of two parallel
and abutting streets, alleys, public-ways, or similar rights-of-way, the center of the same, as
combined, shall constitute the district boundary lines, except in the case of the center line of the
right-of-way of the Chicago and North Western Railroad, which such center line shall divide the
use classification districts just immediately to the north and south of the center line of the
railroad right-of-way, irrespective of intervening parallel and abutting public-ways as Northwest
Highway.
4.5-2 Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot
lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
4.5-3 Where a lot held in one ownership and of record at the effective date of this Chapter is
divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be construed to be within the less restricted
district; provided that this construction shall not apply if it increases the area of the less restricted
portion of the lot by more than twenty percent.
Ord. #18-010)
Section 28-5 - Use Districts. In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this Chapter,
the Village is divided into several districts.
5.1 One Family Dwelling Districts: R-E, R-1, R-2, and R-3. The purpose of the One Family
Dwelling Districts is to provide for residential developments of predominantly single-family
homes. These Districts should preserve the value of land and protect homes from adverse living
conditions.
5.1-0 One Family Dwelling District: R-E
5.1-0.1 Minimum Lot Size and Minimum Lot Width at Building Line:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-21 REVISED 04/16/18
Minimum Lot Width
Minimum Lot Size at Building Line
Standard or Corner 20,000-29,999 sq. feet 100 feet
Standard or Corner 30,000-less than one acre 125 feet
Standard or Corner one acre or more 150 feet
Churches, Convents and
Monasteries 20,000 sq. feet 100 feet
a. When two or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and dimension to
qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of the Use District in which they are
located, are contiguous and are held in one ownership prior to December 21, 1959, they
shall be maintained and used as one zoning lot for such use.
b. Any single lot or parcel of land, held in one ownership prior to October 4, 1955 which
was of record as of March 15, 2004, that does not meet the requirements for minimum lot
width and area, may be utilized for a permitted use, provided that yards, courts or usable
open space are not less than 75% of the minimum required dimensions of areas.
c. Where lots front upon a cul-de-sac or curved street having a radius of 200 feet or less,
minimum lot widths as set forth above shall be measured at the building setback line
along an arc parallel to the right-of-way of such cul-de-sac or curved street. Such lots
shall also be laid out so that their frontage length, as measured on the arc of such right-ofway
line is not less than 50% of the required lot width measured at the building setback
line. Refer to Chapter 29 of the Municipal Code for further information regarding layout
and design of lots.
5.1-0.2 Required Minimum Yards.
a. Front Yard: 40 feet except that in all residential districts where lots comprising 40% or
more of the frontage between two intersecting streets are developed with building having
front yards of more than 15 feet in depth, the average of such front yards shall establish
the minimum front yards for the entire frontage. A front yard shall not be required to be
more than 50 feet. A minimum front yard of 15 feet shall be required on all lots.
b. Side Yard: 10% of lot width. The combined total for interior lots shall not be less than
20 feet.
c. Exterior Side Yard: In all residential districts where lots comprising 40% or more of the
frontage between two intersection streets are developed with buildings having a yard of
more than 10 feet in depth adjacent to the street, the average of such yards shall establish
the minimum exterior side yard for the entire frontage. A minimum exterior side yard of
10%, with a minimum of 10 feet, shall be required for all lots. In no case, shall an
exterior side yard of more than 50 feet be required.
d. Rear Yard: 30 feet.
5.1-0.3 Maximum Floor Area Ratio.
a. For Single Family Uses:
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-22 REVISED 04/16/18
1. Lots up to 8,750 sq. feet = LA x 0.35
2. Lots over 8,750 sq. feet up to 20,000 sq. feet = 3062 + [( LA – 8750) x 0.26]
3. Lots over 20,000 sq. feet = LA x 0.30
b. For all other uses: 30%
5.1-0.4 Maximum Building Lot Coverage and Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage.
30%
a. Maximum Permitted Building Lot Coverage is 30%.
b. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage:
1. Lots less than or equal to 6,600 sq. feet in area: Total Lot Maximum of 55%. As
part of that 55%, no more than 50% of the front yard, plus, if it is a corner lot, the
exterior side yard, shall be impervious surface.
2. Lots Greater than 6,600 sq. feet in area: Total Lot Maximum of 50%. As part of
that 50%, no more than 50% of the front yard, plus, if it is a corner lot, the
exterior side yard, shall be impervious surface.
c. Existing Impervious Surface Exception: Existing non-conforming residential lots
needing to repair or replace essential elements only, such as driveways, walkways to
home and patios, may receive an administrative exception from the Director of Building
from the impervious surface coverage maximum. An administrative exception shall only
be permitted if:
1. Replacement of deteriorated essential elements the exact same dimension as
existed at the adoption of this Ordinance; and
2. Modification of these areas is not practical or feasible; and
3. Such exception shall not be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare.
5.1-0.5 Maximum Height: 25 feet and 2-1/2 stories.
5.1-1 One Family Dwelling District: R-1
5.1-1.1 Minimum Lot Size and Minimum Lot Width at Building Line:
Minimum Lot Width
Minimum Lot Size at Building Line
Standard or Corner 15,000-19,999 sq. feet 90 feet
Standard or Corner 20,000-29,999 sq. feet 100 feet
Standard or Corner 30,000-less than one acre 125 feet
Standard or Corner one acre or more 150 feet
Churches, Convents
and Monasteries 20,000 sq. feet 90 feet
a. When two or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and dimension to
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-23 REVISED 04/16/18
qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of the Use District in which they are
located, are contiguous and are held in one ownership prior to December 21, 1959, they
shall be maintained and used as one zoning lot for such use.
b. Any single lot or parcel of land, held in one ownership prior to October 4, 1955 which
was of record as of March 15, 2004, that does not meet the requirements for minimum lot
width and area, may be utilized for a permitted use, provided that yards, courts or usable
open space are not less than 75% of the minimum required dimensions of areas.
c. Where lots front upon a cul-de-sac or curved street having a radius of 200 feet or less,
minimum lot widths as set forth above shall be measured at the building setback line
along an arc parallel to the right-of-way of such cul-de-sac or curved street. Such lots
shall also be laid out so that their frontage length, as measured on the arc of such right-ofway
line is not less than 50% of the required lot width measured at the building setback
line. Refer to Chapter 29 of the Municipal Code for further information regarding layout
and design of lots.
5.1-1.2 Required Minimum Yards.
a. Front Yard: 40 feet except that in all residential districts where lots comprising 40% or
more of the frontage between two intersecting streets are developed with building having
front yards of more than 15 feet in depth, the average of such front yards shall establish
the minimum front yards for the entire frontage. A front yard shall not be required to be
more than 50 feet. A minimum front yard of 15 feet shall be required on all lots.
b. Side Yard: 10% of lot width. The combined total for interior lots shall not be less than
20 feet.
c. Exterior Side Yard: In all residential districts where lots comprising 40% or more of the
frontage between two intersection streets are developed with buildings having a yard of
more than 10 feet in depth adjacent to the street, the average of such yards shall establish
the minimum exterior side yard for the entire frontage. A minimum exterior side yard of
10%, with a minimum of 10 feet, shall be required for all lots. In no case, shall an
exterior side yard of more than 50 feet be required.
d. Rear Yard: 30 feet.
5.1-1.3 Maximum Floor Area Ratio.
a. For Single Family Uses:
1. Lots up to 8,750 sq. feet = LA x 0.35
2. Lots over 8,750 sq. feet up to 20,000 sq. feet = 3062 + [( LA – 8750) x 0.26]
3. Lots over 20,000 sq. feet = LA x 0.30
b. For all other uses: 30%
5.1-1.4 Maximum Building Lot Coverage and Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage.
30%
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-24 REVISED 04/16/18
a. Maximum Permitted Building Lot Coverage is 30%.
b. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage:
1. Lots less than or equal to 6,600 sq. feet in area: Total Lot Maximum of 55%. As
part of that 55%, no more than 50% of the front yard, plus, if it is a corner lot, the
exterior side yard, shall be impervious surface.
2. Lots Greater than 6,600 sq. feet in area: Total Lot Maximum of 50%. As part of
that 50%, no more than 50% of the front yard, plus, if it is a corner lot, the
exterior side yard, shall be impervious surface.
c. Existing Impervious Surface Exception: Existing non-conforming residential lots
needing to repair or replace essential elements only, such as driveways, walkways to
home and patios, may receive an administrative exception from the Director of Building
from the impervious surface coverage maximum. An administrative exception shall only
be permitted if:
1. Replacement of deteriorated essential elements the exact same dimension as
existed at the adoption of this Ordinance; and
2. Modification of these areas is not practical or feasible; and
3. Such exception shall not be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare.
5.1-1.5 Maximum Height: 25 feet and 2-1/2 stories.
5.1-2 One Family Dwelling District: R-2
5.1-2.1 Minimum Lot Size and Minimum Lot Width at Building Line:
Minimum Lot Width
Minimum Lot Size at Building Line
Standard or Corner 10,000-14,999 sq. feet 75 feet
Standard or Corner 15,000-19,999 sq. feet 90 feet
Standard or Corner 20,000-29,999 sq. feet 100 feet
Standard or Corner 30,000-less than one acre 125 feet
Standard or Corner one acre or more 150 feet
Churches, Convents and
Monasteries 20,000 sq. feet 90 feet
a. When two or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and dimension to
qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of the Use District in which they are
located, are contiguous and are held in one ownership prior to December 21, 1959, they
shall be maintained and used as one zoning lot for such use.
b. Any single lot or parcel of land, held in one ownership prior to October 4, 1955 which
was of record as of March 15, 2004, that does not meet the requirements for minimum lot
width and area, may be utilized for a permitted use, provided that yards, courts or usable
open space are not less than 75% of the minimum required dimensions of areas.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-25 REVISED 04/16/18
c. Where lots front upon a cul-de-sac or curved street having a radius of 200 feet or less,
minimum lot widths as set forth above shall be measured at the building setback line
along an arc parallel to the right-of-way of such cul-de-sac or curved street. Such lots
shall also be laid out so that their frontage length, as measured on the arc of such right-ofway
line is not less than 50% of the required lot width measured at the building setback
line. Refer to Chapter 29 of the Municipal Code for further information regarding layout
and design of lots.
5.1-2.2 Required Minimum Yards:
a. Front Yard: 25 feet except where a building line has been established on a recorded plat
of subdivision, prior to December 21, 1959, such building line shall determine the front
yard requirements of this Chapter and shall be observed.
In all residential districts where lots comprising 40% or more of the frontage between two
intersecting streets are developed with building having front yards of more than 15 feet in
depth, the average of such front yards shall establish the minimum front yards for the
entire frontage. In no case shall a front yard of more than 40 feet be required. A
minimum front yard of 15 feet shall be required on all lots.
b. Side Yard: 10% of lot width. Subdivisions created after January 1, 2003 shall provide a
minimum side yard of seven feet.
c. Exterior Side Yard: In all residential districts where lots comprising 40% or more of
the frontage between two intersecting streets are developed with buildings having a yard
of more than ten feet in depth adjacent to the street, the average of such yards shall
establish the minimum exterior side yard for the entire frontage. A minimum exterior side
yard of 10% of the lot width, with a minimum of ten feet, shall be required for all lots. In
no case shall an exterior side yard of more than 40 feet be required.
d. Rear Yard: 30 feet.
5.1-2.3 Maximum Floor Area Ratio.
a. For Single Family Uses:
1. Lots up to 8,750 sq. feet = LA x 0.45
2. Lots over 8,750 sq. feet = 3938 + [( LA – 8750) x 0.4]
b. For All Other Uses: 50%
5.1-2.4 Maximum Building Lot Coverage and Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage.
a. Maximum Permitted Building Lot Coverage is 35% for lots 6,000 square feet or greater
and 40% for lots less than 6,000 square feet
b. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage:
1. Lots less than or equal to 6,600 sq. feet in area: Total Lot Maximum of 55%. As
part of that 55%, no more than 50% of the front yard, plus, if it is a corner lot, the
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-26 REVISED 04/16/18
exterior side yard, shall be impervious surface.
2. Lots Greater than 6,600 sq. feet in area: Total Lot Maximum of 50%. As part of
that 50%, no more than 50% of the front yard, plus, if it is a corner lot, the
exterior side yard, shall be impervious surface.
c. Existing Impervious Surface Exception: Existing non-conforming residential lots
needing to repair or replace essential elements only, such as driveways, walkways to
home and patios, may receive an administrative exception from the Director of Building
from the impervious surface coverage maximum. An administrative exception shall only
be permitted if:
1. Replacement of deteriorated essential elements the exact same dimension as
existed at the adoption of this Ordinance; and
2. Modification of these areas is not practical or feasible; and
3. Such exception shall not be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare.
5.1-2.5 Maximum Height: 25 feet and 2-1/2 stories.
5.1-3 One Family Dwelling District: R-3
5.1-3.1 Minimum Lot Size and Minimum Lot Width at Building Line:
Minimum Lot Width
Minimum Lot Size at Building Line
Standard or Corner 8,750-9,999 sq. feet 70 feet
Standard or Corner 10,000-14,999 sq. feet 75 feet
Standard or Corner 15,000-19,999 sq. feet 90 feet
Standard or Corner 20,000-29,999 sq. feet 100 feet
Standard or Corner 30,000-less than one acre 125 feet
Standard or Corner one acre or more 150 feet
Churches, Convents and
Monasteries 20,000 sq. feet 90 feet
a. When two or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and dimension to
qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of the Use District in which they are
located, are contiguous and are held in one ownership prior to December 21, 1959, they
shall be maintained and used as one zoning lot for such use.
b. Any single lot or parcel of land, held in one ownership prior to October 4, 1955 which
was of record as of March 15, 2004, that does not meet the requirements for minimum lot
width and area, may be utilized for a permitted use, provided that yards, courts or usable
open space are not less than 75% of the minimum required dimensions of areas.
c. Where lots front upon a cul-de-sac or curved street having a radius of 200 feet or less,
minimum lot widths as set forth above shall be measured at the building setback line
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-27 REVISED 04/16/18
along an arc parallel to the right-of-way of such cul-de-sac or curved street. Such lots
shall also be laid out so that their frontage length, as measured on the arc of such right-ofway
line is not less than 50% of the required lot width measured at the building setback
line. Refer to Chapter 29 of the Municipal Code for further information regarding layout
and design of lots.
d. The Director of Building may issue a building permit for the erection of a single family
residence on any parcel of land which does not meet the minimum lot requirements of
width or area or both, of the District, if such parcel fronts on a street which has a majority
of the developed lots that both front on said street and are contained between two
adjacent streets which intersect with said street ( or in lieu of a second intersecting street,
a public park, cemetery, railroad right-of-way, a cul-de-sac, waterway or a corporate
boundary line of the Village) that are either less than the minimum area or width, or both
required by the District; provided that no permit shall be issued pursuant hereto for any
parcel containing less than 6,250-square feet and a frontage less than 49 feet.
If there is an existing principal residence on a parcel, this paragraph is not applicable. The
parcel is deemed buildable and permits may be issued for either a new residence or
alterations to the existing residence.
5.1-3.2 Required Minimum Yards.
a. Front Yard: 25 feet except where a building line has been established on a recorded plat
of subdivision, prior to December 21, 1959 such building line shall determine the front
yard requirements of this Chapter and shall be observed.
In all residential districts where lots comprising 40% or more of the frontage between two
intersecting streets are developed with building having front yards of more than 15 feet in
depth, the average of such front yards shall establish the minimum front yards for the
entire frontage. In no case shall a front yard of more than 40 feet be required. A
minimum front yard of 15 feet shall be required on all lots.
b. Side Yard: 10% of lot width. Subdivisions created after January 1, 2003, shall provide a
minimum side yard of 7 feet.
c. Exterior Side Yard: In all residential districts where lots comprising 40% or more of the
frontage between two intersecting streets are developed with buildings having a yard of
more than ten feet in depth adjacent to the street, the average of such yards shall establish
the minimum exterior side yard for the entire frontage. A minimum exterior side yard of
10% of the lot width with a minimum of ten feet shall be required for all lots. In no case
shall an exterior side yard of more than 40 feet be required.
d. Rear Yard: 30 feet.
5.1-3.3 Maximum Floor Area Ratio.
a. For Single Family Uses:
1. Lots up to 8,750 sq. feet = LA x 0.45
2. Lots over 8,750 sq. feet = 3938 + [( LA – 8750) x 0.4]
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-28 REVISED 04/16/18
b. For All Other Uses: 50%
5.1-3.4 Maximum Building Lot Coverage and Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage.
a. Maximum Permitted Building Lot Coverage is 35% for lots 6,000 square feet or greater
and 40% for lots less than 6,000 square feet
b. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage:
1. Lots less than or equal to 6,600 sq. feet in area: Total Lot Maximum of 55%. As
part of that 55%, no more than 50% of the front yard, plus, if it is a corner lot, the
exterior side yard, shall be impervious surface.
2. Lots Greater than 6,600 sq. feet in area: Total Lot Maximum of 50%. As part of
that 50%, no more than 50% of the front yard, plus, if it is a corner lot, the
exterior side yard, shall be impervious surface.
c. Existing Impervious Surface Exception: Existing non-conforming residential lots
needing to repair or replace essential elements only, such as driveways, walkways to
home and patios, may receive an administrative exception from the Director of Building
from the impervious surface coverage maximum. An administrative exception shall only
be permitted if:
1. Replacement of deteriorated essential elements the exact same dimension as
existed at the adoption of this Ordinance; and
2. Modification of these areas is not practical or feasible; and
3. Such exception shall not be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare.
5.1-3.5 Maximum Height: 25 feet and 2-1/2 stories.
5.1-4 Two Family Dwelling District: R-4. The purpose of the R-4 district is to provide areas
for two-family dwellings and to provide a use which is compatible with adjacent single-family
districts.
5.1-4.1 Minimum Lot Size and Minimum Lot Width at Building Line.
a. Single Family Dwellings:
Minimum Lot Width
Minimum Lot Size at Building Line
Standard or Corner 8,750-9,999 sq. feet 70 feet
Standard or Corner 10,000-14,999 sq. feet 75 feet
Standard or Corner 15,000-19,999 sq. feet 90 feet
Standard or Corner 20,000-29,999 sq. feet 100 feet
Standard or Corner 30,000-less than one acre 125 feet
Standard or Corner one acre or more 150 feet
Churches, Convents and
Monasteries 20,000 sq. feet 90 feet
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-29 REVISED 04/16/18
b. For Two Family Dwellings, Standard or Corner:
Minimum Lot Width
Minimum Lot Size at Building Line
4-bedroom 7,000-sq feet per dwelling unit 105
3-bedroom 6,000-sq feet per dwelling unit 90
2-bedroom or less 5,000-sq feet per dwelling unit 50
5.1-4.2 Required Minimum Yard.
a. Front Yard: 25 feet except where a building line has been established on a recorded plat
of subdivision, prior to the date of this Ordinance, such building line shall determine the
front yard requirements of this Chapter and shall be observed.
In all residential districts where lots comprising forty percent or more of the frontage
between two intersecting streets are developed with buildings having front yards of more
than 15 feet in depth, the average of such front yards shall establish the minimum front
yards for the entire frontage. In no case shall a front yard of more than 40 feet be
required. A minimum front yard of 15 feet shall be required on all lots.
b. Side Yard: 10% of lot width. Subdivisions created after January 1, 2003, shall provide a
minimum side yard of seven feet.
c. Exterior Side Yard: On corner lots, there shall be maintained a side yard of not less
than 20 feet on the side adjacent to the street which intersects the street upon which the
building maintains frontage, and in the case of a reversed corner lot, there shall be
maintained a setback from the side street of not less than 50% of the front yard required
on the lots in the rear of such corner lots, but such yard need not exceed 20 feet. No
accessory building on said reversed corner lot shall project beyond the front yard required
on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be located nearer than five feet to the side lot line of
said adjacent lots.
d. Rear Yard: 30 feet.
5.1-4.3 Maximum Floor Area Ratio.
a. For Single Family Uses:
1. Lots up to 8,750 sq. feet = LA x 0.45
2. Lots over 8,750 sq. feet = 3938 + [( LA – 8750) x 0.4]
b. For All Other Uses: 100%
5.1-4.4 Maximum Building Lot Coverage and Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage.
a. Maximum Permitted Building Lot Coverage is 35%.
b. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage:
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-30 REVISED 04/16/18
1. Lots less than or equal to 6,600 sq. feet in area: Total Lot Maximum of 55%. As
part of that 55%, no more than 50% of the front yard, plus, if it is a corner lot, the
exterior side yard, shall be impervious surface.
2. Lots Greater than 6,600 sq. feet in area: Total Lot Maximum of 50%. As part of
that 50%, no more than 50% of the front yard, plus, if it is a corner lot, the
exterior side yard, shall be impervious surface.
c. Existing Impervious Surface Exception: Existing non-conforming residential lots
needing to repair or replace essential elements only, such as driveways, walkways to
home and patios, may receive an administrative exception from the Director of Building
from the impervious surface coverage maximum. An administrative exception shall only
be permitted if:
1. Replacement of deteriorated essential elements the exact same dimension as
existed at the adoption of this ordinance; and
2. Modification of these areas is not practical or feasible; and
3. Such exception shall not be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare.
5.1-4.5 Maximum Building Height: 25 feet and 2-1/2 stories.
5.1-4.6 Minimum Floor Area (Square Foot) per Dwelling Unit for Multi-Family Dwellings
exclusive of utility rooms and garages):
One Two Three Four
Efficiency Bedroom Bedroom Bedroom Bedroom
R-4 -- 600 750 900
5.1-5 Multiple-Family Dwelling District: R-5. The purpose of the R-5 district is to provide for
residential developments using one-family attached dwellings to allow a density greater than
permitted in the R-3 One-Family Dwelling District but less than permitted in the R-6 Multiple-
Family Dwelling District. Developments in this district shall be of similar composition and
design compatible with adjoining developments of one-family dwellings. The minimum area for
this District is two acres.
5.1-5.1 Minimum Lot Size/Density and Minimum Lot Width at Building Line. Each multifamily
building or buildings shall be situated on a zoning lot with a net area of not less than
20,000-square feet.
a. Single Family Dwellings:
Minimum Lot Width
Minimum Lot Size at Building Line
Standard or Corner 8,750-9,999 sq. feet 70 feet
Standard or Corner 10,000-14,999 sq. feet 75 feet
Standard or Corner 15,000-19,999 sq. feet 90 feet
Standard or Corner 20,000-29,999 sq. feet 100 feet
Standard or Corner 30,000-less than one acre 125 feet
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-31 REVISED 04/16/18
Standard or Corner one acre or more 150 feet
Churches, Convents and
Monasteries 20,000 sq. feet 90 feet
b. Two Family Dwellings:
Minimum Lot Size/Density
4-bedroom 5,000-sq feet per dwelling unit
3-bedroom 4,000-sq feet per dwelling unit
2-bedroom or less 3,500-sq feet per dwelling unit
5.1-5.2 Maximum Floor Area Ratio.
a. For Single Family Uses:
1. Lots up to 8,750 sq. feet = LA x 0.45
2. Lots over 8,750 sq. feet = 3938 + [( LA – 8750) x 0.4]
b. For All Other Uses: 100%
5.1-5.3 Required Minimum Yards.
a. Front Yard: 25 feet.
b. Side Yard: 10% of lot width. Subdivisions created after January 1, 2003, shall provide a
minimum side yard of seven feet. On corner lots there shall be maintained a side yard of
not less than 20 feet on the side adjacent to the street which intersects the street upon
which the building maintains frontage, and in the case of a reversed corner lot, there shall
be maintained a setback from the side street of not less than 50% of the front yard
required on the lots in the rear of such corner lots, but such yard need not exceed 20 feet.
No accessory building on said reversed corner lot shall project beyond the front yard
required on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be located nearer than five feet to the side lot.
c. Exterior Side Yard: On corner lots, there shall be maintained a side yard of not less than
20 feet on the side adjacent to the street which intersects the street upon which the
building maintains frontage, and in the case of a reversed corner lot, there shall be
maintained a setback from the side street of not less than 50% of the front yard required
on the lots in the rear of such corner lots, but such yard need not exceed 20 feet. No
accessory building on said reversed corner lot shall project beyond the front yard required
on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be located nearer than five feet to the side lot line of
said adjacent lots.
d. Rear Yard: 30 feet.
5.1-5.4 Maximum Building Lot Coverage and Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage.
a. Maximum Permitted Building Lot Coverage is 35% for new construction
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-32 REVISED 04/16/18
b. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage:
1. Lots less than or equal to 6,600 sq. feet in area: Total Lot Maximum of 55%. As
part of that 55%, no more than 50% of the front yard, plus, if it is a corner lot, the
exterior side yard, shall be impervious surface.
2. Lots Greater than 6,600 sq. feet in area: Total Lot Maximum of 50%. As part of
that 50%, no more than 50% of the front yard, plus, if it is a corner lot, the
exterior side yard, shall be impervious surface.
c. Existing Impervious Surface Exception: Existing non-conforming residential lots
needing to repair or replace essential elements only, such as driveways, walkways to
home and patios, may receive an administrative exception from the Director of Building
from the impervious surface coverage maximum. An administrative exception shall only
be permitted if:
1. Replacement of deteriorated essential elements the exact same dimension as
existed at the adoption of this ordinance; and
2. Modification of these areas is not practical or feasible; and
3. Such exception shall not be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare.
5.1-5.5 Maximum Building Height: 35 feet exclusive of stair heads and mechanical
equipment facilities.
5.1-5.6 Minimum Floor Area (Square Foot) per Dwelling Unit for Multi-Family Dwellings
exclusive of utility rooms and garages):
One Two Three Four
Efficiency Bedroom Bedroom Bedroom Bedroom
R-5 -- 750 900 1200 1400
5.1-5.7 Spacing Between Multi-Family Buildings. There shall be a minimum of 25 feet
between principal buildings.
5.1-6 Multiple-Family Dwelling District: R-6. The purpose of the R-6 district is to provide
areas for medium density multiple-family developments. The minimum area for this District is
one acre.
5.1-6.1 Minimum Lot Size/Density and Minimum Lot Width at Building Line.
a. For Single Family Dwellings:
Minimum Lot Width
Minimum Lot Size at Building Line
Standard or Corner 8,750-9,999 sq. feet 70 feet
Standard or Corner 10,000-14,999 sq. feet 75 feet
Standard or Corner 15,000-19,999 sq. feet 90 feet
Standard or Corner 20,000-29,999 sq. feet 100 feet
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-33 REVISED 04/16/18
Standard or Corner 30,000-less than one acre 125 feet
Standard or Corner one acre or more 150 feet
Churches, Convents and
Monasteries 20,000 sq. feet 90 feet
b. Multi-Family Dwellings:
Minimum Lot Size/Density
4-bedroom 4,000-sq feet per dwelling unit
3-bedroom 3,500-sq feet per dwelling unit
2-bedroom or less 2,500-sq feet per dwelling unit
5.1-6.2 Maximum Floor Area Ratio.
a. For Single Family Uses:
1. Lots up to 8,750 sq. feet = LA x 0.45
2. Lots over 8,750 sq. feet = 3938 + [( LA – 8750) x 0.4]
b. For All Other Uses: 150%
5.1-6.3 Required Minimum Yards.
a. For Single Family Uses:
1. Front Yard: 25 feet except where a building line has been established on a
recorded plat of subdivision, prior to December 21, 1959 such building line shall
determine the front yard requirements of this ordinance and shall be observed.
In all residential districts where lots comprising 40% or more of the frontage
between two intersecting streets are developed with building having front yards of
more than 15 feet in depth, the average of such front yards shall establish the
minimum front yards for the entire frontage. In no case shall a front yard of more
than 40 feet be required. A minimum front yard of 15 feet shall be required on all
lots.
2. Side Yard: 20 feet width. Subdivisions created after January 1, 2003, shall
provide a minimum side yard of seven feet.
3. Exterior Side Yard: In all residential districts where lots comprising 40% or more
of the frontage between two intersecting streets are developed with buildings
having a yard of more than ten feet in depth adjacent to the street, the average of
such yards shall establish the minimum exterior side yard for the entire frontage.
A minimum exterior side yard of 10% of the lot width with a minimum of ten feet
shall be required for all lots. In no case shall an exterior side yard of more than
40 feet be required.
4. Rear Yard: 30 feet.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-34 REVISED 04/16/18
b. For all other uses:
1. Front Yard: 25 feet
2. Side Yard: 10% of lot width. Subdivisions created after January 1, 2003, shall
provide a minimum side yard of seven feet.
3. Exterior Side Yard: On corner lots, there shall be maintained a side yard of not
less than 20 feet on the side adjacent to the street which intersects the street upon
which the building maintains frontage, and in the case of a reversed corner lot,
there shall be maintained a setback from the side street of not less than 50% of the
front yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner lots, but such yard need
not exceed 20 feet. No accessory building on said reversed corner lot shall
project beyond the front yard required on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be
located nearer than five feet to the side lot line of said adjacent lots.
4. Rear Yard: 30 feet
5.1-6.4 Maximum Building Lot Coverage and Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage.
a. Maximum Permitted Building Lot Coverage is 35% for new construction.
b. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage:
1. Lots less than or equal to 6,600 sq. feet in area: Total Lot Maximum of 55%. As
part of that 55%, no more than 50% of the front yard, plus, if it is a corner lot, the
exterior side yard, shall be impervious surface.
2. Lots Greater than 6,600 sq. feet in area: Total Lot Maximum of 50%. As part of
that 50%, no more than 50% of the front yard, plus, if it is a corner lot, the
exterior side yard, shall be impervious surface.
c. Existing Impervious Surface Exception: Existing non-conforming residential lots
needing to repair or replace essential elements only, such as driveways, walkways to
home and patios, may receive an administrative exception from the Director of Building
from the impervious surface coverage maximum. An administrative exception shall only
be permitted if:
1. Replacement of deteriorated essential elements the exact same dimension as
existed at the adoption of this ordinance; and
2. Modification of these areas is not practical or feasible; and
3. Such exception shall not be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare.
5.1-6.5 Maximum Building Height: 50 feet exclusive of elevator penthouses, stair heads and
mechanical equipment facilities.
5.1-6.6 Minimum Floor Area (Square Foot) per Dwelling Unit for Multi-Family Dwellings
exclusive of utility rooms and garages):
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-35 REVISED 04/16/18
One Two Three Four
Efficiency Bedroom Bedroom Bedroom Bedroom
R-6 500 600 750 900 --
5.1-6.7 Spacing Between Multi-Family Buildings. There shall be a minimum of 25 feet
between principal buildings.
5.1-7 Multiple-Family Dwelling District (R-7). The purpose of the R-7 district is to provide
high density multiple-family developments which will provide a buffer between the Downtown
B-5) District and the single family neighborhood, reduce transportation needs by locating high
density developments close to public transportation facilities and pride a consumer base for the
Downtown District area. In addition, the purpose of the R-7 District is to stimulate development
in areas within a designated redevelopment area consistent with a redevelopment plan.
5.1-7.1 Location. All land within the R-7 zoning district classification, shall be located in the
areas adjoining the area designated Downtown District mixed use or areas within a designated
redevelopment area consistent with a redevelopment plan and also designated for “High Density
Multi-Family” on the Village of Arlington Heights General Comprehensive Plan. All other
parcels of land zoned R-7 prior to the adoption of this amendment, but not indicated as “ High
Density Multi-Family” shall conform to the requirements of the R-6 District, except that the
minimum lot area for two or more dwelling units shall be 2,100 square feet per dwelling unit.
5.1-7.2 Permitted Uses: See Section 5.5 Permitted uses.
5.1-7.3 Minimum Area for Zoning District: Two-Acres.
5.1-7.4 Minimum Lot Size:
Single-Family: See R-3 Requirements
Multiple-Family:
2-bedroom or more 900-sq.ft. per dwelling unit
1-bedroom or less 600-sq.ft. per dwelling unit
Churches, Convents & Monastery: 20,000-sq. ft. Standard & Corner
Minimum Lot Width for residential lots in a new subdivision, measured at the building setback
lines thereof, shall meet the following standards:
a. 70 feet when the lot contains an area of 8,750-sq. ft. or more, but less than 10,000-sq. ft.;
b. 75 feet when the lot contains an area of 10,000-sq. ft. or more, but less than 15,000-sq.
ft.;
c. 90 feet when the lot contains an area of 15,000-sq. ft. or more but less than 20,000- sq.
ft.;
d. 100 feet when the lot contains an area of 20,000-sq. ft. or more, but less than 20,000-sq.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-36 REVISED 04/16/18
ft.;
e. 125 feet when the lot contains an area of 30,000-sq. ft. or more, but less than one acre;
f. 150 feet when the lot contains an area of one acre or more.
Where lots front upon a cul-de-sac or curved street having a radius of 200 feet or less, minimum
lot widths as set forth above shall be measured at the building setback line along an arc parallel
to the right-of-way of such cul-de-sac or curved street. Such lots shall also be laid out so that
their frontage length, as measured on the arc of such right-of-way line is not less than 50% of the
required lot width measured at the building setback line. Refer to Chapter 29 of the Municipal
Code for further information regarding layout and design of lots.
5.1-7.5 Minimum Lot Width at Building Line:
Single-Family See R-3 Requirements
Multiple-Family Standard Corner
2-bedroom or more N/A N/A
1-bedroom or less N/A N/A
Churches, Convents & Monastery: 100-ft.
5.1-7.6 Required Minimum Yards:
Front Yard: 25 feet plus one-foot for each foot or fraction thereof by which building height
exceeds 40 feet.
Side Yard: 10% of lot width plus 1-foot for each foot or fraction thereof by which building
height exceeds 40 feet.
Exterior Side Yards: On corner lots, there shall be maintained a side yard of not less than 20 feet
on the side adjacent to the street which intersects the street upon which the building maintains
frontage, and in the case of a reversed corner lot, there shall be maintained a setback from the
side street of not less than 50% of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner
lots, but such yard need not exceed 20 feet. No accessory building on said reversed corner lot
shall project beyond the front yard required on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be located nearer
than five feet to the side lot line of said adjacent lots.
Rear Yard: 30 feet.
Ord. #03-066)
5.1-7.7 Maximum Building Lot Coverage: 45% for new construction
Impervious Surface Coverage for One-Family Dwelling: Refer to Section 5.1-3.47.
5.1-7.8 Dwelling Standards.
a. Every single-family dwelling unit hereafter erected shall conform to the requirements of
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-37 REVISED 04/16/18
Chapter 23 of the Municipal Code.
b. No habitable room shall be erected or occupied with a floor below grade.
c. Minimum Floor Area ( Square Foot) per Dwelling Unit for Multi-Family Dwellings
exclusive of utility rooms and garages):
One Two Three Four
Efficiency Bedroom Bedroom Bedroom Bedroom
R-7 500 600 750 900 --
5.1-7.9 Spacing Between Multi-Family Buildings, Including Court Standards. The following
standards shall apply:
a. Between the opposing walls of outer and inner courts. Inner courts are not permitted.
b. When two or more buildings, which contain attached dwelling units or multi -family
dwelling units are located on the same zoning lot.
c. When the windows of a living unit in a multi-family or attached single-family building
are opposite an accessory building.
5.1-7.10 Spacing Standards.
Minimum Distance
Conditions Between Opposing Walls
a. If either or both walls contains a living room window 50 feet
b. If either or both walls contains a bedroom window 30 feet
c. Both walls contain windows of other rooms 24 feet
d. When there are no windows in either of opposing walls 12 feet
e. If either or both walls contains windows of other rooms 15 feet
5.1-7.11 Additional court standards projections in Outer Courts. Projections in outer
courts shall not exceed five feet.
5.1-7.12 Parking: See Section 10 – Off Street Parking and Loading.
Ord. #03-065)
5.1-7.13 Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 200%
a. Single Family Detached: See Section 5.3-3.2
5.1-8 Institutional District: I. The I District shall be reserved for institutional non-residential
and institutional residential uses as defined in this Chapter and as specified in the Permitted Use
Table Section. Any development in the I District shall be considered in accordance with the
Planned Unit Development requirements set forth in Section 9 of this Chapter. The minimum
area for this District is two acres. The minimum area requirement for a parcel for which a zoning
amendment to an I classification is to be applied may be reduced to not less than one acre if the
proposed use would adjoin and abut the related institutional facility whose land use is permitted
within the I district provided the combination of area of the subject property and the adjacent
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-38 REVISED 04/16/18
parcel is at least four acres.
The location of any “I” District shall be as follows:
a. Property of a gross land area up to four acres must have frontage on a street classified at
least as collector on Arlington Heights Thoroughfare Plan.
b. Property of a gross area of over four acres and no more than twenty acres must have
frontage on a street classified at least as a secondary arterial on Arlington Heights
Thoroughfare Plan.
c. Property of a gross land area of over twenty acres must have frontage on a street
classified as a major arterial on Arlington Heights Thoroughfare Plan.
5.1-8.1 Minimum Lot Size/Density and Minimum Lot Width at Building Line.
Minimum Lot Width
Minimum Lot Size at Building Line
Residential or Non-Residential 100 feet
Churches, Convents & Monastery 20,000 square feet 90 feet
One-Bedroom 2,400 square feet per dwelling unit
Two Bedroom 2,400 square feet per dwelling unit
Three Bedroom * 2,700 square feet per dwelling unit
3-bedroom dwellings cannot exceed 10% of total number of dwellings
5.1-8.2 Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 100%
5.1-8.3 Required Minimum Yards.
a. Front Yard: 1-Story or 2-Story 25 feet
3-Story 30 feet
4-Story 35 feet
b. Side Yard: 1-Story or 2-Story 25 feet
3-Story 30 feet
4-Story 35 feet
c. Rear Yard: 1-Story or 2-Story 30 feet
3-Story 35 feet
4-Story 40 feet
5.1-8.4 Maximum Building Coverage: 40%
5.1-8.5 Maximum Height: 45 feet and four stories. Any accessory building shall not exceed
35 feet in height.
5.1-8.6 Minimum Floor Area (Square Foot) per Dwelling Unit for Multi -Family Dwellings
exclusive of utility rooms and garages):
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-39 REVISED 04/16/18
One Two Three Four
Efficiency Bedroom Bedroom Bedroom Bedroom
I 550 650 750 800 --
5.1-9 Office Transitional: OT. The OT district shall be restricted to professional and
administrative offices developed in accordance with an approved Planned Unit Development for
the total site. This district is designed generally as a transition between heavy traffic arteries and
residential areas, or between manufacturing or business and residential areas. The activities
within this district shall not generate heavy vehicular traffic or create perceptible noise or glare
beyond lot lines and shall be compatible with adjoining residential property. The minimum area
for this District shall be 20,000 square feet.
The location of any OT district shall be on property which has access to a major or secondary
arterial street designated on the Village Official Map or Village Comprehensive Plan Map or
shall be adjacent to an existing business or manufacturing zoned district.
5.1-9.1 Minimum Lot Size and Minimum Lot Width at Building Line: The minimum lot
size is 10,000 square feet. Each lot or combination of adjoining lots shall have a minimum
frontage of 100 feet.
5.1-9.2 Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 80%
5.1-9.3 Required Minimum Yards:
a. Front Yard: 25 feet
b. Side Yard: Side yards of at least 20 feet in width shall be provided on each side on lots
adjacent to a residential district. No side yards are required on that side that is adjacent to
a business or manufacturing district. At least one side yard of 12 feet is required per lot.
c. Rear Yard: 30 feet may be reduced half the width of an adjoining alley.
5.1-9.4 Maximum Building Lot Coverage: 40%
5.1-9.5 Maximum Height: 30 feet and two stories
5.1-9.6 Conditions of Use. All uses permitted in this district shall be subject to the following
conditions of use:
a. The development plan shall be considered a Planned Unit Development and shall be
subject to the requirements of Section 9.
b. In no case shall there be any delivery to or from the premises of goods, merchandise or
wares except as shall be strictly occasional and incidental to the principal use. Storage of
goods, wares or merchandise for sale or delivery from or on the premises is prohibited,
except for samples as shall be necessary for use of the premises by sales representatives
headquartered on the premises; this shall not be construed to permit retail or wholesale
catalog store.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-40 REVISED 04/16/18
5.1-10 Business District Limited Retail: B-1. The purpose of the B-1 district is to provide for
the convenience shopping of persons residing in adjacent residential areas. Limited service and
office establishments are permitted in this district provided that such establishments will be
conducted without noise, odor or any other condition, which might be disturbing to adjacent
residential areas. The minimum size for this District shall be one acre.
5.1-10.1 Minimum Lot Size for Dwelling Units above the First Floor:
Minimum Lot Size
4-bedroom 4,000-sq feet per dwelling unit
3-bedroom 3,500-sq feet per dwelling unit
2-bedroom or less 2,500-sq feet per dwelling unit
5.1-10.2 Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 150%
5.1-10.3 Required Minimum Yards:
a. Front Yard: When lots front on a street and at least 80% of the frontage directly across
the street between two consecutive intersecting streets is in a residential district, the front
yard regulations for the residential district shall apply to said lots in the business district.
Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with the front lot line of an
adjacent lot located in a residential district, a yard equal in depth to the minimum front
yard required by this Chapter on such adjacent lot in the residential district shall be
provided along such front or side lot line for a distance of at least 25 feet, including the
width of any intervening alley, from such lot in the residential district.
b. Side Yard: Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line of a property in an
adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such side lot line. Such yard
shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard, which would be required under
this Chapter for a residential use on the adjacent property in the residential district.
c. Rear Yard: Where a rear lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line of a property in an
adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard
shall be 20 feet in depth. A rear yard shall not less than 30 feet in depth and beginning at
a level no higher than that of the finished floor of the lowest residential unit shall be
provided for residential uses located above the first floor.
5.1-10.4 Conditions of Use. All uses permitted in this district (except “ R” District uses) shall
be subject to the following conditions of use:
a. Dwelling units and lodging rooms are not permitted below the second floor.
b. All activities except for outdoor cafés and automobile off-street parking facilities
permitted in this District shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building.
c. Establishments of the “ drive-in” type, offering goods or services directly to customers
waiting in parked motor vehicles are not permitted.
d. That there shall be no manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than those
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-41 REVISED 04/16/18
which are clearly incidental and essential to the retail business conducted on the same
premises.
e. That not more than three persons ( exclusive of manager, clerks, and drivers) shall be
engaged in the manufacture, processing or treatment of products.
f. That such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to odor, dust,
smoke, noise, vibration or other similar causes.
g. All deliveries and loading related activities, as well as parking lot sweeping in the service
area, directly abutting a residential area shall not be permitted between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
h. Refrigerated trailers shall not be left separated from the cab on the site.
i. All trailers shall only be parked within the designated loading areas.
5.1-11 General Business District: B-2. The purpose of the B-2 district is to provide sites to be
used primarily as community shopping centers which serve a large trade area and to include the
grouping of more compatible business uses which promote public convenience and business
prosperity. Commercial activities including business and off uses are permitted in this district.
The minimum size for this District shall be four acres.
5.1-11.1 Minimum Lot Size for Dwelling Units above the First Floor:
Minimum Lot Size
Multiple-Family
4 bedrooms 5,000-sq. feet per unit
3 bedrooms 4,500-sq. feet per unit
2 bedrooms 3,500-sq. feet per unit
Lodging Room 600-sq. feet per dwelling unit
5.1-11.2 Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 250%
5.1-11.3 Required Minimum Yards:
a. Front Yard: When lots front on a street and at least 80% of the frontage directly across
the street between two consecutive intersecting streets is in a residential district, the front
yard regulations for the residential district shall apply to said lots in the business district.
Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincided with the front lot line of an
adjacent lot located in a residential district, a yard equal in depth to the minimum front
yard required by this Chapter on such adjacent lot in the residential district shall be
provided along such front or side lot line for a distance of at least 25 feet, including the
width of any intervening alley, from such lot in the residential district.
b. Side Yard: Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line of a property in an
adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such side lot line. Such yard
shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard, which would be required under
this Chapter for a residential use on the adjacent property in the residential district.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-42 REVISED 04/16/18
c. Rear Yard: Where a rear lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line of a property in an
adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard
shall be 20 feet in depth. A rear yard shall be provided for residential uses located above
the first floor, such yard to be not less than 30 feet in depth and to begin at a level no
higher than that of the finished floor of the lowest residential unit.
5.1-11.4 Conditions of Use. All uses permitted in this district (except “R” district uses) shall be
subject to the following conditions:
a. Dwelling units and lodging rooms are not permitted below the second floor.
b. That there shall be no manufacture, processing, or treatment of products other than those
which are clearly incidental and essential to the retail businesses conducted.
c. That not more than five persons ( exclusive of manager, clerk and drivers) shall be
engaged in said manufacture, process or treatment of products including catering,
cleaning, laundering, plumbing, upholstering and other similar permitted uses.
d. That such uses, operation or products shall not be objectionable due to odor, dust, smoke,
noise, vibrations or other similar causes.
e. The preparation of articles intended for human consumption shall be conducted wholly
within an enclosed building. However, the consumption of such articles may be
permitted outdoors in an enclosed area.
f. All activities except for outdoor cafes, the sale of Christmas trees, and automobile off
street parking facilities permitted in this District shall be conducted wholly within an
enclosed building.
g. All deliveries and loading related activities, as well as parking lot sweeping in the service
area, directly abutting a residential property shall not be permitted between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
h. Refrigerated trailers shall not be left separated from the cab on the site.
i. All trailers shall only be parked within the designated loading areas.
5.1-12 General Service, Wholesale and Motor Vehicle District: B-3. The purpose of the B-3
district is to provide areas primarily for motor vehicle oriented uses, wholesale/retail and service
establishments. This district is located on arterial streets designated on the Village Official Map
or Village Comprehensive Plan Map. The minimum size for this District shall be four acres
5.1-12.1 Minimum Lot Size for Dwelling Units above the First Floor:
Minimum Lot Size
Multiple Family:
4-bedrooms 5,000-sq feet per dwelling unit
3-bedrooms 4,500-sq feet per dwelling unit
2-bedrooms 3,500-sq feet per dwelling unit
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-43 REVISED 04/16/18
Lodging Room 600-sq feet per lodging room
5.1-12.2 Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 350%
5.1-12.3 Required Minimum Yards.
a. Front Yard: When lots front on a street and at least 80% of the frontage directly across
the street between two consecutive intersecting streets is in a residential district, the front
yard regulations for the residential district shall apply to said lots in the business district.
Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincided with the front lot line of an
adjacent lot located in a residential district, a yard equal in depth to the minimum front
yard required by this Chapter on such adjacent lot in the residential district shall be
provided along such front or side lot line for a distance of at least 25 feet, including the
width of any intervening alley, from such lot in the residential district.
b. Side Yard: Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line of a property in an
adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such side lot line. Such yard
shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard, which would be required under
this Chapter for a residential use on the adjacent property in the residential district.
c. Rear Yard: Where a rear lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line of a property in an
adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard
shall be 20 feet in depth. A rear yard shall be provided for residential uses located above
the first floor, such yard to be not less than 30 feet in depth and to begin at a level no
higher than that of the finished floor of the lowest residential unit.
5.1-12.4 Conditions of Use. All uses permitted in this district (except “ R” District uses) shall
be subject to the following conditions of use:
a. Dwelling units are not permitted below the second floor.
b. That there shall be no manufacture, processing, or treatment of products other than those
which are clearly incidental and essential to the retail businesses conducted.
c. That such uses involving the production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair
of materials, goods or products shall take place within completely enclosed buildings,
except for the storage of building materials and except for the parking of motor vehicles
in the open.
d. That such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to odor, dust,
smoke, noise, vibrations or other similar causes.
e. The preparation of articles intended for human consumption shall be conducted wholly
within an enclosed building. However, the consumption of such articles may be
permitted outdoors in an enclosed area.
f. All deliveries and loading related activities, as well as parking lot sweeping in the service
area, directly abutting a residential property, shall not be permitted between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-44 REVISED 04/16/18
g Refrigerated trailers shall not be left separated from the cab on the site.
5.1-13 Limited Service District: B-4. The purpose of the B-4 district is to provide areas for
specialized services for home, business and industry. It shall also provide a buffer between
existing residential areas and industrial areas. The minimum size for this District shall be four
acres.
5.1-13.1 Minimum Lot Width at Building Line. 50 feet
5.1-13.2 Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 150%
5.1-13.3 Required Minimum Yards.
a. Non-Transitional Yards (Not Adjacent to Residential Districts)
1. Front Yard: Five-foot yard; 10-foot building line. Parking is allowed in the five
feet adjacent to the building.
2. Side Yard: At least one side yard is required. Minimum total width for yard or
yards is 12 feet. No one-yard shall be less than six feet. Side yards may be
omitted where two or more buildings are developed with party walls or as
adjoining buildings (total length of building not to exceed 200 feet). In such case,
side yards shall be provided at both ends of the property. In the case of a side
yard serving as a drive, the minimum side yard shall be 12 feet exclusive of walks
or landscaped areas.
3. Rear Yard: 10 feet.
b. Transitional Yards (Adjacent to Residential Districts)
1. Front Yard: When lots front on a street and at least 80% of the frontage directly
across the street between two consecutive intersecting streets is in a residential
district, the front yard regulations for the residential district shall apply to said lots
in the business district. Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincided
with the front lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residential district, a yard
equal in depth to the minimum front yard required by this Chapter on such
adjacent lot in the residential district shall be provided along such front or side lot
line for a distance of at least 25 feet, including the width of any intervening alley,
from such lot in the residential district.
2. Side Yard: Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line of a
property in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such
side lot line. Such yard shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard
which would be required under this Chapter for a residential use on the adjacent
property in the residential district.
3. Rear Yard: Where a rear lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line of a
property in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such
rear lot line. Such yard shall be 20 feet in depth.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-45 REVISED 04/16/18
5.1-13.4 Maximum Building Lot Coverage: 70%
5.1-13.5 Maximum Building Height: 30 feet and two stories.
5.1-13.6 Conditions of Use. All uses permitted in this district (except “ R” District uses) shall
be subject to the following conditions of use:
a. That there shall be no manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than those
which are clearly incidental and essential to the businesses conducted.
b. That such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to odor, dust,
smoke, noise, vibrations or other similar causes.
c. All activities shall take place within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise
specified.
d. Within 150 feet of the nearest point of any residential district, all storage shall be in
completely enclosed buildings or structures and storage located elsewhere in this district
may be open to the sky, but shall be enclosed by solid wall or fence, including solid doors
or gates thereto at least eight feet high, but in no case lower than the enclosed storage.
e. All deliveries and loading related activities, as well as parking lot sweeping in the service
area, directly abutting a residential property shall not be permitted between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
f. Refrigerated trailers shall not be left separated from the cab on the site.
g. All trailers shall only be parked within the designated loading areas.
5.1-14 Downtown District: B-5. The purpose of the B-5 District is to provide a central area for
various retail, office, governmental, institutional, public, residential and cultural activities.
Emphasis on pedestrian traffic and access will be encouraged for all uses permitted. The
minimum size for this District is 30 acres.
5.1-14.1 Minimum Lot Size for Dwelling units above the First Floor.
1-bedroom or less 300-sq feet per dwelling unit
2-bedrooms 400-sq feet per dwelling unit
3-bedrooms 500-sq feet per dwelling unit
Hotels 250-sq feet per lodging room
5.1-14.2 Required Minimum Yards.
a. Public Street Frontage; none, except where 50% or more of the property directly across
the street frontage is zoned R-3 a 20 foot setback is required.
b. Interior Yards/Lot Lines: 25 feet if abutting residential districts. Additional setbacks may
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-46 REVISED 04/16/18
be required pursuant to an approved Planned Unit Development and/or Building Code
requirements.
5.1-14.3 Maximum Building Height. The maximum height of any building shall be 90 feet
exclusive of elevator penthouses, stair heads and other mechanical equipment facilities. For
parcels or lots of 10,000 square feet or larger, the maximum building height may be increased up
to 140 feet ( 180 feet for air rights developments over railroads) by using the following height
bonus system:
a. Setback Bonus. Two additional feet in height shall be allowed for each one foot of
building wall setback measured from the property line to building line.
b. Landscaped Mall or Plaza Bonus. One additional foot in height shall be allowed for each
whole unit of 1,000-square foot of fully landscaped plaza. An area of less than 50 feet in
width will be considered setback and not plaza. The Village shall consider appropriate
landscaping to include shade trees, shrubs, planter boxes, grass sculpture, decorative
paving, fountains, all of which must be for public enjoyment.
c. Arcade Bonus. Eleven feet six inches additional height shall be allowed for each 1,000 -
square foot of an arcade. An arcade must have a minimum horizontal clearance of five
feet, as measured from the inner wall to the projecting wall, with a minimum height of 9
feet.
d. Multi-use Concept Bonus. Twenty-three additional feet of height shall be allowed for a
building with two different non-residential uses. A use of less than an entire floor area
will not qualify for a bonus. Only the following uses will qualify for this height bonus:
retail business, services, offices, hotel and theater.
e. Enclosed Parking Bonus. Eleven feet six inches additional height shall be allowed for
each level of underground car parking. Five feet nine inches additional height shall be
allowed for each level of a parking structure above grade.
f. General Amenities Bonus. Twenty-three additional feet in height shall be allowed for
landscaping. Landscaping credited under ( b) above may not be a part of the general
amenities bonus.
g. Upper Floor Setback Bonus. Eleven feet six inches additional height shall be allowed
for each whole unit of ten feet setback of the largest floor above the third floor. Setback
shall be measured from the face of the lower floor to the face of the largest upper floor.
5.1-14.4 Conditions of Use. All uses permitted in this district shall be subject to the following
conditions of use:
a. Any non-residential use permitted in the B-5 District shall conform to the conditions of
use provided in the B-2 General Business District;
b. Dwelling units shall not be permitted below the second floor;
c. All land within the B-5, Downtown District Classification, shall be located on land
contiguous to existing B-5, Downtown District zoning classification and designated as
Downtown District Mixed Use on the Village Comprehensive Plan.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-47 REVISED 04/16/18
5.1-15 Research, Development, and Light Manufacturing District: M-1. The purpose of the
M-1 District is to encourage the grouping of offices, research offices and laboratories, light
manufacturing uses, and ancillary business uses. The District should be accessible to an arterial
street designated on the Village Official Map or Village Comprehensive Plan Map. Residential
and retail uses are prohibited. Performance standards protect residential areas by restricting
objectionable manufacturing activities such as noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare,
fire hazards, and other objectionable influences. The minimum size for this District shall be four
acres.
5.1-15.1 Minimum Lot Size and Minimum Lot Width at Building Line: The minimum lot
size is 25,000 square feet. Each principal building site shall have a minimum frontage of 100
feet on either a public or private street.
5.1-15.2 Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 250%
5.1-15.3 Required Minimum Yards.
a. Front Yard: 50 feet for yards located on a major or secondary arterial and 40 feet for all
others.
b. Side Yard: 10% of lot width or 25 feet whichever is greater, but the total side yard does
not need to exceed 50 feet. Building lines shall not be closer than 50 feet from a
residential district boundary, unless such residential district boundary falls within a street
right-of-way in which case it shall not be closer than 125 feet. No structures, drives,
parking lots, parked cars or other obstructions may be located within six feet of the
residential boundary line within a yard adjoining a residential district.
c. Rear Yard: 30 feet except when adjacent to residential districts, in which case a 50 foot
minimum rear yard shall be required.
5.1-15.4 Building Lines for Accessory Buildings. An accessory building shall be built only in
the rear yard of a principal building and shall have a building line of at least 25 feet from the rear
and side property lines, except as otherwise provided by subsection 6.6-5. When the rear of the
property lines are also the street property lines and are not the boundaries of residential zoning
districts, the required yard shall be 50 feet on major and secondary arterial streets and 40 feet on
all other streets.
5.1-15.5 Conditions of Use. All uses permitted in this district shall be subject to the following
conditions of use:
a. Any production or processing of goods, materials or products shall take place without
creating disturbing influences to the use and occupancy of adjoining properties.
b. All research, business, production, servicing and processing shall take place within
completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise specified. Within 150 feet of a residence
district, all storage shall be in completely enclosed buildings or structures, and storage
located elsewhere in this district may be open to the sky but shall be enclosed by solid
walls or fences (including solid doors or gates thereto) at least eight feet high, but in no
case lower in height than the enclosed storage and suitably landscaped.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-48 REVISED 04/16/18
Open off-street loading facilities and open off-street parking of motor vehicles under one
and one-half ton capacity may be unenclosed throughout the District, except for such
screening of parking and loading facilities as my be required under applicable provisions
of this Chapter.
c. Every principal building shall be located on a lot which is a lot of record in an approved
subdivision approved by the Village of Arlington Heights after February 1, 1964.
5.1-16 Limited Heavy Manufacturing District: M-2. The purpose of the M-2 district is to
provide adequate space in appropriate locations for manufacturing and other activities. This
district should be accessible to major railroads and arterial streets designated on the Village
Official Map or Village Comprehensive Plan Map. Residential and retail uses are prohibited.
Performance Standards protect residential areas by restricting objectionable manufacturing
activities such as noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, fire hazards, and other
objectionable influences. The minimum size for this District shall be four acres.
5.1-16.1 Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 250%
5.1-16.2 Required Minimum Yards:
a. Front Yard: 15 feet except where lots within the same block and comprising 40% of the
frontage on the same street are already developed on the effective date of this code, with
front yards with an average depth of less than 15 feet, then such average depth shall be
the required front yard depth for such frontage in said block.
b. Side Yard: 10% of lot width but does not need to be greater than ten feet.
c. Rear Yard: 30 feet when property abuts a residential district. No storage or parking shall
take place within 15 feet of the rear lot line.
5.1-16.3 Conditions of Use. All uses permitted in this district are subject to the following
conditions of use:
a. Any production or processing of goods, materials, or products shall take place without
creating disturbing influences to the use and occupancy of adjoining properties.
b. All business, production, servicing and processing shall take place within completely
enclosed buildings, unless otherwise specified. Within 150 feet of the nearest point of
any residential district, all storage shall be in completely enclosed buildings or structures,
and storage located elsewhere in this district may be open to the sky, but shall be
enclosed by solid wall or fence, including solid doors or gates thereto, at least eight feet
high but in no case lower in height than the enclosed storage. However, open off -street
loading facilities and open off-street parking facilities for the storage of motor vehicles
may be unenclosed throughout the district except for such screening of parking and
loading facilities as may be required under the provisions of Section 6.16.
5.1-17 Public Land District: P-L. The purpose of the P-L district is to provide areas for public
facilities which serve the citizens of Arlington Heights. Such facilities shall be developed in
accordance with an approved Planned Unit Development.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-49 REVISED 04/16/18
5.1-17.1 Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 250%
5.1-17.2 Required Minimum Yards:
a. Front Yard: 15 feet except where lots within the same block and comprising 40% of the
frontage on the same street are already developed on the effective date of this code, with
front yards with an average depth of less than 15 feet, then such average depth shall be
the required front yard depth for such frontage in said block.
b. Side Yard: 10% of lot width but does not need to be greater than 10 feet.
c. Rear Yard: 30 feet when property abuts a residential district. No storage or parking shall
take place within 15 feet of the rear lot line.
5.1-17.3 Conditions of Use.
a. All trucks entering the P-L district for the delivery of raw materials or conveyance of
products manufactured or processed within the district shall have access from an arterial
or collector street designated on the Village Official Map or Village Comprehensive Plan
Map and shall not traverse any local street entering a residential district; provided,
however, that this shall not apply where the delivery of products is necessary for the
construction of minor streets or individual residential, principal or accessory buildings in
residential districts, or where ingress or egress is required by vehicles and equipment to
service the district, and there is no direct access from major or primary thoroughfares.
b. Storm drainage and wastewater shall be disposed of in underground public sewers and
shall not be permitted to drain on the surface of public streets.
5.1-18 Overlay Zoning District – Council Trail/Arlington Heights Road. The purpose of the
overlay district is to assure that future development of the Council Trail / Arlington Heights
Road area is properly developed by encouraging unified, cohesive development. The following
conditions of use shall supplement the underlying zoning for the area, but shall supersede the
underlying zoning where different.
5.1-18.1 Conditions of Use:
a. Building Height: maximum 45 feet;
b. Building Setbacks, Front, Side, Rear: minimum 100 feet;
c. Parking Lot Setback, East and West Yards: minimum 30 feet;
d. Landscaping:
1. Landscaping between the east property line and parking lot shall include a mix of
eight foot tall Austrian Pines, six foot tall River Birch ornamental trees, six foot
tall crabapple trees, four inch caliper Weeping Willow trees and a dense
continuous planting of six foot tall Nigra Arborvitae.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-50 REVISED 04/16/18
2. Landscaping between the north property line and the parking lot shall include a
six foot tall board on board fence adjacent to the single family homes fronting on
Emerson Street and a mix of eight foot tall Colorado Spruce trees, six foot tall
Crabapple trees and four inch caliper shade trees.
3. Detention basin landscaping shall include a mix of four inch caliper shade trees
and ornamental trees, as well as various deciduous shrubs and groundcovers.
4. Landscaping of vehicular entryways shall include median landscaping consisting
of six foot tall shade or ornamental trees and 24 inch deciduous shrubs, as well as
a row of four inch caliper shade trees on both sides of the entryways. A mix of
deciduous shrubs and groundcovers shall be provided at the entryways.
5. Perimeter landscaping along Arlington Heights Road and Council Trail shall
include a mix of four inch caliper shade trees and ornamental trees, as well as
deciduous shrubs and groundcovers.
6. Other comparable species may be substituted with the approval of the Planning
Department.
e. Cross Access Easement. Cross access easements are required to allow the adjacent
commercial parcel to the north access to the driveway at Pickwick Road and the driveway
at Council Trail. These easements shall be established at a time when the adjoining
property to the north is developed for commercial uses and include mutual maintenance
provisions.
f. Access. Access shall be limited as follows: no access to Tonne Road; no access to Foster
Street; one access drive to Arlington Heights Road; and one access drive to Council Trail.
g. Driveway Locations. The driveway along Arlington Heights Road shall align with
Pickwick Road and include two outbound lanes and one inbound lane subject to Illinois
Department of Transportation approval. The driveway off of Council Trail shall be
located a minimum of 120 feet east of the Arlington Heights Road right-of-way line as
measured to the center of the driveway.
h. Parking. Parking shall not be required for basement space which is dedicated to storage
and mechanical equipment.
i. Right-of-Way Dedications. Dedication of right-of-way for Arlington Heights Road,
Council Trail and Tonne Road shall be required as determined by the Engineering
Department.
j. Public Improvements. Roadway improvements shall be required, as determined by the
Engineering Department as follows:
1. The north half of Council Trail along the entire south property line shall include
pavement, storm sewer, curb and gutter, sidewalks, and street lighting. Pavement
improvements shall include widening of Council Trail for one northbound right
turn lane and one southbound left turn lane.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-51 REVISED 04/16/18
2. The Arlington Heights Road median between Emerson Street and Pickwick Road
shall be re-striped to accommodate a two-way, bidirectional left hand turn lane,
subject to Illinois Department of Transportation approval.
3. Additional improvements to Arlington Heights Road may be required by the
Illinois Department of Transportation.
4. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the developer shall provide an escrow for
33% of the estimated costs of construction for a traffic signal (and warrant study)
at the intersection of Council Trail and Arlington Heights Road. The cost
estimate shall be determined by the Engineering Department and take into
account yearly inflationary rates. If the signal is not constructed within five years
of issuance of a certificate of occupancy, then the escrow shall be returned to
developer.
k. Loading areas. As stipulated in Chapter 28, Section 11.7, loading areas shall not be
required.
5.1-19 Overlay Zoning District – Euclid Avenue / Rohlwing Road. The purpose of the overlay
district is to encourage a high quality, high density, mixed use development given the area’ s
proximity to Route 53 and Arlington Park / Metra station. The following conditions of use shall
supplement the underlying zoning for the area, but supersede the underlying zoning where
different.
5.1-19.1 Conditions of Use:
a. Minimum Lot Size:
Dwelling Units above the first floor:
1 Bedroom or less: 300 square feet per dwelling unit;
2 Bedrooms: 400 square feet per dwelling unit;
b. Building Setbacks: 15 feet along Euclid Avenue; 15 feet along Rohlwing Road; 70 feet
along Salt Creek Lane.
c. Parking Lot Setbacks: 15 feet along Euclid Avenue and Rohlwing Road; 10 feet along
Salt Creek Lane.
d. Prohibited Uses:
The following uses shall be prohibited:
Automobile Service Stations;
Motor Vehicle Repair, Minor;
Motor Vehicle Sales and Incidental Rental of Motor Vehicles;
Motor Vehicle Sales Lots;
Pawn Shop / Cash Converter;
Currency Exchanges.
Funeral Parlors / Mortuary;
Animal Hospitals.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-52 REVISED 04/16/18
e. All development shall be subject to an approved Planned Unit Development.
5.1-20 Overlay Zoning District – Hickory Kensington Area. The purpose of the overlay
district is to implement the goals of the Hickory Kensington Area Plan by establishing
development guidelines specific to the redevelopment area. The following conditions of use
shall supplement the underlying zoning for the area, but supersede the underlying zoning where
different.
5.1-20.1 Conditions of Use:
a. Building Height:
R-6 Minimum: 30’
Maximum: 40’
R-7 Minimum: 35’
Maximum: 55’
B-2 Minimum: 40’
Maximum: 60’
b. Floor Area Ratio:
R-7 250%
B-2 No Requirement
c. Building Lot Coverage:
R-7 60%
d. Building Setbacks:
Public Street Frontages: R-6 R-7 B-2 B-3
Minimum: 10’ 8’ 0’ (10’ on Kensington) 10’ on Kensington
Maximum: 15’ 10’ 5’ (15’ on Kensington) 15’ on Kensington
Front: R-6, R-7, B-2: No Requirement
Side: R-6 10% of lot width (5’ minimum, 30’ maximum)
R-7 10% of lot width (5’ minimum, 30’ maximum)
B-2 In the case of walls having window openings there shall be a minimum open
space of 25’ between buildings
Rear: R-6 30’
R-7 30’
B-2 30’
e. Minimum Lot Size – Multiple Family
B-2 1 bedroom or less 450 sq. feet per unit
2 bedroom 750 sq. feet per unit
f. Spacing Between Buildings
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-53 REVISED 04/16/18
R-6 10’
R-7 10’
g. Parking – Residential
B-2 1.5 spaces per unit
h. Parking Lots: Surface. R-6, R-7, B-2 No more than 33% of a development can be
allocated to surface parking lots.
i. B-2: First floor commercial shall not be required fronting Campbell Street
j. Prohibited Uses: Single-Family Detached;
Institution, Residential;
Schools: Elementary, High and College (Public and Private);
Churches, Synagogues and other places of worship (including
lodging);
Day Care Centers
k. Buildings constructed prior to February 20, 2012 in areas zoned M-2 as set forth on the
Village’ s Zoning Map, dated January 1, 2013 can be occupied by uses permitted in the
M-2 Limited Heavy Manufacturing District as set forth in the Permitted Use Table.
l. All development shall be subject to an approved Planned Unit Development consistent
with the Hickory/Kensington Area Plan.
5.1-21 Outdoor Eating Cafés on Private Property. Restaurants located in the B-1, B-2, B-3,
and B-5 Districts may seek permission to have an Outdoor Eating Café on Private Property. Such
cafés are eligible for the Special Use Waiver process set forth in Section 8.7 of this Chapter and
must meet the following conditions:
a. The outdoor café may only be an incidental use to an existing restaurant that has obtained
a special use permit or special use waiver from the Village;
b. All tables, chairs, and other appurtenances shall be installed in such a manner that they
can be easily removed during winter months and/or if required by the Village and must
be designed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot;
c. The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in the outdoor café shall be restricted
by the liquor license governing the restaurant;
d. The outdoor café shall not be detrimental to the health, safety, morals or general welfare
of persons residing or working in the vicinity;
e. The outdoor cafe may only be open between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.;
f. The proprietor shall provide adequate outdoor refuse disposal as required by the Village’ s
Health Department; and
g. The following design criteria apply to all outdoor cafés:
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-54 REVISED 04/16/18
1. Outdoor furnishings, materials and their color should be selected for continuous
harmony and aesthetic quality with the adjoining buildings and streetscape.
Materials shall be of durable quality such as wrought iron; light gauge materials
like aluminum and plastics shall be generally discouraged. Weather resistant
wood is allowed only as a secondary accent material;
2. Colors shall be harmonious; brilliant or bright colors shall be used only for
accent; and
3. Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear as well as for
their beauty. Proper measures shall be taken to correct damage or decline due to
the elements, neglect or abuse.
5.1-22 Outdoor Eating Cafés on Public Property. Restaurants located in the B-5 District may
seek permission from the Village to have an Outdoor Eating Café on public property. Such cafés
are eligible for the Special Use Waiver process set forth in Section 8.7 of this Chapter and must
meet the following conditions:
a. The use of public sidewalks for restaurant tables shall only be permitted incidental to the
operation of a restaurant on private contiguous property that has obtained a special use
permit or special use waiver from the Village;
b. In no event shall the operation of the sidewalk cafe reduce the open portion of the public
sidewalk to less than five feet clear of all obstructions ( i.e. street lighting, benches, trees,
trash receptacles, etc.);
c. No permit shall be issued until the applicant enters into a lease of the right-of-way, signs
a hold harmless agreement and submits to the Village evidence of general liability
insurance and dram shop insurance, including the Village as a named insured and
insuring the Village against any liability resulting from the uses permitted by the adopted
ordinance. Minimum coverage shall be $ 1,000,000 for general liability insurance and
300,000 for dram shop insurance and shall have no less than an “ A” rating by the most
recent AM Best Insurance Rating Guide;
d. All maintenance and upkeep of the public right-of-way associated with the operation of
the outdoor cafe shall be the responsibility of the owner of such cafe (upkeep includes the
replacement of damaged public property, i.e. brick pavers);
e. All outdoor cafe permits shall be subject to an annual review and such permits may be
revoked at any time on 30 days’ notice;
f. Tables to be placed within the Village’s right-of-ways shall not have a surface area
greater than nine-square feet, shall be easily removable and cannot, in any way, impede
safe pedestrian movement;
g. All tables, chairs, and other appurtenances shall be installed in such a manner that they
can be easily removed during winter months and/or if required by the Village and must
be designed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot;
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-55 REVISED 04/16/18
h. The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in the outdoor café shall be restricted
by the liquor license governing the restaurant;
i. The outdoor café shall not be detrimental to the health, safety, morals or general welfare
of persons residing or working in the vicinity;
j. The outdoor cafe may only be open between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.;
k. The proprietor shall provide adequate outdoor refuse disposal as required by the Village’s
Health Department;
l. The following design criteria apply to all outdoor cafés:
1. Outdoor furnishings, materials and their color should be selected for continuous
harmony and aesthetic quality with the adjoining buildings and streetscape.
Materials shall be of durable quality such as wrought iron; light gauge materials
like aluminum and plastics shall be generally discouraged. Weather resistant
wood is allowed only as a secondary accent material;
2. Colors shall be harmonious; brilliant or bright colors shall be used only for
accent;
3. Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear as well as for
their beauty. Proper measures shall be taken to correct damage or decline due to
the elements, neglect or abuse.
5.1-23 Outdoor Sale of Christmas Trees in a Residential District. The outdoor sale of
Christmas trees and ancillary items is permitted in the following Districts: R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, B-
2, and B-3.With regard to the R-E, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts, the outdoor sale must be in
conjunction with a church use.
For all listed districts, the sale is only permitted for a 30-day period each year. The 30-day
period may be determined by the business operator and shall be subject to the following
conditions:
a. That such sales shall not substantially reduce the parking so as to create a shortage of
available customer parking;
b. That the location and use of the tree sales and accessory equipment on the site be handled
in a manner that will not create a disturbance to surrounding residential properties as
determined by the Building Commissioner;
c. That the remaining debris be mulched and removed from the location, and all temporary
structures be removed from the location;
d. That the operation of outdoor Christmas tree sales be permitted between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and that all lighting and other equipment be turned off when the
business is not in operation;
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-56 REVISED 04/16/18
e. No living quarters shall be permitted in conjunction with the Christmas tree sales
operation.
5.1-24 Administrative Occupancy Requirement for Community Residence, Large ( 5 to 8
persons). A community residence housing five to eight developmentally disabled persons is
permitted in all Residential Districts (R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, and R-7) as well as the
Institutional District. In order to receive an Administrative Occupancy Permit, the following
conditions must be met:
a. The residence shall be licensed by the State; and
b. The residence shall be located within 1,200 lineal feet ( as measured property line to
property line) from an existing or approved Community Residence, Large; unless
petitioner can prove that the legitimate government interest of normalization through
dispersion can be maintained.
c. All codes, regulations and policies of the Village of Arlington Heights shall be complied
with; and
d. Each residence shall provide one parking space per employee present plus one space for
each resident who owns and/or operates a motor vehicle. All required parking shall be
accommodated in the residence’ s garage and driveway.
If any of the above requirements cannot be met, then the Community Residence shall be required
to obtain a Special Use Permit.
All community residences obtaining an Administrative Occupancy Permit are required to renew
their permit annually, including providing the Village with a copy of their current State license.
Any increase in the number of residents living in the facility beyond what the Administrative
Occupancy Permit allows will require reapplication by the community residence operator.
5.2 Minimum Areas for Zoning Districts. The minimum areas that may constitute a separate
or detached part of any of the following zoning districts on the Comprehensive Amended Zoning
Map or subsequent amendments to said Zoning Map shall be as shown in the following table.
When a zoning district is directly across the street from or abuts a district of the same or a less
restrictive classification, the area of the land directly across the street or abutting the property
may be included in the calculations in meeting the minimum requirements. ( Refer to specific
zoning district classification for minimum area requirements.)
Ord. #03-065)
5.3 Development Standards.
5.3-1 Minimum Lot Size and Minimum Lot Width. Minimum lot size shall be based on lot
area as defined in Section 3.68.
5.3-2 Table of Floor Area Ratio, Building Coverage, Height. (Refer to Table at end of
Section )
5.3-3 Maximum Floor Area Calculation for One-Family Dwelling Districts
5.3-3.1 Maximum Floor Area Calculation for Single Family Lots in R-1, One Family
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-57 REVISED 10/07/03
Dwelling:
a. Lots up to 8,750 sq. ft. = LA x 0.35
b. Lots over 8,750 sq. ft. up to 20,000 sq. ft. = 3062 + [( LA – 8750) x 0.26]
c. Lots over 20,000 sq. ft. = LA x 0.30
5.3-3.2 Maximum Floor Area Calculation for Single Family Lots in R-2 and R-3 One
Family Dwelling:
a. Lots up to 8,750 sq. ft. = LA x 0.45
b. Lots over 8,750 sq. ft. = 3938 + [( LA – 8750) x 0.4]
5.4 Table of Required Minimum Yards. (Refer to Table at end of Section 5.)
5.5 Permitted Uses. No principal building, structure or land use shall be permitted except in the
zoning districts indicated and for the purposes permitted in the following table. Each use is
mutually exclusive and does not encompass other uses listed in the table. A principal use listed
in that table in any district denoted by the letter “X” is permitted by right provided that all other
requirements of state law, this Chapter, and all other applicable ordinances and regulations have
been met. A principal use listed in the Table in any district denoted by the letter “ S” is a special
use and permitted only subject to the provisions of Section 8. A principal building structure or
use not indicated in any district by either an “X” or an “ S” is not permitted in that district.
5.5-2.1 Similar and Compatible Uses. Uses that are not specifically listed in Section 5.5-1,
Permitted Use Table) but are clearly similar and compatible to uses listed in said section, may
be allowed provided that the use complies with the same conditions as would be applied to the
compatible use. Determination of what constitutes “ clearly similar and compatible” shall be
made by the Village.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-58 REVISED 04/16/8
Ord. #17-027, #18-010)
5.5-1 Permitted Use Table.
Residential Uses RE R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 R7 I B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 PL
Antenna Non Commercial p p p P p p p
Community Residence,
Small & Large p p p p p p p p p
Shelter Care Homes s s s s s s s s
Apartment-Multi Family
Buildings
p p p s
Dwelling Units and lodging
rooms (if business uses for
such uses occupy the
ground floor
p p p p
One Family Attached
Dwellings
p p p p
One Family Detached
Dwellings
p p p p p p p p
Golf Course s s s s s p s
Commercial Uses B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 I OT PL M1 M2
Retail Stores/Sales (not otherwise listed) p p p p p
Adult Business p
Agricultural Implement Sales and Service within wholly
enclosed building
p
Amusement Facility, Large s s
Amusement Facility, Small p p
Animal Hospitals p p
Antenna Commercial s s s s s s s s s s
Arts and Craft Studios/Galleries p p p p p
Auction Rooms p p p p
Auditorium, Stadium, Meeting Hall, Gymnasium or other
similar places for public events
s s s
Auto Car Wash s
Auto Service Station, with or without convenience marts s s
Bakery p p p p
Banks and Financial Institutions p p p p p
Banquet Halls s s s
Barber, Beauty Salon p p p p p
Broadcasting Station TV, Radio p p p p p p
Bowling Alleys p p s
Building Material Sales p p
Carpet Cleaning and Service p
Catering Establishments s p p p
Clubs and Lodges, Private s s s
Community Center, Recreation Building s s s s s s
Municipal or Non Profit s s s s s s
Contractor Office & Design Showroom (no vehicle storage p p p p p p p
Convenient Mart and Food Store p p p p p
Contractor Shops p p p
Currency Exchanges p p p p
Dance Halls s s
Day Care Centers s s s s s s
Drive-Through when used in conjunction with uses
otherwise permitted s s s
Drug Store and Pharmacy p p p P
Electrical Equipment Sales p P
Fairgrounds Kiddie Parks s
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-59 REVISED 06/19/17
Commercial Uses B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 I OT PL M1 M2
Food Stores p p p p p
Foot Massage p p p p s
Funeral Parlor, Mortuary p p p
Garden Center p p p
Health Club p p p
Hotel s s s
Interior Decorator Shops p p p p p
Kennel, Commercial s
Laundry Dry Cleaning up to 5,000 sf p p p p p
Liquor Stores, Package Goods Only p p p p
Machinery Sales and Service p p
Medical Dental Orthopedic Appliance and Instrument
Supply Sales p p p
Monuments Sales p
Motor Vehicle Rental s p p
Motor Vehicle Repair Major p p
Motor Vehicle Repair Minor s p
Motor Vehicle Sales, including auxiliary service s p
Motor Vehicle Sales Lots when contiguous to and adjoining
auto sales room under same owners s p
Music Conservatories or Instruction p p p p p
Offices, Business and Professional p p p p p p p p p p
Offices, Medical and Dental incl. labs p p p p p p p p
Pawn Shop Cash Converter p p
Personal Trainer (limited to 2 clients at a time per trainer;
and no more than 4 personal trainers on site at one time p p p p p p p
Photographers p p p p p p
Photographers, incl. photo developing processing p p p p p
Physical Rehabilitation Center p p p p s p p
Post Office not incl. bulk distribution p p
Printing Services Retail p p p p p
Private Library, Museum or Other Similar Buildings s s s s
Railroad Passenger Stations s s
Recreation Facilities Commercial incl. Health Club p p p p p p
Recreational Vehicles and Boars, Sales/Supplies p
Repair Major p p
Repair Minor p p p p
Restaurant s s s s
Restaurant Amusement Device Arcade s s
School, Commercial p p p p p p p
Secondhand Store p p p p
Security and Guard Firms p p p p
Sign Painting Shop (enclosed) p p
Studios Recording p p p p p
Tailor, Dressmaking Shop p p p p p
Taxicab Dispatching Office p p p
Theaters, Excluding Drive-Ins p p p
Ticket Agencies p p p p p
Tool and Die Shop p p p p
Travel Bureau and Transportation Ticket Offices p p p p p p p p
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-60 REVISED 06/19/17
Institutional Uses RE R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 R7 I
Cemeteries/Mausoleums s s s s
Places of Worship p p p p p p p p p
Care Facility, Ambulatory p
Care Facility, Longer, Intermediate, Extended p
Health and Medical Institutions, Hospitals p
Institution Residential s s s s p
Schools s s s s s s s s
Manufacturing/Processing Uses M1 M2 B3
Products made from fabrics and similar materials and textile mill products p
Bakery Products, Wholesale & Production p
Beverages Bottling and Distributing p p
Beverages – Non Alcoholic p
Carpet Cleaning on Premises p
Canned Food Products p
Ceramic Products p p
Computers p p
Concrete Gypsum & Plaster Products p
Containers, Pallets and other similar products p
Cosmetics, Perfumes & other similar products p
Dairy Products p
Drugs p p
Dwelling Unit for Caretaker located on premises p p
Electronic Components and Lighting and Wiring Equipment p p
Furniture/Fixtures p
Glass Products made of purchased glass p
Household Appliances p
Instruments and Supplies – Medical, Dental, Engineering p p
Jewelry, Silverware and Plated Ware p p
Leather (not including tanning) and Vinyl Products p
Metal Products, Fabricated – except machinery and transportation equipment p
Musical Instruments p p
Office and Art Supplies p
Paper Products from converted paper-paperboard p
Photographic Equipment & Supplies, Developing/Processing p p
Plastic Products, Fabricated p
Pottery and Related Products p p
Printing Ink p
Printing, Publishing p p
Radio and Television/Communication Equipment p p
Rubber Products, Fabricated p
Signs and Advertising Displays p
Silver Plating and Repairing p p
Structural Clay Products, Cut Stone and Stone Products p
Sugar and Confectionary Products p
Tool and Die Shops p p
Toys; Sporting Goods p
Watches, Clocks, Clockwork Operated Devices and Parts p p
Storage Facility (not located along major or secondary arterial streets) p p
Wholesale and Warehouse Facility p p p
Wholesale Offices (including warehouses and storerooms) p p p
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-61 REVISED 06/19/17
Other Uses I OT B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 PL M1 M2
Parking Garage, Private Customer/Employee s s s s s s s s s s
Private and Public Utility Facilities
Heliport s s s s s s s s
Ord. #11-024)
5.5-2 Permitted Use Table: Solar Energy Systems
ZONING SOLAR GROUND SOLAR WALL SOLAR ROOF
R-E P P P
R-1 P P P
R-2 P P P
R-3 P P P
R-4 P P P
R-5 P P P
R-6 P P P
R-7 P P P
B-1 P P P
B-2 P P P
B-3 P P P
B-4 P P P
B-5 P
O-T P P P
O-R P P P
I P P P
M-1 P P P
M-2 P P P
P-L P P P
Section 28-6 – General Provisions
6.1 Interpretation.
6.1-1 In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
6.1-2 Where the conditions imposed by an provision of this Chapter upon the use of land or
buildings or upon the bulk of buildings are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this Code or of any other law,
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive
for which impose higher standards or requirements) shall govern.
6.1-3 This Code is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private
agreement provided that where the regulations of this Code are more restrictive ( or impose
higher standards or requirements) than such easements, covenants or other private agreements,
the requirements of this Code shall govern.
6.2 Scope of Regulations. Except as may otherwise be provided in Section 7, “ NonZONING
REGULATIONS
28-62 REVISED 10/01/11
Conforming Uses and Buildings,” all buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings
established hereafter, all structural alteration or relocation of existing buildings occurring
hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be
subject to all regulations of this Code which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such
buildings, uses or land shall be located.
However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with
law prior to January 1, 2003, and provided that construction is begun within one year of such
effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or structure may be
completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit has
been issued, and further may upon completion be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by
the use for which originally designated – subject thereafter to the provisions of Section 7, “ Non -
conforming Uses and Buildings.”
6.3 Access to Public Street. Every principal building hereafter erected shall be on a zoning lot
or parcel of land which adjoins a public street or a permanent easement of access to a public
street; such easement to be at least twenty feet wide unless a lesser width was duly established
and recorder prior to January 1, 2003.
6.4 Permits. No application for a building permit or other permit or license, or for a certificate
of occupancy, shall be approved by the Director of Building & Life Safety, and no permit or
license shall be issued by any other Village Department which would authorize the use or change
in use of any land or building contrary to the provisions of this Code, or the erection, moving,
alteration, enlargement or occupancy of any building designed or intended to be used for a
purpose or in a manner contrary to the provisions of this Code.
The Director of Building & Life Safety may, however, issue building permits or certificates of
occupancy for residential structures erected on lots having less than the required width and/or
area when such lots are part of a subdivision approved by the President and Board of Trustees
subsequent to January 1, 2003, if the lot width and/or area is no less than 90% of the requirement
imposed by this Chapter and the structure conforms in all other respects with the provisions of
this Code.
Ord. #11-034)
No contractor or builder shall construct two or more buildings of like exterior design on the same
side of any street unless such buildings are separated by two or more buildings or building sites,
or a combination thereof, of completely dissimilar design. Buildings of like exterior design may
not be erected directly across the street from each other. All buildings shall be considered to be
of "like exterior design" unless they have substantially different floor plans, elevations, and are
substantially different in exterior appearance in the opinion of the Code Official.
Ord. #11-024)
6.5 Accessory Structures.
6.5-1 Where an accessory structure is structurally attached to a main building it shall be subject
to, and must conform to, all regulations of this Chapter applicable to the main building.
Ord. #03-065, #05-082)
6.5-2 An accessory structure including but not limited to a tool shed, storage building, detached
garage, tree house or gazebo, shall only be located in a rear yard. An accessory structure may be
located no less than three feet from a side lot line (except for a tree house which shall be setback
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-63 REVISED 04/16/18
five feet and no closer than ten feet to the principal structure), and no less than five feet from the
rear lot line. No more than three accessory structures shall be permitted on any zoning lot less
than 10,000 square feet and no more than four accessory structures shall be permitted on any
zoning lot 10,000 square feet or greater.
6.5-3 On a reversed corner lot, no accessory building shall be located in the front yard, if
extended, of the adjacent property to the rear. When this requirement will make it impossible to
build, it will be permitted to construct an accessory structure no closer to the side lot line
abutting the street than two-thirds the required front yard on the adjoining lot. In no case shall it
be permitted to construct an accessory structure beyond the building line established for the main
building.
6.5-4 Time of Construction. No accessory structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the
time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.
Ord. #07-018)
6.5-4a All driveways and detached garages must be designed to conform with the existing
adjoining grade. If the petitioner can demonstrate, to the reasonable satisfaction of the Village,
that it is not feasible to have the foundation and driveway to conform to the grade, appropriate
screening, approved by the Village, must be incorporated. Such screening can be a retaining
wall with a finished exterior, a solid screen using landscaping or a fence or some other
decorative treatment, which sufficiently reduces the visual impact of the foundation and
driveway.
6.5-5 Percentage of Required Rear Yard Occupied. No accessory structure or structures shall
occupy more than 40% of the area of a required rear yard.
6.5-6 Height of Accessory Structures in Required Rear Yards. No accessory structure or
portion thereof shall exceed a height of 15 feet above grade; except that no tree house
may be taller than the highest point of structure and in no case shall a tree house be taller
than 15 feet.
Ord. #03-065, #05-082, #18-010)
6.5-7 Maximum Size of Accessory Structures.
a. Detached Garage: 720-sq. ft.
i. Floor Area in excess of 400 square feet shall be included in the Maximum Floor
Area Ratio.
ii. Floor Area Bonus for Detached Garages. In determining the floor area ratio for
lots having a detached garage and no other garage, 100% of the floor area of the
detached garage shall be excluded from the FAR calculation. A FAR bonus for a
detached garage shall only be allowed if there are no other garages on site, if the
structure is architecturally compatible with the principal dwelling unit, and if 50%
or more of the existing homes that both front on the same side of the street and are
contained between two adjacent streets which intersect that street also have
detached garages.
iii. Where a detached garage is located in the rear yard, the side drive shall be a
minimum of nine feet wide as measured from the exterior wall of the house to the
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-64 REVISED 04/16/18
lot line.
b. Playhouse, Shed and Gazebo: 300 sq. ft.
c. Tree House: 100 sq. ft.
Ord. #11-024)
6.5-7a Maximum Number of Garages. In the R-E, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts, there
shall be no more than two detached garages per zoning lot.
6.6 Bulk Regulations.
6.6-1 Continued Conformity with Bulk Regulations. The maintenance of yards, courts and
other open space and minimum lot area legally required for a building shall be a continuing
obligation of the owner of such building or of the property on which it is located, as long as the
building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts, other open space or
minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by virtue of change of ownership or for any
other reason, be used to satisfy yard, court, other open space, or minimum lot area requirements
for any other building.
6.6-3 Location of Required Open Space. All yards, courts and other open spaces allocated to
a building or dwelling group shall be located on the same zoning lot as such building or dwelling
group.
6.6-4 Required Yards - Existing Buildings. No yards now or hereafter provided for a
building existing on January 1, 2003, shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced
below if already less than the minimum yard requirements of this code for equivalent new
construction.
6.6-5 Permitted Structures in Required Yards. The following shall not be considered to be
obstructions when located in the required yards specified. For the purpose of this Section:
F Denotes permitted obstruction in front yards and side yards adjoining streets
S Denotes permitted obstruction in interior side yard
R Denotes permitted obstruction in rear yards
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-65 REVISED 04/16/18
Ord. #03-065, #05-082, #11-024, #12-055, #18-010)
6.6-5.1 Table of Permitted Obstructions F (=Front S=Side R=Rear)
Arbors and trellises, freestanding F S R
Awnings and canopies, (which provides cover for windows and doors) F S R
Balconies R
Basketball Poles / Structures (minimum set back five feet side and rear lot line, 10 feet front lot
line.)
F S R
Bay Windows, projecting three feet or less in yard F R
Central Air Conditioning Compressor Units a minimum distance of 10 % of the lot width of the
property.
R
Chimneys projecting 20-inches or less into the yard F S R
Detached Garages R
Deck, with a minimum distance of 15 feet from rear lot line R
Earth stations, in business and manufacturing districts. If located adjacent to residential district,
minimum distance of ten feet from the property line is required (see Section 6.15 of this Code)
S R
Earth stations, in residential districts, with a minimum distance of 10 feet from the property lines
see Section 6.15 of this Code)
R
Eaves, overhanging, projecting 2.5 feet or less into the yard. F R
Eaves, overhanging projecting into the yard for a distance of 2.5 inches per foot of required yard. S
Entryway/ portico, open. Intended to provide cover for a doorway-cannot extend more than 5 feet
out from the building and not more than 10 feet across with a minimum of 3.5 feet to side lot line.
Steps as are necessary for access to a permitted building with a minimum of 3.5 feet to side lot
line or for access to a zoning lot from a street or alley.
F S R
Fire Pits R
Flag poles F S R
Generators R
Gutters (maximum gutter size – 4 inch) F S R
Laundry drying equipment R
Non-commercial antenna. In residential districts with a minimum distance of 10 feet from the
property lines (see Section 6.15 of this Code).
R
Outdoor living/kitchen space R
Parking (see Section 11.2-11) F S R
Patio, open F S R
Playhouse, child’ s (not to exceed 32-sq. feet in a side yard) with a min. of five feet to lot line S R
Recreational Equipment, a min. of five feet from lot line S R
Sport Courts (fences for Sport Courts to comply with fence regulations) R
Swimming Pools, a min. of 8-ft. from any property line including decks & appurtenances R
Tool sheds and similar buildings or structures for domestic storage. R
Tree House (Minimum of 5 feet to lot lines) R
Window Wells with a minimum of 3 feet setback from the property line and a maximum
projection of only 4 feet out from the foundation
F S R
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-66 REVISED 06/06/11
Ord. #11-024)
6.6-5.2 Table of Permitted Obstructions for Renewable Energy Systems
F=Front S=Side R=Rear)
SOLAR -
GROUND
MOUNTED
SOLAR – WALL
MOUNTED
GEOTHERMAL
ENERGY SYSTEMS
must be three feet from
property line)
ZONING F S R F S R F S R
R-E P P P P P P
R-1 P P P P P P
R-2 P P P P P P
R-3 P P P P P P
R-4 P P P P P P
R-5 P P P P P P
R-6 P P P P P P
R-7 P P P P P P
B-1 P P P P P P P P P
B-2 P P P P P P P P P
B-3 P P P P P P P P P
B-4 P P P P P P P P P
B-5 P P P
O-T P P P P P P P P
O-R P P P P P P P P
I P P P P P P P P P
M-1 P P P P P P P P P
M-2 P P P P P P P P P
P-L P P P P P P P P P
Ord. #03-068)
6.7 Buildings on a Zoning Lot. Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to
provide dwelling units shall be located on a zoning lot as herein defined and in no case shall
there be more than one such building on one zoning lot. All adjacent lots, which come under
common ownership after November 1, 2003, must be developed in compliance with Chapter 29
of this Code.
6.8 Rezoning of Public and Semi-Public Areas. An area indicated on the zoning map as a
public park, recreation area, public or private school site, cemetery or other similar open space,
shall not be used for any purpose other than that designated; and when the use of the area is
discontinued, it shall automatically be zoned to the most restrictive adjoining district.
6.9 Enforcement of Development Schedule. Site development plans approved in conjunction
with rezoning of property shall be effective for no more than 24-months from the date the
ordinance was adopted granting the approval. Unless a building permit has been issued and
construction commenced within this time period, all ordinances approving the rezoning,
including any other conditions and approvals, shall be void. An extension of up to 12-months
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-67 REVISED 05/20/13
can be obtained by submitting a detailed request to the Planning and Community Development
Department. After appropriate review, the Planning and Community Development Department
will transmit the request and its recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees for final
determination. In the event that an additional request for extension is made, said request will
also be reviewed by the Plan Commission and the Plan Commission will transmit the request
with its recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees. Single-family residential subdivisions
are not subject to this requirement, but rather the requirements as outlined in Chapter 29.
6.10 Height of Structures. The following may be erected to the height permitted in the existing
or hereafter adopted ordinances of the Village: bulkheads, chimneys, cooling towers, cupolas,
domes, elevators, fire towers, gas tanks, monuments, ornamental towers, parapet walls,
penthouses, radio towers, scenery lofts, spires, stacks, stage towers, tanks, water towers and
necessary mechanical appurtenances.
6.11 Vision Clearance. No building or structure hereafter erected and no planting or other
obstruction to the vision of drivers of motor vehicles or pedestrians shall be located:
6.11.1 In any " R" Districts, exceeding a height of three feet above the street grade within 12
feet of the intersecting street lines bordering corner lots and between private properties within 12
feet of walks, driveways, bike paths, and walking paths.
6.11-2 In B-1 through B-4 Districts, within 12 feet of the intersecting street lines bordering a
corner lot, provided that this regulation shall not apply to that part of a building above the first
floor.
Ord. #04-013, #13-025)
6.12 Traffic Engineering Approval. No building permit or occupancy certificate shall be
issued, nor shall any request requiring Plan Commission review be approved for those projects
outlined in Sections 6.12-1 and 6.12-2, unless the applicant provides at their own expense, a
traffic study and parking analysis that evaluates access, on-site circulation, parking, trip
generation, trip distribution, impacts to public streets, and any other issue identified by the
Village.
Section 6.12-1 For Projects Requiring Plan Commission Review. A traffic study and parking
analysis prepared by a qualified professional engineer or prepared in a manner acceptable to the
Village shall be required for the following projects:
1. All developments with a drive-through.
2. Any rezoning, special use, land use variation, Planned Unit Development, and
amendments thereto that:
a. is 5,000 square feet or more in floor area and located along a major or secondary
arterial street as defined by the Village’s Thoroughfare Plan,
b. notwithstanding projects less than 5,000 square feet in floor area and located
along a major or secondary arterial street as defined by the Village’ s
Thoroughfare Plan, do not need to provide a traffic study, but shall be required to
provide a detailed parking analysis. The Village reserves the right to require a
traffic study if it deems necessary.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-68 REVISED 05/20/13
3. Any rezoning, special use, land use variation, Planned Unit Development, and
amendments thereto that is not adjacent to a major or secondary arterial street as defined
by the Village’s Thoroughfare Plan.
4. The Village shall reserve the right to require a traffic study and parking analysis for
projects requiring subdivision, if it deems necessary.
Section 6.12-2 For Projects Not Requiring Plan Commission Review. A traffic study and
parking analysis prepared by a qualified professional engineer or prepared in a manner
acceptable to the Village shall be required for the following projects:
1. Residential Developments:
R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3: 100-dwelling units or more
R-4, R-5, R-6, R-7: 48-dwelling units or more
2. Commercial Developments:
B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5, and OT: 20,000 sq. ft. or more
Drive-in Uses in any B district: All
3. Industrial Developments:
M-1, M-2: 75-cars or more parking requirements
or 100 or more anticipated employees.
4. Institutional Developments
a. Residential development of 100-units or more,
b. Non-residential development of 20,000 square feet or more.
5. The traffic study and/or parking analysis requirements may be administratively waived
by the Village, if it determines that requiring such study is not necessary for the
successful development of a project.
Ord. #04-059)
6.13-1 Fence Permit Required. No fence shall be erected without having secured a permit
from the Director of Building, who shall grant the permit only if the proposed fence is in
compliance with all the provisions of this Code and any amendment to it, and if the proposed
fence will be erected in a structurally sound manner.
6.13-2 Materials and Type of Construction:
a. The use of barbed wire fencing is prohibited;
b. All metal fences erected shall be of nine gauge woven wire or its equivalent;
c. Fence posts shall be of an approved material and shall be embedded into tamped earth or
concrete, to a depth which would assure its structural stability;
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-69 REVISED 04/16/18
d. All fences must be erected with the finished side facing the adjoining properties;
e. Solid fencing is allowed only between certain zoning districts and where otherwise
specified in Chapter 28; and
f. Slatted chain link fence is prohibited.
Exception: In the M-1 and M-2 Districts, slatted fences will be allowed between business
properties and to enclose garbage dumpsters but cannot be located adjacent to a street or
residential properties.
Ord. #05-082, #18-010)
Section 6.13-3 Location of Fences. A fence is a permitted obstruction in any yard with the
following limitations:
a. Front Yard. Fences shall not exceed a height of 36-inches and shall not contain any
sharp points and must be an open fence; and
b. Side and Rear Yards. Fences can be solid, open or semi-open and shall not exceed a
height of six feet subject to the following:
1. Through Lots. On through lots that are adjacent to non-through lots, fences in
yards with road frontages may not exceed 36-inches and shall not contain any
sharp points and must be an open fence;
2. Corner Lot. That portion of the side and rear yard with street frontages may have
solid, open or semi-open fences erected no closer than five feet to the perimeter of
the lot. Landscaping, a minimum of three-foot high and spaced a maximum of 48-
inches on center, must be provided along the street side of the fence. The
perimeter of the lot is defined as the lot line, sidewalk, or street pavement,
whichever is closest to the building. In each instance where the building is closer
than five feet to the perimeter of the lot, no fence shall extend beyond the line of
the principal building. An open fence, not exceeding a height of 36 inches, shall
be allowed anywhere within the Rear Yard and shall not contain any sharp points;
and
3. Visibility. Within 12 feet of intersecting property lines at streets, walks,
driveways, bike paths, or walking paths, fences shall not exceed 36-inches and
shall not contain any sharp points and must be an open fence.
c. Exterior Side Yards. Fences shall be allowed in an Exterior Side Yard with the following
limitations:
1. A solid, open or semi-open fence, not exceeding a height of six feet shall be
allowed no closer than five feet to the perimeter of the lot. Landscaping, a
minimum of three feet high and spaced a maximum of 48 inches on center, must
be provided along the street side of the fence. The perimeter of the lot is defined
as the lot line, sidewalk, or street pavement, whichever is closest to the building.
In each instance where the building is closer than five feet to the perimeter of the
lot, no fence shall extend beyond the line of the principal building; and
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-70 REVISED 10/18/04
2. An open fence, not exceeding a height of 36 inches shall be allowed within the
Exterior Side Yard and shall not contain any sharp points.
6.13-4 Wire Gauge. All metal fences erected in the Village shall be at least nine gauge woven
wire or its equivalent.
Ord. # 04-059)
6.13-5 Safety Hazards Prohibited. The Director of Building may order any fence removed that
is a hazard to public safety or to the free flow of traffic.
6.13-6 For fences required for screening of parking lots, between zoning districts, detention and
retention basins, and commercial antenna structures and earth stations, see Section 6.16.
6.14 Non-Commercial Antenna Structures and Earth Stations. (Refer to Chapter 23)
6.14-1 Non-Commercial Antenna and Related Structures. Non-commercial antenna and
related structures shall be permitted in all residential districts, subject to Chapter 23, Article XIII.
6.14-1.1 Location.
a. Non-Commercial Antenna Structure. Non-Commercial antenna structures may be
mounted only on roofs or rear yards with a minimum distance of ten feet from the
property lines. Each residence is allowed only one ground structure. In multi-family
developments, each building is allowed one ground structure. (Refer to Section 6.6-5 of
this Code.)
b. Non-Commercial Earth Stations. In residential districts, non-commercial earth stations
shall be permitted obstructions in rear yards only with a minimum distance of ten feet
from the property lines. On corner lots, no earth station shall be erected outside of the
established building line of both street frontages and, where no building line is
established, earth stations shall have a minimum setback of 25-feet from property lines
fronting on any street or highway. (Refer to Section 6.6-5 of this Code.)
6.14-2 Commercial Antenna and Related Structures. Commercial antenna and related
structures are special uses in all non-residential districts and are subject to Chapter 23, Article II.
6.14-2.1 Location.
a. Commercial Antenna Structure. Commercial antenna structures may not be located in
any required yard. Where no minimum yard is established, commercial antenna
structures may be located no closer than ten-feet to any lot line of 25-feet to lot line, if
adjacent to a residential district.
b. Commercial Earth Stations. In business and manufacturing districts, commercial earth
stations shall be permitted obstructions in rear and side yards. If located adjacent to a
residential district, a minimum distance of ten feet from the property line is required.
6.14-2.2 Commercial Antenna Standards. The following standards will be considered in
addition to those stipulated in Chapter 23, Article II, when determining whether approval of an
application for a commercial antenna structure is in the public interest:
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-71 REVISED 10/18/04
a. The petitioner must demonstrate that there is not technically suitable space available on
an existing tower or structure within the geographic area to be serviced.
b. A landscaping plan shall be submitted that demonstrates substantial screening of the
antenna and related structures from adjacent land uses. Screening must consist of a wellmaintained
masonry wall of brickwork of stonework, solid wood fence, densely planted
compact hedge or berm and hedge.
6.14-2.3 Special Use Waiver for Use of Existing Antenna Structure. The special use
requirement for a commercial antenna may be waived if the petitioner locates the antenna on an
existing antenna tower or structure. The petitioner must submit detailed plans to the Planning
Department for an administrative review to determine if the special use public hearing can be
waived. No building permit will be issued until approval is granted through the administrative
review.
6.14-3 Location.
a. Non-Commercial Antenna Structure. Non-Commercial antenna structures may be
mounted only on roofs or rear yards with a minimum distance of 10 -feet from the
property lines. Each residence is allowed only one ground structure. In multi-family
developments, each building is allowed one ground structure. ( Refer to Section 6.6-5 of
this code).
b. Earth Stations. In business and manufacturing districts earth stations shall be permitted
obstructions in rear and side yards. If located adjacent to a residential district, a
minimum distance of ten feet from the property line is required. In residential districts
earth stations shall be permitted obstructions in rear yards only with a minimum distance
of ten-feet from the property lines. On corner lots, no earth station shall be erected
outside of the established building line of both street frontages and, where no building
line is established, earth stations shall have a minimum setback of 25-feet from property
lines fronting on any street or highway. (Refer to Section 6.6-5 of this Code).
6.14-4 Building Permit Required. Refer to Chapter 23.
A non-commercial antenna and non-commercial earth station shall not be erected without first
obtaining a building permit as provided in Chapter 23, unless specifically exempted under the
provisions thereof.
6.15 Landscaping.
6.15-1 Landscaping of Parking Lots.
6.l5-1.1 Intent and Purpose. This Subsection establishes ecological and environmental
requirements to reduce air and noise pollution and improve the appearance of the Village. The
requirements apply to all new construction and to all enlargements or expansion of any structure,
related parking or paved service areas if abutting a residential district or street, taking place after
the effective date of this amendment to the Municipal Code.
Ord. #04-059)
6.15-1.2 New Landscaping Requirements.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-72 REVISED 01/03/03
a. All paved service areas abutting a residential district or street or off-street parking areas
containing more than four parking spaces, shall be effectively screened on each side
adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a residence district or any institutional
premises or adjoining any public way by a well-maintained wall, fence, densely planted
compact hedge designed to provide year round opacity or berm and hedge.
1. Such screening shall be three-feet high on the frontage of a public way, except
that in the interests of safety, so the line of sight will not be obstructed, the
minimum height shall be lowered at street intersections and driveways to not less
than 18-inches as determined by the Director of Planning and Community
Development or designee.
2. Such screening shall be 6-foot high if adjoining a residential district or any
institutional premises.
b. Landscaped islands equal in area to at least one parking space, protected by durable
materials, and containing at least one live shade tree at a minimum of four inches in
diameter shall be located at the end of every twenty parking spaces or beneath every light
pole, whichever results in the greater amount of planted islands. In addition, these
islands shall be located at each end of all rows of car stalls. Open parking areas larger
than four but smaller than twenty spaces shall provide proportional amounts of live
greenery. Design and plant selection shall be as directed by the Director of Planning and
Community Development or designee.
6.15-1.3 In application of this code, the Director of Planning and Community Development or a
designee thereof, will be guided by the provisions of “ Requirements for Landscape Approval”
for the Village of Arlington Heights, and subsequently updated editions to be consistent with
amendments to this Code.
6.15-2 Landscaping Requirements Between Zoning Districts.
6.15-2.1 In any O-T, O-R, Business or Manufacturing District where a rear lot line or side line
coincides with a side or rear lot line of property in adjacent residential districts, screening along
such lot line must be provided.
6.15-2.2 Landscape Requirements between Zoning Districts. Such screening of single items
or combination thereof, shall be a total of six feet in height at time of installation and consisting
of one or more of the following:
a. well maintained masonry wall; as defined as brickwork or stonework,
b. solid wood fence;
c. offset double row of densely planted landscape material; and
d. landscape berm.
6.15-3 Landscaping of Detention and Retention Basins.
6.15-3.1 Landscaping shall be required along the perimeter of detention and retention basins in
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICPAL CODE
28-73 REVISED 01/03/03
order to minimize their negative visual impact. Such landscaping shall consist of trees and
shrubs in an amount and arrangement that will create an aesthetic visual situation as determined
by the Village Administration.
6.15-3.2 For all retention basins and those detention basins that can be expected to flood to a
depth of greater than three-feet, effective yet unobtrusive warning signs shall be required on all
sides of the basin.
6.15-4 Landscape Maintenance. Each owner of a building, structure, parking lot, detention
basin, or retention basin shall be responsible for maintaining such screening in a well-maintained
condition, including, but not limited to:
a. Replace dead or inadequate plantings.
b. Maintain or repair rotting or missing fence panel sections.
c. Paint or stain fences where necessary to avoid deterioration.
d. Maintain and repair screening walls and berms.
6.15-5 Protection and Preservation of Existing Trees.
6.15-5.1 Intent and Purpose. This section establishes requirements to protect and preserve
existing trees throughout the Village. The requirements apply to all public and private new
construction, enlargements or expansion of any structure, building or parking, service areas, and
other construction. Existing developed or contiguous single-family subdivided residential lots
and public rights-of-way shall be excluded from the requirements of this section except that
single family lots with a potential to redevelop into three or more lots shall comply with these
requirements.
6.15-5.2 Tree Removal. No tree having a trunk size of three-inches or greater in diameter, as
measured six inches above the established ground level, shall be removed from unimproved or
partially improved land prior to receiving approval of a Tree Survey and Preservation Plan from
the Planning Department.
6.15-5.3 Protection of Existing Trees.
a. Tree Survey - A Tree Survey shall be submitted to the Planning Department for review,
by anyone planning any site development. The Tree Survey shall indicate the location,
size and species (both scientific and common name) of all trees located on the parcel with
a trunk size of 3-inches or greater, as measured 6-inches above the established ground
level.
b. Integration of Existing Trees into Site and Landscape Plans. Subject to the determination
of the Planning Department, a reasonable effort shall be made to retain existing trees on
the Tree Survey through the integration of those trees into the site and landscaping plan
for a proposed development. If a reasonable integration into the development plan is not
possible, the developer may choose to mitigate the trees in dispute based upon the
exchange rate set forth in Section 6.15-5.4. Removal of trees designated for preservation
shall be allowed only pursuant to the provisions of this Section 6.15-6. In the event that a
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-74 REVISED 01/01/03 development plan is not required but a landowner desires to clear the site of trees, a Tree
Survey is still required. In such an instance, quality trees will be required to be
preserved.
c. Tree Preservation Plan - A Tree Preservation Plan indicating the location and species of
those trees to be preserved and the methods which are to be used to preserve such trees
shall be submitted to the Planning Department. This Preservation Plan shall specify the
following:
1. Preservation Techniques:
a. Grading and construction equipment - All grading and construction
equipment shall be forbidden from encroaching upon the tree’ s drip line.
b. Material detrimental to trees - Crushed limestone and other materials
detrimental to trees shall not be dumped within the drip line of any tree
nor at any higher location where drainage toward the tree could
conceivably affect the health of the tree.
c. Installation of snow fencing - Snow fencing shall be installed during
construction at the periphery of the tree’ s drip line. In areas where a tree
is in the construction zone and fencing the drip line is not possible, two by
six inch by eight foot long boards banded or wired around each trunk shall
be provided as protection to adequately prevent scarring.
d. During construction - If trees have their roots exposed, the roots are to be
pruned. If exposed roots are greater than two inches, the tree crown is to
be pruned to compensate for the root loss. Also, the tree shall be watered
and fertilized.
2. Preservation Methodology - The methods which are to be used to preserve those
trees shall be clearly specified on the Preservation Pan. These shall, at a
minimum, include the preservation techniques listed above, although alternative
methods may be considered. If, in the opinion of the Planning Department, the
necessary precautions as specified in the Preservation Plan for the development
were not undertaken before or during construction to ensure the preservation of
those trees, the building permit for the parcel shall not be issued, or, if previously
issued, may be revoked until such time as these precautions have been complied
with.
6.15-5.4 Removal of Trees Designated for Preservation. If a tree designated for preservation
on the Preservation Plan is destroyed or razed during construction or removed without receiving
approval, a permit or in the field adjustments, such trees shall be replaced with new trees in
accordance with the following:
a. Exchange Rate
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-75 REVISED 03/19/12
Size of Existing Trees* Number of
diameter in inches) Replacement Trees
36 or greater 8
30 - 35 7
26 - 29 6
20 - 25 5
13 - 19 4
8 - 12 3
3 - 7 2
Trunk size as measured 6-inches above the established ground level.
For the above, in the event of a fraction of an inch, if a fraction is less than one-half inch, the
lower full number shall be used. If a fraction is one-half inch or greater, the higher full number
shall be used.
Ord. #12-015)
b. Minimum Size of Replacement Trees - All replacement trees shall have a minimum trunk
size of four inches in diameter, as measured six inches above the established ground
level, upon installation.
Ord. #07-038, #12-015)
c. Species of Replacement Trees - The following are examples of replacement trees ( Ash
trees are specifically prohibited):
1. Linden
2. Maple (excluding Silver Maple and other similar softwood species)
3. Hackberry
4. Ginkgo
5. Oak
6. Thornless Honey Locust (cultivars)
7. Kentucky Coffee tree
d. Amended Landscape Plan - Removal of trees designed for preservation shall be allowed
only by amending the landscape plan and with the approval of the Planning Department.
The amended landscape plan shall indicate the location, specie and size of all
replacement trees in accordance with the recommendation of the Planning Department.
e. In the Field Adjustments - In the field adjustments to trees designated for preservation on
the Preservation Plan may be necessary during the course of construction. In such
instances, the developer or property owner shall not remove any trees designated for
preservation prior to site inspection and/or consultation with the Planning Department. If
it is agreed that any tree designated for preservation substantially impedes the
development, in the field adjustments may be approved by the Planning Department
without the need of a resubmitted Preservation Plan.
6.15-5.5 Tree Survival/Guarantee. Any relocated or replaced tree shall be guaranteed survival
for up to one growing season. In the event a relocated or replaced tree dies or is in declining
condition, the tree shall be replaced with a 4-inch diameter tree.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-76 REVISED 10/18//04
6.15-6 The requirement of four inch trees set forth in this Code may be waived by the Planning
Department if, in the opinion of the Department, a 4-inch tree is not suitable for that location or
unavailable, or available but of poor quality. In such cases, the Planning Department may accept
either a smaller tree or a greater quantity of smaller trees.
6.15-7 Compliance Bonds. Upon application for a Building Permit, the owner shall furnish a
cash bond in the amount of 30% of the value of the landscape improvements on the approved
Landscape Plan and $ 200.00 for each tree designated to remain or be transplanted on the
approved Tree Preservation Plan. A cost estimate of landscape improvements shall be submitted
to the Director of Planning and Community Development or designee which will be used to
calculate the bond amount based on the percentage stated above. The owner or developer shall
agree that such deposit in escrow may be held by the Village for a period of 18 months after the
final completion of such work. This will be held for the purpose of guaranteeing and securing
the correction of any defect or death of plant material furnished, transplanted or preserved on
site, which was not discernable at the time of final inspection or acceptance by the Village. All
improvements covered by the bond of this Section, shall be inspected by the Director of Planning
and Community Development or designee during the course of construction and at completion.
If such defects have developed, then the cash bond may be applied by the Village for any
amounts incurred in correcting such defects; and that the balance of such deposit, if any, held at
the end of such 18-month period shall be returned by the Village to the developer, or paid to the
order of the depositor, without interest.
6.16 Home Occupation.
Ord. # 04-059)
6.16-1 Home Occupation. An accessory use of a dwelling unit carried on by members of the
immediate family residing on the premises. The use is clearly incidental and secondary to the
use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and does not change the character of the
residence or adversely affect the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood. An
application for a home occupation shall be filed with the Director of Planning and Community
Development. For all Home Occupations, the following standards shall apply:
a. No person other than members of the immediate family residing on the premises shall be
involved or employed in the Home Occupation.
b. There is used no sign other than a nameplate not more than one square foot in area or no
display that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in part for
any purpose other than that of a dwelling unit.
c. No outdoor storage of materials or supplies related to the home occupation shall be
permitted.
d. There shall be no increased noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
created by the Home Occupation.
e. No exterior aspect of this residential structure shall allow the home occupation to be
reasonably recognized as a non-residential use.
6.16-2 Permitted Home Occupations.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-77 REVISED 06/06/11
a. Office facility of a salesman, sales representative or manufacturer’ s representative
provided there is not manufacturing, production or storage on the premises and no more
than one client on the premises at a time.
b. Office facility of an architect, broker, engineer, insurance agent, land surveyor, lawyer,
real estate agent, computer programmer, dentist, physician for consultation only and not
more than one client on the premises at a time.
c. Telephone answering service and office service to include typing, bookkeeping,
transcribing and data entry.
d. Instructional services for not more than one pupil at a time.
e. Painting, sculpturing, writing and home crafts. Retail sale of such items in the home is
prohibited.
f. Home product retail sales where orders are taken at the home of others. Production,
manufacturing and assembly of such product in the home is prohibited.
6.16-3 Prohibited Home Occupations.
a. Catering Services
b. Barber Shop and Beauty Salon
c. Motor Vehicle Repair
d. Restaurants, Tea Rooms
e. Commercial Stables, Kennels
6.16-4 Any proposed Home Occupation that is not specifically listed as permitted or prohibited
may be considered a Special use Permit subject to review and recommendation by the Plan
Commission and approval by the Village Board based upon compliance with the performance
standards.
Ord. #11-024)
6.17-1 Performance, Safety and Bulk Regulations for Geothermal Energy Systems.
a. All geothermal energy systems shall comply with the following performance and safety
standards:
i. The system shall be used only for the property on which it is located.
ii. All geothermal heat pump equipment must be located within the principal
building.
iii. The system shall not be located within any utility easements, unless permission is
granted by the applicable public and private agencies.
b. All geothermal energy systems shall comply with the following bulk regulations:
i. Each zoning lot is permitted one geothermal system.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-78 REVISED 06/06/11
ii. The system is permitted in the front or rear yard for residential and in any yard for
non-residential.
iii. The system shall be setback at least three feet from all lot lines.
6.17-2 Performance, Safety and Bulk Regulations for Solar Energy Systems.
a. All solar energy systems shall comply with the following performance and safety
standards:
i. All electrical transmission lines connecting a solar energy system to a building for
ground based systems shall be located underground.
ii. Shall be for the use of the property on which the system is located except for
reverse metering as allowed by the appropriate state and federal agencies.
iii. If unused for a period of 90 consecutive days, all systems must be removed.
b. All solar energy systems shall comply with the following bulk regulations:
i. Residential Zoning Districts.
a) Roof mounted equipment shall not extend more than five feet above the
highest portion of the roof.
b) Wall mounted equipment:
1) Shall not extend above the eave line or above the top of the
parapet.
2) Permitted only on a side or rear building wall and shall not extend
more than 12 inches from the wall.
c) Ground based systems:
1) Each zoning lot is permitted one ground based solar system.
2) Shall not exceed a height of 15 feet when oriented at maximum tilt.
3) Shall not exceed 200 square feet of surface area.
4) Shall only be located in the rear yard.
5) Must be located a minimum of 15 feet from any lot line.
6) System shall not be located within any utility easements, unless
permission is granted by the applicable public and private
agencies.
ii. Non-Residential Zoning Districts.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-79 REVISED 04/16/18
a) Roof mounted equipment shall not extend more than five feet above the
highest portion of the roof. This does not include the parapet.
b) Wall mounted equipment:
1) Shall not extend above the eave line or above the top of the
parapet.
2) Permitted on any building wall and shall not extend more than 12
inches from the wall.
3) Not permitted in the B-5 district.
c) Ground based systems:
1) Each zoning lot is permitted one ground based solar system;
however, one additional system is permitted for each acre of land
in excess of one acre.
2) Shall not exceed 15 feet tall when oriented at maximum tilt.
3) Shall not exceed 200 square feet of surface area.
4) Must be located a minimum of 15 feet from any lot line.
5) Shall be placed in any required yard, except that in the O-T and OR
districts, a system shall not be placed in a required front or
exterior side yard.
6) Not permitted in the B-5 district.
7) System shall not be located within any utility easements, unless
permission is granted by the applicable public and private
agencies.
Ord. #18-010)
Section 28-7 - Non-Conforming Uses and Buildings.
7.1 Continuation of Non-Conforming Uses and Building. A lawfully established use, building or
structure which becomes non-conforming with respect to this Code on the effective date thereof
or as a result of any subsequent amendment, may be continued except as otherwise provided in
this Section.
7.2 Change of Non-Conforming Use. The non-conforming use of any building, structure, or
portion thereof, which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is
located, may not be changed to another non-conforming use.
7.3 Discontinuance of Non-Conforming Use.
When the non-conforming use of a building, structure, or portion thereof, which is designed or
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-80 REVISED 04/16/18
intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, is discontinued for a
continuous period of one year, such building structure, or portion thereof shall thereafter be
occupied only by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is
located.
Any non-conforming use which is discontinued for a continuous period of one year shall not
thereafter be resumed, and the premises shall thereafter be resumed, and the premises shall
thereafter be occupied only by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in
which it is located.
7.4 Enlargements of Non-Conforming Uses and Buildings.
There shall be no enlargement of a non-conforming use.
When a building, structure, or portion thereof, is designed or intended for a use not permitted in
the district in which it is located, it shall not be enlarged, added to, or structurally altered in any
manner except as may be required by law, unless the building or structure and use thereof shall
be made to conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
7.5 Repairs and Alterations of Non-Conforming Buildings and Structures. Repairs and
alterations necessary in the ordinary course and operation of a building or structure may be made
to a non-conforming building or structure, except that no structural alterations shall be permitted,
unless such structural change is for the purpose of conforming with the use district. Alterations
designed to increase the intensity of a non-conforming uses, are prohibited.
7.6 Damage or Destruction. A building or structure which contains a non-conforming use or is
designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located and which is
damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of 50% of its replacement value shall not be
restored unless the building or structure and the use thereof shall conform to all the regulations of
the district in which it is located.
7.7 Moving. No non-conforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other location on the lot, except as required by law, unless every portion of such building or
structures which is moved as the use thereof made to conform to all the regulations of the district
in which it is located.
7.8 Termination of Non-Conforming Uses, Buildings and Structure.
7.8-1 Non-Conforming Buildings or Structures. Any non-conforming building, structure, or
portion thereof, shall be demolished, removed or remodeled and converted for a use permitted in
the zoning district after the termination of the respective periods of time set out hereinafter,
which periods are hereby established as a reasonable amortization of the normal, useful life of
each class of building and type of construction above the foundation walls or piers:
7.8-1.1 Fireproof construction of non-combustible materials consisting of exterior walls of solid
brick, stone, reinforced concrete, or insulated metal panels between fireproofed steel and with
interior structural members of reinforced concrete or fireproofed steel - thirty years from the date
the building, structure, or portion thereof, became non-conforming with respect to this Code as
hereinbefore indicated, or 40 years from the date of issuance of the building permit for the
construction of either the whole structure or the initial building or initial part thereof, whichever
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-81 REVISED 04/16/18
period shall terminate last.
7.8-1.2 Fire resistant shell construction consisting of exterior walls of solid brick, stone,
reinforced concrete or other masonry units with structural members of unprotected steel, timber
or wood joist construction 20 years from the date the building, structure, or portion thereof,
became non- conforming with respect to this Code as hereinbefore indicated, or 30 years from
the date of issuance of the building permit for the construction of either the whole structure or
the initial building or initial part thereof, whichever period shall terminate last.
7.8-1.3 Frame type construction of exterior walls of wood or timber frame construction
irrespective of the type of exterior surfaces and all other structures not qualifying under
paragraphs 7.8-1.1 or 7.8-1.2 and all physical improvements to land, all or substantially all of
which are below or at ground level 10 years from the date of the building, structure, or portion
thereof became non-conforming with respect to this code as hereinbefore indicated, or 20 years
from the date of issuance of the building permit for the construction of either the whole structure
or the initial building or initial part thereof, whichever period shall terminate last.
If, prior to the adoption of this Section, substantially all of a non-conforming building has been
reconstructed, rebuilt, or structurally altered, or if an addition at least equal in size or valuation
has been structurally attached thereto, then for the purposes of determining the normal useful life
of such building, the date of issuance of the building permit therefore shall be taken to be the
date of issuance of the building permit for such reconstruction, alteration, or addition.
7.8-2 Non-Conforming Use of Conforming Building. In a Residence District, the nonconforming
business or manufacturing use of a building, or portion thereof which is designed or
intended for a residential purpose, or for residential accessory purpose, shall be entirely
discontinued on or before five years from the date the use became non-conforming with respect
to this Section and not be reestablished.
7.8-3 Non-Conforming Use of Land.
7.8-3.1 The non-conforming use of land in a Residence District shall be terminated not later than
two years from the date the use became non-conforming with respect to this Section in each of
the following instances:
a. Where no buildings or structures are employed in connection with such use, or where the
only buildings, structures, or other physical improvements employed are accessory or
incidental to such use or have an assessed valuation of less than $5,000.00 or
b. Where such use is maintained in connection with a conforming building or structure;
except that inadequate off-street parking facilities accessory to a building or structure
located in the Residence District and occupied by a use conforming with the requirements
of the district may be continued for as long a time as the premises are used for a
permitted use.
7.8-3.2 A non-conforming use of land which is accessory to the non-conforming use of a
building or structure shall be discontinued on the same date the non-conforming use of the
building or structure is discontinued.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-82 REVISED 04/16/18
7.8-3.3 A non-conforming use of land which has in connection therewith, physical improvements
all or substantially all of which are underground or at ground level shall be deemed to be a non -
conforming structure, and shall be subject to the applicable provisions of Section 7.8.
7.8-4 Exempted Buildings, Structures and Uses.
7.8-4.1 No lawfully established building, structure, or use shall be subject to the termination
provisions of this Section solely for reasons of being non-conforming with respect to the
standards prescribed in this Chapter for any of the following: Floor Area Ratio, Yards - Front,
Side, Rear, or Transitional; Off-Street Parking or Loading; Lot Area, Building Height and Gross
Floor Area.
7.8-4.2 No non-conforming residential use or building lawfully established in a residential
district shall be subject to the termination provisions of this Section.
Ord. #17-027)
Section 28-8 - Special Uses
8.1 Purpose. The principal objective of the Zoning Code is to provide for an orderly
arrangement of compatible building and land uses, and for the proper location of all types of uses
required in the social and economic welfare of the Village. To accomplish this objective, each
type and kind of use is classified as permitted in one or more of the various districts established
by this Chapter. However, in addition to those uses specifically classified and permitted in each
district, there are certain additional uses which it may be necessary to allow because of their
unusual characteristics or the service they provide the public. These " Special Uses" require
particular consideration as to their proper location in relation to adjacent established or intended
uses, or to the planned development of the community. The conditions controlling the location
and operation of such " Special Uses" are established by the following provisions of this Section
8.
8.2 Authority. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Arlington Heights shall have authority to
permit the " special uses" of land or structures or both, subject to the applicable provisions of
Section 8, if it finds that the proposed location and establishment of any such use will be
desirable or necessary to the public convenience or welfare and will be harmonious and
compatible with other uses adjacent to and in the vicinity of the selected site or sites. For such
uses, the Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board of Trustees may authorize
exceptions to the applicable bulk regulations of this Chapter and such other variations from the
zoning regulations as may be required within the boundaries of such development without
referring the matter to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
8.3 Conditions and Approval. The Plan Commission may recommend and the Board of
Trustees may impose such restrictions upon the height and bulk and area of occupancy of any
structure so approved for a " Special Use" as may be reasonable under the particular
circumstances provided that such restrictions and stipulations shall not be more restrictive than
the requirements established for the district in which such structure is proposed to be located, or
as may be required elsewhere in the Village Code. Off-street parking facilities as well as offstreet
loading and unloading spaces may also be stipulated in the ordinance permitting the
Special Use."
8.4 Procedure. The procedure to be followed in considering applications for a Special Use
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-83 REVISED 06/19/17
permit shall be those outlined in applicable sections of this Chapter.
8.5 Determination. The Plan Commission then shall make its findings and recommendations to
the Village Board of Trustees within 30 days following the date of public hearing on each
application. No Special Use shall be recommended by the Plan Commission unless the
Commission finds:
8.5-1 That the special use is deemed necessary for the public convenience at this location; and
8.5-2 That such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to
the health, safety, morals or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity; and
8.5-3 That the proposed use will comply with the regulations and conditions specified in this
Chapter for such use and with the stipulations and conditions made a part of the authorization
granted by the Village Board of Trustees.
8.6 Ordinance Required. Those uses indicated in Section 5.5 as a Special Use shall not be
established until the Village Board has adopted an ordinance to grant the special use.
Section 8.7 Special Use Waiver for Restaurants. The special use requirement for a restaurant
may be waived if the restaurant use is:
1. A sit-down/carry out restaurant that is no larger than 4,000 square feet ( for purposes of
this provision, any outdoor eating area in the B-5 District is not to be counted for
determining the square footage);
2. A carry-out only restaurant, regardless of size;
3. An outdoor café in conjunction with a restaurant that has been legally established either
through the special use permit or special use waiver process;
The Petitioner must submit detailed plans and an application to the Planning and Community
Development Department for an administrative review to determine if the special use public
hearing can be waived. After review by the Planning and Community Development Department,
the Village reserves the right to add other restrictions if there are impacts to surrounding property
owners and/or require the Applicant to pursue a Special Use through the Plan Commission
process set forth in this Chapter.
Ord. #17-027)
Section 28-9 Planned Unit Development.
9.1 Intent. Planned Unit Developments permit site plans and designs which would not be
possible under strict application of zoning district regulations. Consequently, Planned Unit
Developments shall offer more benefits than a conventional development because of
comprehensive design and adherence to high standards. Improved features include but are not
limited to the following:
a. efficient land utilization;
b. innovative design;
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-84 REVISED 06/19/17
c. preservation of natural areas;
d. diversified land use and architectural treatment;
e. compatibility with adjacent and nearby land developments.
9.2 Qualifications Required for a Planned Unit Development. The following are the projects
that will be considered to be a Planned Unit Development:
a. Any development with more than one principal building on a zoning lot or lot of record.
b. Planned Unit Developments in the following districts shall have a minimum lot size of
one acre: R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, B-1, B-2, B-3, and B-4.
c. Any development in the B-5 Zoning District of any new building or additions of 500
square feet or more to existing buildings.
d. Any development of four or more acres in the M-1 and M-2 Districts, .
e. All developments in the R-7, O-T, O-R, I and P-L Districts
f. Any residential development using private roadways or private drives to provide
vehicular access on the lot
9.3 General Requirements for Planned Unit Developments. Planned Unit Development Sites
shall be under single ownership and/or unified control until fully developed and shall be
governed by all applicable zoning requirements of this Chapter.
9.4 Requirements for Planned Unit Developments Using Private Roadways. A Planned Unit
Development for a residential development using private roadways may be approved in the
following circumstances:
a. The size and shape of the parcel is such that strict application of public street standards
would cause development of the parcel to be impractical;
b. The proposed development is enhanced by exceptional site design features not ordinarily
possible under the strict application of the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Control
Regulations;
c. The development will provide amenities and improvements that would be materially
beneficial to the adjacent neighborhood;
d. The developer demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Plan Commission and
the Village Board that the private roadways will be adequately maintained, including the
execution and recording of a covenant binding all successors in title, ensuring that the
private roadways will be maintained in a condition safe for vehicular travel;
e. Private roadways are constructed in accordance with Village construction standards for
public roadways.
f. Private roadways are not planned or expected to serve property outside the proposed
development.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-85 REVISED 06/19/17
g. Private roadways are not used to fill gaps in the existing thoroughfare system, connect
two collector or arterial streets, or laid out to encourage through traffic.
h. Private roadways shall provide a minimum of two 12-foot wide driving lanes, excluding
curb and gutter dimensions.
i. Only parallel parking is permitted on a private roadway provided the pavement width is
increased by eight feet for each parking lane.
j. Signs indicating building addresses and directing motorists through the development are
provided, the size, number and location of such signs to be determined by the Director of
Building.
k. Unimpeded circulation and travel for emergency vehicles is provided on private
roadways in the development.
l. Curbs are provided along private roadways and driveways.
m. Street lights and sidewalks shall be installed along all private roadways in compliance
with Village standards.
9.5 Variations. In the case of any Planned Unit Development, the Plan Commission may
recommend and the Village Board of Trustees may authorize variations to the applicable bulk
regulations of this Chapter and such other variations from the zoning regulations as may be
required within the boundaries of such development without referring the matter to the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
Such variations may be granted as long as it is demonstrated that they will not exercise a
detrimental influence on the surrounding neighborhood. Variations shall be justified when other
characteristics of the development exceed the minimum standards of the Municipal Code. All
recommendations shall be based on the standards for appeals as stated in Section 6 -201 of the
Arlington Heights Municipal Code. Special consideration shall be given to:
a. The provision for indoor and outdoor recreation facilities, which should be proportional
to the size and density of the Planned Unit Development.
b. The conservation of natural resources such as flood plains, wet lands and wooded areas.
c. As much as possible, the preservation, of the natural drainage and floodwater retention.
9.6 Procedures for Approval of Planned Unit Development. Application shall be made on
forms supplied by the Planning Department and shall be complete with all supporting data,
documents, plans, maps and other documents as specified below.
The Village review and approval of the Planned Unit Development may be performed in three
stages:
a. Review of the Conceptual Plan by the Staff Development Committee and the Conceptual
Plan Review Committee of the Plan Commission.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-86 REVISED 06/19/17
b. Review and approval by the Plan Commission.
c. Review and approval by the Village Board, including adoption of the Ordinance
approving the Planned Unit Development.
9.7 Conceptual Planned Unit Development Submission and Review. Should a Petitioner
desire, the Village will review a Conceptual Plan for a Planned Unit Development. In order for
the Village to review the Conceptual Plan, the following items must be submitted:
a. Conceptual Development Plan including the site layout of buildings, roadways, access
drives, and floor plans as necessary. Conceptual architectural elevations and landscape
plans may also be submitted.
b. A brief written statement explaining the character of the development and its main
features should accompany the plan.
As quickly as possible from the date of submission of the Conceptual Plan, the Village Planning
Department and the Staff Development Committee will review the submitted materials, after
which a meeting of the Conceptual Plan Review Committee will be set. If the Conceptual Plan
Review Committee has an unfavorable recommendation, the petitioner can revise the Conceptual
Plan and resubmit material for Staff and Committee review. The Petitioner can also choose to
move forward to the Plan Commission with the negative recommendation from the Conceptual
Plan Review Committee.
9.8 Submission for Planned Unit Development Approval. The following items are required
for submission to the Plan Commission for approval of a Planned Unit Development, in the
quantity set forth in the Plan Commission application:
a. A legal description of the entire Planned Unit Development;
b. A current plat of survey or Alta Survey of the subject property;
c. Proof of ownership or other legal interest of the petitioner in the property;
d. A Master Plan showing streets, lots, parcels and sites for all uses included in the Planned
Unit Development, including areas proposed to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for
public uses including parks, playgrounds and parkways, as well as a brief written
statement describing the Planned Unit Development;
e. A site plan indicating exterior and interior roadways and streets, pedestrian walkways,
fire lanes, parking lots including parking spaces for handicapped persons, areas reserved
for landscaping and screening, all proposed structures, free standing signs, outdoor
lighting, trash storage areas and loading areas, including a chart with all relevant zoning
data such as FAR, land coverage ratios, density, setbacks, etc.;
f. Architectural floor plans and building elevations;
g. A tree preservation plan and a detailed landscaping plan with all of the planting materials
common and Latin names, sizes and quantities.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-87 REVISED 06/19/17
h. A preliminary engineering plan indicating storm sewer lines, sanitary sewer lines, water
mains and storm water detention or retention facilities and topographic plans.
i. A preliminary development schedule indicating:
1. The approximate date of construction start.
2. The number of construction phases and the date of starting each phase.
3. The date of completion of each phase.
4. A construction staging plan.
j. A draft of all proposed bylaws, covenants, easements, maintenance and other agreements,
wherever applicable.
k. A traffic analysis in accordance with Section 6.12 of this Chapter.
l. Preliminary Plat of Subdivision ( if required) in accordance with Chapter 29 of the
Municipal Code.
9.9 Review of the Plan Material. Once a complete Plan Commission application has been
received, Village Staff will review the submitted material, prepare written comments and submit
the material to the Plan Commission for a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of
this Chapter.
9.10 Public Hearing before the Plan Commission. At the public hearing, the Plan
Commission may make the following findings if fully supported by specific evidence presented
by the petitioner:
a. The reasons why the departures from the Village Zoning and Subdivision regulations and
the Village Comprehensive Plan proposed for the Planned Unit Development are or are
not deemed to be in the public interest.
b. The reasons why the proposed design does or does not make adequate provision for
public services, public utilities and services, for vehicular and pedestrian traffic or
provide for common open space and recreation.
c. The physical and economic benefits of the proposed development to the entire
community.
d. The impact of the proposed development on the adjoining traffic network.
9.11 Approval of Planned Unit Development Ordinance. If, after review of the
recommendation from the Plan Commission, the Village Board approves the Planned Unit
Development, an appropriate Ordinance shall be prepared. Upon approval of the Planned Unit
Development Ordinance, the ordinance and with exhibits shall be recorded by the Village Clerk
with the County Recorder of Deeds. The Village Zoning Map and the Village Comprehensive
Plan shall be amended to include the approved Planned Unit Development. The final approval
and recording is required for the issuance of the building permit.
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-88 REVISED 04/16/18
9.12 Enforcement of Development Schedule. The Planned Unit Development approval shall
be effective for no more than 24-months from the date the ordinance was adopted granting the
approval. Unless a building permit has been issued and construction commenced within this
time period, all ordinances approving the Planned Unit Development, including any other
conditions and approvals, shall be void. An extension of up to 12-months can be obtained by
submitting a detailed request to the Planning Department. After appropriate review, the Planning
Department will transmit the request and its recommendation to the Village Board for final
determination.
In the event that an additional request for extension is made, that request will also be reviewed
by the Plan Commission and the Plan Commission will transmit the request with its
recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees.
9.13 Permit Requirements for Planned Unit Developments. The following items shall be
required as part of a submittal for a building permit, in addition to all other permit requirements:
a. Final Engineering Plans and Details for all utilities, storm water retention, and drainage;
b. Final Construction staging plan, including a construction schedule; and
c. Final copy of all bylaws, covenants, easements, and maintenance agreements, including
bonds and escrow agreements, as requested by the Village.
Ord. #11-024, #18-010)
Section 28-10 - Off Street Parking and Loading.
The off-street parking and loading provisions of this Section shall apply as follows:
10.1 For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established after the effective
date of this Section, accessory parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by the
regulations of the districts in which such buildings or uses are located. However, where a
building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Section, and provided that
construction is begun within six months of such effective date and diligently pursued to
completion, parking and loading facilities as required hereinafter need not be provided.
10.1-1 When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises is planned to be
increased through addition of units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other units of
measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities, parking and loading
facilities as required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
10.1-2 Whenever the existing use of a building or structure is changed to a new use, parking or
loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use. However, if the building or
structure was erected prior to the effective date of this Section, additional parking or loading
facilities are required only in the amount by which the requirements for the new use would
exceed those for the existing use if the latter were subject to the parking and loading provisions
of this Section.
10.1-3 Control of Off-Site Parking Facilities. In a residential district, no zoning certificate for
off-site facilities shall be issued until the Plan Commission has conducted a hearing for a special
use in accordance with Section 8. No off-site parking shall be located in a residential zoning
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-89 REVISED 04/16/18
district unless accessory to a use permitted in that district.
10.1-4 Submission of Parking Plan. Any application for a building permit, or for a certificate
of occupancy where no building permit is required, shall include a parking plan drawn to scale
and fully dimensioned showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance
with this Section.
10.2 Additional Regulations – Parking.
10.2-1 Except as otherwise indicated, required accessory off-street parking facilities provided
for uses listed hereinafter shall be solely for the parking of vehicles of patrons, occupants ( or
their guest), or employees of such uses.
10.2-2 Floor Area. See Section 28-3(48) for floor area measurement requirements.
10.2-3 Employees. Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the
maximum number of full or part-time employees on duty or residing, or both on the premises at
any one time.
10.2-4 Capacity. Parking spaces required on the basis of capacity shall be based on the
capacity as determined by current Village Building and Fire Codes.
10.2-5 Computation. When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required
by this Section results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of one -half or less may
be disregarded, while a fraction in excess of one-half shall be counted as one parking space.
10.2-6 Collective Provision. Off-street parking facilities for separate uses may be provided
collectively if the total number of spaces so provided collectively is not less than the sum of the
separate requirements for each such use and provided that all regulations governing location of
accessory parking spaces in relation to the use served are adhered to. Further, no parking space
or portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use unless otherwise
authorized by the Plan Commission in accordance with Section 10.1-5.
10.2-7 Size. A required off-street parking space shall be at least nine feet in width and at least
18 feet in length, exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or office or work areas.
The length of a parking space can be reduced to 16 1/2 feet including wheel stop if additional
space of one and one half feet in length is provided for car overhang. At least three feet,
excluding any car overhang space, must be provided for any planting screen. The parking shall
have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet.
10.2-8 Horizontal widths for parking rows, aisles, and modules shall be provided at widths no
less than listed in the following table:
Parallel
30
One Way
45 60
Two Way
90
Single Row Parking 9' 17' 19' 20' 18'
Driving aisle 12' 12' 13' 18' 24'
Minimum width of module 21' 29' 32' 38' 42'
Two row parking 18' 34' 38' 40' 36'
Driving aisle 12' 12' 13' 18' 24'
Minimum width of module 30' 46' 51' 58' 60'
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-90 REVISED 04/16/18
Certain required off-street parking spaces mandated by this Section may be satisfied by spaces
eight and one-half feet in width by 18 feet in length if the Petitioner provides an analysis that
justifies the narrower spaces to the satisfaction of the Director of Engineering. Spaces
predominantly patronized by rapid-turnover parkers do not qualify for the narrower width.
10.2-9 Access. Each required off-street space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of
such width and design as to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to such parking
space. All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular
access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movement.
No driveway across public property or requiring a curb cut shall exceed a width of 25 feet,
except when, in the opinion of the Director of Engineering, safe and efficient design principals
require an increase, in which case the Director of Engineering may authorize a maximum
driveway width of 36 feet. Furthermore, no access from a street or alley to off-street parking
facilities shall be located less than 35 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way of two
intersecting streets.
10.2-10 Handicapped Parking. Parking for the handicapped shall be provided at a size,
number and location, as specified by the current Illinois Accessibility Code.
10.2-11 In Yards.
10.2-11.1 In R-E, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts, off-street parking spaces shall be allowed based
on the following:
a. Off-street parking spaces may be located in any yards but only on concrete or asphalt
surfaces.
b. Except as set forth in subsection c. below, no driveway and/or parking area shall exceed a
width of 22 feet.
c. For three car garages, a driveway and/or parking area shall be allowed to be a maximum
of 32 feet in width, within 18 feet of the garage’ s front elevation when, in the opinion of
the Director of Engineering, the installation of such driveway will not be detrimental to
drainage or alter the character of the area.
d. When the garage is located to the rear of the residence, the side drive shall be a minimum
of nine feet wide. Projections (chimneys, awnings, etc.) shall not be allowed to overhang
within this measurement.
e. For a zoning lot with a lot width of 70 feet or greater, all driveway pavement must be
setback at least three feet from the side or rear lot line (whichever lot line applies).
f. For side-loaded garages ( when the garage door(s) face a side lot line), the driveway
pavement dimension shall be a minimum of 22 feet from the face of the garage to the
edge of the driveway pavement along the side lot line.
Nothing contained herein, however, shall permit the parking of any vehicle in a portion of yard
where such parking would otherwise be prohibited by any provision of Arlington Heights
Village Code, nor shall this section be construed to eliminate any requirements for the
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-91 REVISED 04/16/18
installation of driveways otherwise imposed by the Code, including specifications for the
construction and character of such driveways. Parking upon grass, dirt or other non-hard surface
of any vehicle except towed vehicles is prohibited.
10.2-11.2 In "R-4", " R-5", " R-6" and " R-7" and "M-1" off street parking spaces may be located
in any yard except required front yards.
In O-T Office Transitional Districts off-street parking spaces may be located in any required
yard.
In Business and M-2 Districts, off-street parking spaces may be located in any required yard.
10.2-12 Design and Maintenance.
10.2-12.1 Open and Enclosed Parking Spaces. Accessory parking spaces located on the same
lot occupied by the use served, may be open to the sky or enclosed in a building. Accessory
parking spaces located in an " R-5" or "R-7" District elsewhere than on the same lot occupied by
the use served shall be open to the sky except when otherwise allowed as a Special Use by the
Village.
10.2-12.2 Surfacing and Drainage. All off street parking areas except those accessory to one
family dwellings, shall be improved with a compacted base, surfaced with asphaltic concrete or
some comparable all-weather dustless material of a design and thickness in accordance with
prescribed engineering standards, and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of surface
water accumulation by means of a positive storm water drainage system connected directly or
indirectly to a public drainage way.
10.2-12.3 Lighting.
a. All lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be shielded or otherwise
optically controlled so as to provide glareless illumination in such a manner as not to
create a nuisance on adjacent property.
b. All off-street parking areas with lighting shall limit spillage onto adjacent property.
Maximum horizontal foot candles as given off by the neighboring property as measured
in the following districts shall not exceed:
Foot Candles Lux
Single-Family Residential Districts . 1 1.0
Multiple Family Residential Districts . 2 2.0
Business Districts 2.0 21.5
Light Industrial Districts 5.0 53.8
Park, School & Institutional Districts 5.0 53.8
c. All light poles erected 20-feet to 40-feet above ground level:
1. Shall be flat bottom optically controlled sharp cut-offs, as approved by the
Director of Engineering;
2. Shall not be installed with diffusing refractors; and
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-92 REVISED 04/16/18
3. Shall maintain a ratio of 3:1 or less of luminaire spacing to luminaire mounting
heights.
d. All light poles erected 0-feet to 20-feet above ground level:
1. Shall be of translucent materials and not transparent materials, as approved by the
Director of Engineering; and
2. Shall not be installed with diffusing refractors.
e. Light Poles shall not be erected higher than 40-feet above ground level.
f. Parking installed for the public benefit by Park Districts, educational and religious
institutions shall be exempt from the requirements of (c) (3) of this Section.
g. All present non-conforming off-street parking areas shall be equipped with the lighting
required by this section upon the obsolescence or replacement of the existing lighting.
h. Definitions and Terms used in this Section shall be defined by the Illumination
Engineering Societies in the current edition of the IES Lighting Handbook.
i. Lighting standards in side and rear yard(s) in districts other than R-E through R-7 are
exempt from the requirements of (d) of this Section when said side or rear yard(s) are not
adjacent to a residential district or roadway and the lighting standards do not cause glare
to vehicular traffic.
10.2-12.4 Curbing. The perimeter of all parking areas providing space for parking five or more
vehicles shall be protected in accordance with prescribed engineering standards.
10.2-13 Maximum Number of Spaces. The total number of accessory parking spaces provided
for a two-family or multiple-family dwelling or hotel shall not exceed that required by this
Section for such use or for an equivalent new use by more than 50%. The total number of
accessory parking spaces for a single-family residential zoning lot shall be six.
10.2-14 Parking of Certain Vehicles in Residential Zoning Districts. The purpose and intent
of this Section is to restrict the parking of certain vehicles in residential zoning districts as
defined below. No vehicles, other than private passenger vehicles or commercial vehicles subject
to the provisions of Section 10.2-14.2, may be parked between the front line of any portion of the
building and the street in a residential area for a greater length of time than is required for
loading or unloading or for performing services associated with the equipment or materials
hauled in commercial vehicles. In no case shall a vehicle, other than a private passenger vehicle
or commercial vehicles subject to the provisions of Section 10.2-14.2, be parked between the
front line of any portion of the building and the street in a residential area overnight, except as
authorized by the Chief of Police as provided elsewhere in this Section.
10.2-14.1 Parking of Recreational Vehicles. Recreational Vehicles (RV) may be parked on a
residential zoning lot subject to the following:
a. Front Yard.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-93 REVISED 04/16/18
1. RVs shall not be parked between the front line of any portion of the building and
the street, unless otherwise specifically provided for in this Chapter.
b. Side Yard.
1. No more than two RVs may be parked in a side yard.
2. A single RV may not exceed 20 feet in length and two RVs, if parked-end to-end,
may not exceed a total combined length of 20 feet.
3. A single RV may not exceed a height of four feet in height.
4. Any RV located in an interior side yard shall be parked a minimum of three feet
from the side lot line.
5. Any RV located in an interior side yard shall be screened on all sides with a single
row of evergreens a minimum of five feet high at time of planting or a semi-open
wood fence five feet high.
c. Rear Yard.
1. No more than two RVs shall be parked in a rear yard.
2. A single RV shall not exceed 32 feet in length and two RVs, if parked end -to-end,
shall not exceed a total combined length of 32 feet.
3. A single RV shall not exceed a height of 12 feet in height.
4. Any RV located in a rear yard shall be parked a minimum of five feet from the
rear lot line and a minimum of three feet from any interior lot line.
5. Any RV located in a rear yard shall be screened on all sides with a single row of
evergreens a minimum of five feet high at time of planting or semi-open wood
fence five feet high.
d. Exterior Side Yards and Rear Yards Adjacent to a Street or Roadway.
1. No RVs shall be located in an exterior side yard or that portion of a rear yard that
is between an adjacent street or roadway and a line extended from the building.
e. Additional Requirements.
1. Not more than two RVs may be parked on any residential zoning lot.
2. At no time shall a parked RV be used for living, sleeping or other purposes. No
RV shall be connected to gas, water or sanitary sewer service.
3. Any RV may be parked in a fully enclosed garage unless such parking is
specifically prohibited elsewhere in the Code.
4. The owner of an RV shall not park the RV in a manner so as to create a dangerous
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-94 REVISED 04/16/18
or unsafe condition on the lot where parked or to adjacent property. Parking in
such fashion that the RV may readily tip or roll shall be considered a dangerous or
unsafe condition.
5. The parking surface of an RV in any permitted area shall be a hard surface such as
concrete, asphalt or crushed stone.
6. RVs shall not have their wheels removed or be affixed to the ground so as to
prevent ready removal of the vehicle.
7. RVs shall not be used as accessory structures in any zoning district.
8. No major automobile repairs, as defined in Section 3 of this Chapter shall be
performed on any RV except within a garage or other structure.
9. Temporary parking of RVs for the purpose of loading or unloading shall be
permitted for no more than two days within any period of four consecutive days.
10.2-14.2 Parking of Commercial Vehicles. Commercial vehicles may be parked on a
residential zoning lot subject to the following:
a. Size/Weight Limitation. No commercial vehicle having a license class designation
greater than “ B” under the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be parked on a residential zoning
lot. This limitation shall not apply to a pick -up style commercial vehicle with the license
class designation of “D.” All other Class “D” vehicles are prohibited.
b. Location. No commercial vehicle shall be parked on a residential zoning lot unless
parked within a private garage. However, a commercial vehicle that meets one of the
following criteria is not required to be parked within a private garage:
1. The vehicle has no signage;
2. The vehicle’ s signage is limited to the identification of the owner or operator
affixed, by name or logo, and shall be no larger than 25% of the area of the front
door, including glass, on the driver’s side. Such identification may appear on not
more than two separate portions of the vehicle.
c. Number. Generally, only one commercial vehicle shall be parked on a residential lot. A
second commercial vehicle may be parked on a residential lot only if it meets all of the
following criteria:
1. The vehicle shall not have a license class designation of “B” or greater under the
provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code; and
2. The vehicle’ s signage is limited to the identification of the owner or operator
affixed, by name or logo, and shall be no larger than 25% of the area of the front
door, including glass, on the driver’ s side. Such identification may appear on not
more than two separate portions of the vehicle.
d. Nothing in the provisions of this Section shall be construed to prohibit trucks and other
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-95 REVISED 04/16/18
service vehicles from being parked on the premises temporarily for purposes of making
deliveries or rendering service to the property.
e. The Police Chief, or duly appointed representative, may authorize the parking of
commercial vehicles designed for providing emergency services applying the same
procedures and restrictions as used for RVs.
10.2-14.3 No inoperable or unlicensed vehicle shall be permitted on any residential property for
more than 48 hours unless it is in an enclosed garage.
10.3 Location of Accessory Off-Street Parking Facilities. The location of off street parking
spaces in relation to the use served shall be as prescribed hereinafter. All distances specified
shall be walking distances between such parking spaces and a main entrance to the use served.
10.3-1 For Uses in an R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 District. Parking spaces accessory to
dwellings shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served.
10.3-2 For Uses in an R-5, R-6 or R-7 District. All parking spaces shall be within 500 feet of
the use served, except that spaces accessory to a multiple-family dwelling or apartment-hotel
shall be within 300 feet of the use served. However, no parking spaces accessory to a use in an
R-5 or R-7 District shall be located in an R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 District.
10.3-3 For Uses in Business and Manufacturing Districts. All required parking spaces shall
be within 1,000 feet of the use served, except for spaces accessory to dwelling units (other than
those located in a transient hotel), which shall be within 300 feet of the use served. However, no
parking spaces accessory to a use in a Business or Manufacturing District shall be located in a
Residence District.
10.4 Schedule of Parking Requirements. Accessory off-street parking spaces for the
following uses shall be provided as required herein.
USE REQUIREMENTS
Housing for Elderly One space for each multi-family dwelling
unit. Single family detached and attached
dwelling units require two parking spaces
per unit.
Dormitories Two spaces per three residents, plus one
space for each staff member.
10.4-1 RESIDENTIAL USES
USE REQUIREMENTS
Multiple Family Dwellings Two spaces for each dwelling unit
in the R-5 and R-6 Zoning Districts
Multiple Family Dwellings One and one-half spaces for each
in the R-7 Zoning District dwelling unit
One & Two Family Dwellings Two spaces for each dwelling unit
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-96 REVISED 04/16/18
10.4-2 RETAIL - COMMERCIAL AND SERVICES USES
USE REQUIREMENTS
Amusement Device Arcades One space for each 300 square feet of floor
area
Automobile Service Stations One space for each employee plus three
spaces for each service bay
Banks One space for each 300 square feet of floor
area
Beauty Shop One space for each 250 square feet of floor
area
Bowling Alleys Three spaces for each alley plus the required
spaces for restaurants that are provided
Dance Studio One space for each 250 square feet of floor
area
Furniture and Appliance Stores, One space for each 600 square feet of floor
area
Health Clubs One space for each 200 and fifty square feet
of floor area
Motor Vehicle Sales and Machinery Sales One space for each 600 square
of floor area
Offices - Business, Professional & Governmental One space for each 300 square feet of floor
area
Offices - Medical or Dental Clinics, One space for every 200 square feet of floor
area
Medical Center ( Refer to State of Illinois Accessibility
Standards for additional requirements.)
Personal Trainer One space for each 250 square feet of floor
space
Restaurant - Carry-Out One space for each 300 square feet of floor
space
Restaurant - Sit-Down One space for each 45 square feet of seating
area
Retail Stores - Not Otherwise Specified One space for each 300 square feet of floor
area
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-97 REVISED 04/16/18
10.4-2 RETAIL - COMMERCIAL AND SERVICES USES
USE REQUIREMENTS
Theaters (Indoor) One space for each four seats
Undertaking Establishments, Funeral Parlors 25 spaces for each chapel or parlor
10.4-3 WHOLESALE, STORAGE & PRODUCTION
USE REQUIREMENTS
Establishments Engaged in Production, One space for each two employees plus
Processing, Cleaning, Servicing, one space for each vehicle used in the
Testing or Repair of Materials, the conduct of the enterprise.
Goods or Products, or Engaged in
Research and Development
Warehouses and Storage One space for each two employees plus one
space for each vehicle used in the conduct
of the enterprise
Wholesale Establishments One space for each two employees plus one
space for each vehicle used in the conduct of
the enterprise
10.4-4 COMMUNITY SERVICE USES
USE REQUIREMENTS
Colleges & Universities One space for every five students at
maximum enrollment
Community Centers Spaces equal in number to 30% of capacity
Church One space for each five seats
Day Care Centers and Schools Three spaces for each two employees
Hospital Three spaces for each hospital bed
Libraries, Art Galleries One space for each 1000 feet &
Museums- Public of gross floor space
Places of Assembly as follows:
Stadiums, Arenas, Auditoriums Parking equal in number to 30% of the
other than Church, College or capacity in persons
Institutional School),
Convention Halls, Skating Rinks,
and other similar places of assembly
Public Utility and Public Spaces as required for similar office,
Service Uses retail uses or industrial
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-98 REVISED 04/16/18
10.4-4 COMMUNITY SERVICE USES
USE REQUIREMENTS
Recreational Facilities Spaces equal in number to 30% of capacity
Schools, Commercial One space for each employee plus spaces
equal in number to one-half of the maximum
number of students projected to be in
attendance at any one time
Schools, Elementary One space per employee plus one space per
every five classrooms
Schools, High Two spaces per each employee plus one
space per ten students at maximum
10.4-5 MISCELLANEOUS USES
USE REQUIREMENTS
Fraternities, Sororities, & Dormitories One space for each three active member plus
one space for the manager thereof
Hotels & Motels One space for each lodging room plus
spaces as required for any restaurant that is
included
Nursing Homes One space for each two beds
Private Clubs and Lodges One space for each lodging room plus
parking spaces equal in number to 30% of
the capacity in persons (exclusive of lodging
room capacity)
Crematories, Mausoleums Parking spaces shall be as determined by
Plan Commission Fraternal and Religious
institutions to serve persons employed or
residing on the premises, as well as the
visiting public
Other Uses For uses not listed heretofore in this
schedule of parking requirements, parking
spaces shall be provided on the same basis
as required for the most similar listed uses
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-99 REVISED 04/16/18
10.5 PARKING IN THE DOWNTOWN DISTRICT
10.5-1 Furniture and Appliance Store (B-5)
USE REQUIREMENTS
First Floor One space for each 1000 square feet of floor
area
Other than First Floor One space for each 1500 square feet of floor
area
10.5-2 Multiple Family Dwellings (B-5)
Including Apartment Hotels)
USE REQUIREMENTS
Efficiency and One Bedroom Apartments One space for each unit
Two Bedroom Apartments One and one-fourth spaces for each unit
Three Bedroom Apartments One and one-half spaces for each unit
10.5-3 Office - Business, Professional, and Governmental (B-5)
USE REQUIREMENTS
First Floor One space for each 600 square feet in excess
of 1500 square feet of floor area
Second Floor or Basement One space for each 750 square feet in excess
of 2000 square feet of floor area
Above the Second Floor One space for each 1250 square feet in
excess of 2500 square feet of floor area.
10.5-4 Offices-Medical or Dental and Medical Centers (B-5)
USE REQUIREMENTS
First Floor Three spaces for each examination room
Other Than the First Floor Two spaces for each examination room
10.5-5 Retail Stores and Banks (B-5)
USE REQUIREMENTS
First Floor One space for each 500 square feet in excess
of 1500 square feet of floor space
Second Floor or Basement One space for each 700 and fifty square feet
in excess of 2000 square feet of floor area
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-100 REVISED 04/16/18
10.5-5 Retail Stores and Banks (B-5)
USE REQUIREMENTS
Above the Second Floor One space for each 1000 square feet in
excess of 2500 square feet of floor area
10.5-6 Restaurant - Sit-Down (B-5)
USE REQUIREMENTS
First Floor or Basement One space for each two hundred square feet
of public seating area
Above the First Floor One space for each 250 square feet of public
seating area
Other Uses (B-5) For uses not listed heretofore in the above
schedule of parking requirements for the B-5
zoning district, parking spaces shall be
provided at 50% in number as required
elsewhere
10.5-8 Leasing of Parking Spaces. The off-street parking requirements in the B-5 Downtown
District may be met by the leasing of spaces from the Village. The duration and terms of such
lease shall be determined by the President and Board of Trustees. The parking shall not be
separated from the place of business by a major arterial road and shall be within the Downtown
District or contiguous to the Downtown District.
10.5-9 Substantial Compliance. If an existing developed parcel does not meet parking
requirements but the deficit is either less than ten spaces or no more than five percent less than
the number of required parking spaces, the parcel will be deemed to be in substantial compliance
with the parking requirements if the property owner can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Village that there is sufficient parking on-site for the proposed uses.
10.6 Additional Regulations - Off-Street Loading.
10.6-1 Location. All required loading berths shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use
served. No loading berth for vehicles over two ton capacity shall be closer than 50 feet to any
property in a Residence District unless completely enclosed by building walls or a uniformly
painted solid fence or wall, or any combination thereof, not less than six feet in height. No
permitted or required loading berth shall be located within 25 feet of the nearest point of
intersection of any two streets. No loading berth shall be located in a required side yard and any
loading berth located in a required rear yard shall be open to the sky.
10.6-2 Size. Unless otherwise specified, a required loading berth shall be at least ten feet in
width by at least 35 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a
vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
10.6-3 Access. Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed in such a manner that all
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-101 REVISED 04/16/18
vehicle maneuvering shall be performed entirely on the property being serviced when the access
is from a street designated on the Village Official Map or Village Comprehensive Plan Map as
an arterial or collector street.
10.6-4 Repair and Service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be
permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in any Residence or Business District.
11.6-5 Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not be used to satisfy the space
requirements for any off-street parking facilities or portion thereof.
10.6-6 For special uses other than prescribed for hereinafter, loading berths adequate in number
and size to serve such use, as determined by the Plan Commission, shall be provided.
10.6-7 Uses for which off-street loading facilities are required herein, but which are located in
buildings of less floor area than the minimum prescribed for such required facilities, shall be
provided with adequate receiving facilities off any adjacent alley, service drive, or open space on
the same lot which is accessible by motor vehicle.
10.7 Schedule of Loading Requirements. For the uses listed in the following table, off-street
loading berths shall be provided on the basis of gross floor area or building or portions thereof
devoted to such uses in the amounts shown below:
USE GROSS FLOOR REQUIRED NUMBER
AREA IN SQUARE AND MINIMUM
FEET DIMENSIONS OF BERTH
a. Multiple-Family Dwellings 10,000 to 200,000 1-(10 ft. x 35 ft.)
b. Hospitals, sanitariums, and For each additional 1 additional -
other institutional uses 200,000 or fraction ( 10 ft. x 35 ft.)
c. Hotels, Clubs and Lodges, thereof
except as set for in Item (c)
d. Hotels, Clubs and Lodges - 10,000 to 20,000 1-(10 ft. x 35 ft.)
when containing any of the 20,000 to 150,000 1-(10 ft. x 50 ft.)
following: Retail Shops For each additional 1 additional -
Convention Halls, 150,000 or fraction ( 10 ft. x 50 ft.)
Auditoriums, thereof
Exhibition Halls, or
Business or Professional
Offices (other than accessory)
e. Retail Stores 5,000 to 10,000 1-(10 ft. x 35 ft.)
f. Restaurants - Sit-down 10,000 to 25,000 2-(10 ft. x 35 ft. ea.)
g. Motor Vehicle and Machinery 25,000 to 40,000 2-(10 ft. x 50 ft. ea.)
Sales 40,000 to 100,000 3-(10 ft. x 50 ft. ea.)
h. Wholesale Establishments 200,000 or fraction 1 additional -
but not including ware- thereof ( 10 ft. x 50 ft.)
house and storage buildings
other than accessory)
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-102 REVISED 04/16/18
USE GROSS FLOOR REQUIRED NUMBER
AREA IN SQUARE AND MINIMUM
FEET DIMENSIONS OF BERTH
i. Auditoriums, Convention 10,000 to 20,000 1-(10 ft. x 35 ft.)
Halls, Exhibition Halls, 20,000 to 100,000 1-(10 ft. x 50 ft.)
Sports Arenas, Stadiums For each additional 1 additional -
j. Bowling Alleys 100,000 or fraction thereof (10 ft. x 50 ft.)
k. Banks and Offices - 10,000 to 100,000 for 1-(10 ft. x 35 ft.)
Business, Professional and each additional 1 additional -
Governmental 100,000 or fraction ( 10 ft. x 35 ft.)
thereof to 500,000 1 additional -
for each additional ( 10 ft. x 35 ft.)
500,000 or fraction
thereof
l. Establishments Engaged in 5,000 to 10,000 1-(10 ft. x 35 ft.)
Production, Processing, 10,000 to 40,000 1-(10 ft. x 50 ft.)
Cleaning, Servicing, 40,000 to 100,000 2-(10 ft. x 50 ft. ea.)
Testing, or Repair of For each additional 1 additional
Materials, Goods or 100,000 or fraction ( 10 ft. x 50 ft.)
Products thereof
m. Warehouses and Storage
Buildings
n. Theaters 8,000 to 25,000 1-(10 ft. x 35 ft.)
For each additional 1 additional -
50,000 or fraction ( 10 ft. x 35 ft.)
thereof
o. Undertaking Establishments 8,000 to 100,000 1-(10 ft. x 35 ft.)
and Funeral Parlors For each additional 1 additional -
100,000 or fraction ( 10 ft. x 35 ft.)
thereof
Ord. #17-037)
10.8 Schedule of Bicycle Parking Requirements
Bicycle Parking ( BP) is defined as any designated space made publicly available for secure
short-term bicycle storage. Designs and dimensions of BP spaces and structures must comply
with standards set forth in the Association of Pedestrian and Bicycles Professionals Bicycle
Parking Guidelines handbook. The minimum number of required off-street BP spaces shall be
determined using the guidelines set forth in this Section. These requirements shall apply in the
case of new construction or when a change in use results in the requirement for additional offstreet
motor vehicle parking. However, if space is not available or feasible on a site to provide
the required number of bicycle parking spaces, the Director of Planning may determine that
fewer or no spaces be provided.
These requirements are established to ensure adequate parking and access for the following
building and development types in the Village of Arlington Heights.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-103 REVISED 04/16/18
10.8-1 Residential Uses
USE REQUIREMENT
Multiple Family Dwelling in the R-5 and R-6 One BP space for every 10 dwelling units
Zoning Districts
Multiple Family Dwellings in the R-7 Zoning One BP space for every 10 dwelling units
District
10.8-2 Retail – Commercial and Services
USE REQUIREMENT
Amusement Device Arcades One BP space for each 6,000 square feet of
floor area, minimum of two BP spaces
Automobile Service Stations One BP space for every 40 employees,
minimum of two BP spaces
Banks One BP space for each 6,000 square feet of
floor area, minimum of two BP spaces
Beauty Shops One BP space for each 5,000 square feet of
floor area, minimum of two BP spaces
Bowling Alleys One BP space for each 5,000 square feet
of floor area, minimum of two BP spaces,
maximum of 12 BP spaces
Dance Studios One BP space for every 2% capacity,
minimum of two BP spaces
Furniture and Appliance Stores One BP space for each 12,000 square feet of
floor area, minimum of two BP spaces,
maximum of 12 BP spaces
Health Clubs One BP space for each 5,000 square feet of
floor area, minimum of two BP spaces
Motor Vehicle Sales One BP space for each 12,000 square feet of
floor area, minimum of two BP spaces,
maximum of 12 BP spaces
Offices-Business, Professional & Governmental One BP space for each 6,000 square feet of
floor area, minimum of two BP spaces,
maximum of 36 BP spaces
Offices-Medical or Dental Clinics One BP space for every 4,000 square feet of
floor area, minimum of two BP spaces,
maximum of 12 BP spaces
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-104 REVISED 04/16/18
10.8-2 Retail – Commercial and Services
USE REQUIREMENT
Medical Center One BP space for every 6,000 square feet of
floor area, minimum of two BP spaces,
maximum of 12 BP spaces
Personal Trainer One BP space for each 5,000 square feet of
floor space, minimum of two BP spaces
Restaurant – Carry-Out One BP space for each 6,000 square feet of
floor space, minimum of two BP spaces
Restaurant – Sit-Down One BP space for each 900 square feet of
seating area, minimum of two BP spaces,
maximum of 24 BP spaces
Retail Stores-Not Otherwise Specified One BP space for each 6,000 square feet of
floor area, minimum of two BP spaces,
maximum of 24 BP spaces
Theaters (indoor) One BP space for each 6,000 square feet of
floor area, minimum of two BP spaces
Undertaking Establishments, Funeral Parlors One BP space for each chapel or parlor,
minimum of two BP spaces
10.8-3 Wholesale, Storage and Production
USE REQUIREMENT
Establishments Engaged in Production, Cleaning, One BP space for each 40 employees,
Servicing, Materials, Goods or Products, or minimum of two BP spaces
Engaged in Research and Development
Warehouses and Storage One BP space for each 40 employees,
minimum of two BP spaces
Wholesale Establishments One BP space for each 40 employees,
minimum of two BP spaces
10.8-4 Community Service Uses
USE REQUIREMENT
Colleges & Universities One BP space for every 20 employees and
2.5% of maximum enrollment
Community Centers Spaces equal to 2% of capacity, minimum
of two BP spaces
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-105 REVISED 04/16/18
10.8-4 Community Service Uses
USE REQUIREMENT
Churches One BP space for each 100 seats, minimum
of two BP spaces
Day Care Centers One BP space for every 100 children at
maximum enrollment plus three spaces per
every 40 employees, minimum of two BP
spaces
Schools One BP space for every 20 employees and
2.5% of maximum enrollment
Hospitals One BP space for every 80 employees,
minimum of two BP spaces
Libraries, Art Galleries, Public Museums One BP space per every 20,000 square feet
of gross floor space, with a minimum of two
BP spaces
Places of Assembly as follows: Stadiums, BP space equal in number to 1% of the
Arenas, Auditoriums (other than Church, capacity when capacity is >10,000 persons,
College or Institutional School), Convention 2% when college is <10,000 persons
Halls, Skating Rinks and other similar places of
assembly
Recreational Facilities BP spaces equal in number to 2% of
capacity
Schools, Commercial One BP space for every 20 employees plus
BP spaces equal to 2.5% of the maximum
number of students projected to be in
attendance at any one time
Schools, Elementary and High One BP space for every 20 employees plus
BP spaces equal to 2.5% of the maximum
number of students projected to be in
attendance at any one time
10.8-5 Miscellaneous Uses
USE REQUIREMENT
Fraternities, Sororities, Dormitories One BP space for every 20 lodging rooms
plus BP equal to 2% of the capacity in
persons (exclusive of lodging room
capacity)
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-106 REVISED 04/16/18
10.8-5 Miscellaneous Uses
USE REQUIREMENT
Hotels & Motels One BP space for each forty employees,
minimum of two BP spaces, plus BP spaces
as required for any restaurant that is
included
Nursing Homes One BP space for every 40 beds
Private Clubs & Lodges One BP space for every 20 lodging rooms
plus BP equal to 2% of the capacity in
persons (exclusive of lodging room
capacity)
Crematories, Mausoleums One BP space for each 40 employees
minimum two BP spaces)
For uses not listed in this schedule of BP requirements, BP spaces shall be provided on the same
basis as required for the most similar listed uses. However, BP spaces shall not be required for
Construction Yards, Day Care Homes, Freight Terminals, Private and Public Utility Facilities
and Single Family-Two Family Dwellings.
The required BP spaces for a multi-tenant commercial or industrial development may be
combined at one location on the site provided that the total number of spaces is not less than the
required sum for the combined square footage of all the tenants, and the location is within 200
feet of each tenant entrance.
10.8-6 Bike Parking in the Downtown District
Bike parking is not required in the Downtown District except for Planned Unit Developments, in
which case the number of BP spaces will be determined as part of the formal review process.
Ord. #18-010)
Section 28-11 Zoning Board of Appeals.
11.1 Zoning Board of Appeals. The powers, duties and responsibilities of the Zoning Board of
Appeals are set forth in Chapter 6 of the Municipal Code.
11.2 Land Use Variations. In order to receive a variation, the Petitioner must provide support
for each of the following factors:
1. The proposed use will not alter the essential character of the locality and will be
compatible with existing uses and zoning of nearby property; and
2. The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances, which may include the length of
time the subject property has been vacant as zoned; and
3. The proposed variation is in harmony with the spirit and intent of this Chapter;
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-107 REVISED 04/16/18
4. The variance requested is the minimum variance necessary to allow reasonable use of the
property.
A variation may be granted if the evidence provided sustains each of the factors listed above.
Every variation shall be accompanied by findings of fact specifying the reasons for granting the
variation by applying the above factors.
The concurring vote of four members of the Zoning Board is necessary to reverse any order,
requirements, decision or determination of the Administrative officer, or to decide in favor of the
applicant in any manner upon which it is required to pass or to effect any variation.
11.3 Application. An application for a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
filed with the Department of Planning and Community Development upon a form prescribed
therefore which shall be accompanied by the application fee and the following:
a. Plat of Survey. Nine copies of the Plat Survey, designating dimensions of proposed
construction spotted thereon.
b. Preliminary Plans. The Applicant must submit nine copies of detailed preliminary plans
relating to the variation. If the application is for a fence variation, the placement and
height of fence must be designated on the Plat of Survey.
c. Proof of Ownership. The Applicant shall submit documentation evidencing ownership of
property and any lease or rental agreement in effect pertaining to the petition on the
subject property. If Title is in Trust, a copy of the Trust Agreement, certified by the
Trustee with evidence of all current ownership of beneficial interest together with a letter
of authorization from the Trust Company shall be provided.
11.4 Departmental Review. The Planning Department shall circulate the application and plans
to the appropriate departments for review and recommendations. All reviews and
recommendations. All reviews and recommendations shall be made available to the applicant
prior to the public hearing. The applicant may submit revised plans to the Planning Department
for review and all revised plans must be submitted 14 days prior to the public hearing. The
revised plans shall be submitted and reviewed. The Planning Department shall transmit all
recommendations to the Zoning Board of Appeals for their review prior to the date of the public
hearing.
11.5 Public Hearing Notification Requirements. The applicant shall comply with notification
requirements as set forth in Section 14 of this Chapter.
11.6 Determination. The Zoning Board of Appeals may require additional plans or studies in
order to conduct a thorough investigation of a request before them. The findings and
recommendations of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall generally be transmitted to the Village
Board of Trustees within 30 days of adjournment of the public hearing. If the petition also
requires a recommendation from the Plan Commission, the findings and recommendations of the
Zoning Board of Appeals will generally be transmitted to the Village Board within 30 days of
adjournment of the Plan Commission Public Hearing.
11.7 Limitation on Requests for Variations. No request for a variation shall be considered
by the Zoning Board of Appeals for property which has been the subject matter of a previous
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-108 REVISED 04/16/18
request for a variation for a period of one year after the Zoning Board of Appeals has made a
determination or recommendation for a variation on the same property. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall not consider any petition for rehearing of a variation request after a decision or
recommendation on a variation has been made unless substantial changes have been made to the
evidence or use to adjacent properties.
Ord. #18-010)
Section 28-12 - Plan Commission
12.1 Plan Commission. The powers, duties and responsibilities of the Plan Commission are
set forth in Chapter 6 of the Municipal Code.
In applications for Planned Unit Development, Subdivisions, Special Use Permits, Rezoning and
Land Use Variations, the Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board of Trustees
may authorize exceptions to the applicable bulk regulations of this Chapter and such other
variations from the Zoning Regulations ( Chapter 28 and Chapter 29 of the Municipal Code) as
may be required within the boundaries of such development without referring the matter to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
Section 12.2 Land Use Variations. In order to receive a variation, the Petitioner must provide
support for each of the following factors:
1. The proposed use will not alter the essential character of the locality and will be
compatible with existing uses and zoning of nearby property; and
2. The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances, which may include the length of
time the subject property has been vacant as zoned; and
3. The proposed variation is in harmony with the spirit and intent of this Chapter; and
4. The variance requested is the minimum variance necessary to allow reasonable use of the
property.
A variation may be granted if the evidence provided sustains each of the factors listed above.
Every variation shall be accompanied by findings of fact specifying the reasons for granting the
variation by applying the above factors.
12.3 Application. An application verified by the owner of the subject property or their
authorized agent shall be filed with the Planning Department upon a form prescribed therefore
which shall be accompanied by the application fee and ten complete sets of the following:
a. Plat of Survey.
b. Preliminary and Final Plat of Subdivision. If required pursuant to Chapter 29
Subdivision Control Regulations.
c. Preliminary architectural drawings as set forth below (these are not required for zoning
changes to R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3 zoning classification):
1) Detailed site plan to include roadways, driveways, parking area and dimensions,
all proposed structures, free standing signs, outdoor lighting, trash storage areas,
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-109 REVISED 04/16/18
loading areas, and project data to include total land area, building area, floor area
ratio and parking computations.
2) Detailed landscaping plan (required for new construction only) including location,
quantity, common names, and size of all landscaping materials.
3) Floor Plan.
4) Building Elevations.
5) Building Sections.
6) Sign Plans.
d. Preliminary engineering plans and engineering feasibility study ( required for new
construction or increase in building coverage only).
e. Traffic Study. If required, (see Section 6.13 of this Chapter)
f. Proof of Ownership. The applicant shall submit documentation evidencing ownership of
property and any lease or rent agreement in effect pertaining to the petition on the subject
property. If the title is in a trust, a copy of the Trust Agreement, certified by the Trustee
with evidence of all current ownership of beneficial interest together with a letter of
authorization from the trust company shall be provided.
12.4 Departmental Review. The Planning Department shall circulate the application and plans
to the appropriate departments for review and recommendations. All reviews and
recommendations shall be made available to the applicant prior to the public hearing. The
applicant may submit revised plans to the Planning Department for review and all revised plans
must be submitted at least 14 days prior to public hearing. The revised plans shall be
resubmitted and reviewed. The Planning Department shall transmit all recommendations to the
Plan Commission for their review prior to the date of the public hearing. If any of the plans have
been changed, the applicant shall submit ten new sets of plans to the Planning Department at
least seven days prior to date of public hearing for transmittal to the Plan Commission. Plans
submitted for Plan Commission later than seven days prior to date of public hearing may result in
a continuation of the public hearing.
12.5 Public Hearing Notification Requirements. The applicant shall comply with notification
requirements as set forth in Section 14 of this Chapter.
12.6 Determination. The Plan Commission may require additional plans or studies in order to
conduct a thorough investigation of a request before them. The findings and recommendations
of the Plan Commission shall be transmitted to the Village Board within 30 days of adjournment
of the public hearing.
Ord. #13-035, #18-010)
Section 28-13 - Design Commission
13.1 Design Commission. The powers, duties and responsibilities of the Design Commission
are set forth in Chapter 6 of the Municipal Code.
13.2 Design Review. The procedures to be followed when determining when and how design
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-110 REVISED 04/16/18
review will occur shall be as follows:
a. For developments where a public hearing is necessary before the Plan Commission or
Zoning Board of Appeals, the design review process should, if feasible, be completed by
the time of the public hearing. Development proposals requiring rezoning, PUD or other
Plan Commission approvals, shall be reviewed by the Design Commission for building
and signage only.
b. For developments where no public hearing is necessary, the applicant for building permit
shall be informed if there is a need for design review and if so, whether that review will
be by the Design Commission or Staff. Developments that do not require a public
hearing by the Plan Commission shall be reviewed by the Design Commission or by
administrative design review for all elements under the Commission’ s responsibility.
c. For demolition in residential zoning districts and all properties in the B-5 zoning district,
design review is required prior to a demolition permit being issued. The review will
evaluate the following:
1. The development plan; and
2. The estimated time frame for demolition and subsequent redevelopment plan and
timeline, including verifying that:
a) Proposed redevelopment is in character with the neighborhood and meets
the criteria in the design guidelines; and
b) Proposed redevelopment will not adversely affect the neighborhood.
13.3 Application. An application verified by the owner of the subject property or their
authorized agent shall be filed the Department of Planning & Community Development upon a
required form and eight copies of the following:
a. Plat of Survey;
b. Floor Plans;
c Existing and proposed elevations of all building facades and roof plans ( renderings
optional);
d. Proposed site plan and photos of adjacent properties;
e Landscaping plans - including existing plant material, size and quantity of proposed
material;
f. Specifications and rendering of signs, if sign review is required;
g. A sample of all color, kind and texture of materials to be used;
h. Location map with roads, parking, existing buildings and other significant features within
approximately 250 feet from proposed building site;
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-111 REVISED 04/16/18
i. Zoning data worksheet.
13.4 Departmental Review. The Department of Planning & Community Development shall be
the administrative contact to the Design Commission responsible for reviewing all petitions,
making recommendations for changes or modification in design and providing assistance in
interpreting the Design Guidelines. The Director or designee may determine that certain projects
do not need formal design review, either by the Design Commission or staff. Such projects may
include small ( approximately 300 square feet or less) one-store additions in the rear of homes,
small commercial building changes and similar small projects. The review will ensure the
project is in compliance with the design guidelines, as applicable. In cases where the Village has
determined that formal design review is not necessary, no design review fee will be charged.
13.5 Design Commission Meeting. The Design Commission will schedule a public meeting as
soon as practicable after complete submittal and review by the Department of Planning &
Community Development of the plans, at which time the developer will make a presentation on
the project. A decision of approval, modification or denial will be made immediately upon
consideration of the Design Guidelines following the applicant’s presentation.
13.6 Notice by Sign. For projects in residential districts requiring Design Commission review, a
sign providing notice of the public meeting of the Design Commission shall be required to be
posted by the applicant in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 14 of this
Chapter.
13.7 Issuance of a Certificate of Approval. The Design Commission will issue a Certificate of
Approval if:
a. The applicant’ s plans achieve the purpose and intent of the Design Guidelines; and,
b. The proposed design is compatible with the character of neighboring buildings
contributing to a favorable environment in the Village.
c. The existing property or structure is determined not to have significant architectural,
historical, aesthetic, or cultural value.
If the Commission denies the issuance of a Certificate of Approval, no building permit or
demolition permit will be issued on the application except by direction of the Village Board.
13.8 Enforcement of a Development Schedule. The Certificate of Approval shall be
effective for no more than 12 months from the date it was issued. Unless a building permit has
been issued and construction commenced within this time period, the Certificate of Approval
shall be void. An extension of up to 12 months can be obtained by submitting a detailed request
to the Planning and Community Development Department.
13.9 Amendments. Amendments to a Certificate of Approval must be obtained through the
same process as set forth above.
13.10 Appeal. For all petitioners appearing before the Design Commission who do not need to
also appear before the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals, the petitioner has the right
to appeal directly to the Village Board. The appeal must be made in writing and submitted to
ZONING REGULATIONS
28-112 REVISED 04/16/18
the Village Manager, within 30 days of receipt of the notice of denial by the Design
Commission. The Village Board, at a regular meeting, will either:
a. agree with the Design Commission’ s decision; or
b. overrule or modify the decision of the Design Commission and direct the issuance of a
permit.
For all petitioners appearing before the Design Commission who need to also appear before the
Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals, the petitioner has the right to file an appeal to the
Village Board. The appeal must be made in writing and shall be forwarded to the Village Board
along with the other documents submitted for their review at the same time as the
recommendation from the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals is submitted to the
Village Board.. The appeal will then be considered by the Village Board at a regular meeting
concurrently with the Village Board’s review of the recommendation from the Plan Commission
or Zoning Board of Appeals. The Village Board will either:
a. agree with the Design Commission’ s decision; or
b. overrule or modify the decision of the Design Commission and direct the issuance of a
permit.
In all other cases, the Design Commission’ s decision will be sent to the Plan Commission or
Zoning Board of Appeals, so that they are aware of the Design Commission’ s decision.
Ord. #17-027, #18-010)
Section 28-14 Changes and Amendments.
14.1 Requirement for Public Hearing. The regulations imposed and the districts created by
this Chapter may be amended from time to time, but no such amendments shall be made until a
public hearing has been held. The Notification Requirements set forth below apply for all public
hearings required by this Chapter.
14.2 Published Notice. A notice of the time and place of any public hearing shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village. This Notice shall be published at least 15
days before the date of the public hearing.
14.3 Written Notice. A petitioner for any project requiring a public hearing pursuant to this
Chapter shall serve written notice in person or by first-class mail to all property owners of record
within 250 feet of the property lines of the subject property; provided the number of feet
occupied by all public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways shall be excluded in computing
the 250 foot requirement. If the project is a planned unit development, the 250 feet shall be
measured from the outermost property line of the entire planned unit development In addition to
notifying property owners, if applicable, the homeowners’ association or condominium
association must also be notified. The notice must be sent no less than 15 days nor more than 30
days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A copy of the notice with a copy of the list of
addresses shall be provided to the Planning Department at the time notice is given to the owners
or taxpayers. If, after a bona fide effort to determine such by the petitioner, an owner cannot be
found, the notice requirements of this section shall be deemed satisfied upon the petitioner filing
an affidavit evidencing the inability to serve notice on that owner.
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
28-113 REVISED 04/16/18
The required notices shall contain the address of the location for which the public hearing is
requested, a brief statement of the nature of the request, the name and address of the legal and
beneficial owner of the property, and the time and date on which the hearing shall be held.
14.4 Notice by Sign. Not less than 15 days prior to the date before the public hearing, the
petitioner shall post a readable sign on all adjacent roadways. All signs must be removed no later
than ten days after completion of the final hearing.
The required sign shall contain the current zoning action requested, date, time and place where
the hearing shall be held, a statement that further information can be obtained from the petitioner
and the Planning Department of the Village of Arlington Heights, and the phone number of the
Village and the petitioner. The sign shall be approximately 30” high by 48” wide. The words
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING" must appear at the top of the sign(s) in letters no smaller
than 1.5". The date and time of the hearing shall also be 1.5". The sign(s) shall meet all other
requirements set forth by the Village. All costs associated with the sign(s) for any public
hearings are to be borne by the petitioners. A sample sign is set forth below:
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
HEARING FOR: [Fill in current zoning and action requested]
HEARING LOCATION: ARLINGTON HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL BUILDING
33 S. ARLINGTON HEIGHTS ROAD
ARLINGTON HEIGHTS, IL 60005
DATE: [Fill in hearing date] TIME: [Fill in hearing time]
PUBLIC ATTENDANCE AND COMMENTS INVITED
FOR DETAILS CALL:
Fill in petitioner’s name or Village of Arlington Heights
and phone number] Department of Planning & Community Development
at 847-368-5200
14.5 Certification of Notice. In advance of the hearing date, the petitioner shall furnish an
affidavit certifying that he has complied with the applicable notice requirements. Attached to the
affidavit shall be a list of all property owners notified in accordance with the above, the returned
notices which are undeliverable by the post office, a copy of the notice sent to each of the
individuals therein specified, and a statement that the sign was erected according to Village
requirements. Forms of the affidavit shall be made available by the Planning Department.
14.6 Protest Against Amendment. Owners of the frontage of property immediately adjoining
or across an alley from or directly opposite frontage which is proposed to be altered as to
regulations or districts may file a written protest against a proposed amendment. The protest
must be signed by at least 20% of the owners as described above and each signature must be
notarized. The written protest shall be filed with the Village Clerk. If the written protest meets
the requirements of this Section, the amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote
of two-thirds of all members of the Village Board.