CITY CODE
OF
ABINGDON, IL
Code current through:
Ord. 2021-6, passed July 7, 2021
Published by:
STERLING CODIFIERS
an
American Legal Publishing Company
525 Vine Street  *  Suite 310  *  Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of Abingdon, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including ordinance 2021-6, passed July 7, 2021.  Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2016-7
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE ABINGDON, IL CITY CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the city of Abingdon, IL, as
follows:
Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city code
of the city of Abingdon, IL prepared by Sterling Codifiers, containing the
compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes
made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the city,
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law
of the city as enacted by the mayor and city council.
Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the
loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official city code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the city clerk, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city
code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the city code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change
or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to
the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication as provided by law.
PASSED this 18th day of April, 2016.
APPROVED this 18th day of April, 2016.
/s/                       
Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/                       
City Clerk
Roll call vote:   Ald. Funk, aye; Ald. Terry Allen, aye; Ald. Myron Hovind,
absent; Ald. Jason Johnson, aye; Ald. Roger Roberts, aye; Ald. Cris Feller,
aye; Ald. Terry Stegall, aye; and Ald. Jeff Brown, aye.
AYES: 7
NAYS: 0
ABSENT: 1
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
ABINGDON CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official city code of Abingdon. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the ABINGDON CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title headings, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2016 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of the
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2016 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
numbers of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifier, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(2016 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The city clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of this code shall make every
effort to maintain said code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the city clerk.
Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to
the office of the clerk when directed so to do by order of the city council.
(2016 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Court Proceedings
1-2-3: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
   A.   Making any appropriation or providing for a budget, budget amendment,
or transfer of funds.
   B.   Levying or imposing taxes not contained in this code.
   C.   Authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any other evidence
of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city;
or promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city.
   D.   Granting any right or franchise.
   E.   Establishing, dedicating, locating or relocating, naming, opening,
widening, vacating, or paving or surfacing, any street or public way in the
city; or establishing or prescribing grades of streets in the city.
   F.   Providing and assessing taxes for local improvements.
   G.   Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city.
   H.   Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city.
   I.   Rezoning specific property.
   J.   Regulating traffic or parking on any particular street or in any
particular area, or designating off street parking lots, when such provisions
are not practical to be included within the other traffic or parking provisions
within this code.
   K.   Transferring real estate from, or acceptance of real estate by, the
city.
   L.   Creating specific funds.
   M.   Prescribing the number, classification, benefits, compensation, and
other provisions and rules governing city officers and employees, which are not
inconsistent with the provisions within this code.
   N.   Which is special although permanent in effect.
   O.   Which is temporary although general in effect.
   P.   The purpose of which has been accomplished. (2006 Code § 1-2-8; amd.
2016 Code)
1-2-2: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Repealed Ordinances Not Revived: When any ordinance repealing a former
ordinance, or part thereof, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be
construed to revive the former ordinance or part thereof, unless it shall be
therein so expressly provided. (2006 Code § 1-2-6)
   B.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   C.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   D.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2016 Code)
   E.   Use Violations: The adoption of this code shall not be interpreted as
the permission of any use or the continuance of any use of structure or
premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of
adoption of this code. (2006 Code § 1-2-7)
1-2-3: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code,
or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference, is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any codes or portions
of codes adopted herein by reference. The city council hereby declares that it
would have passed each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
1-3-1: Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-4: History Or Source Notes References
1-3-1: RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Generally: In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances, the
rules set forth in this section shall be observed, unless such construction
would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. The rules
of construction in this section shall not be applied to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction.
   B.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   C.   Minimum Requirements; Most Restrictive Applies: In the interpretation
and application of any provision of this code, the provision shall be held to
be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Where any provision of this
code imposes a greater restriction upon the subject matter than the general
provision imposed by this code, the provision imposing the greater restriction
or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: The use of any gender based pronoun should not be construed to
be gender biased, but is only used for grammatical simplicity.
   F.   May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
   G.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   H.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   I.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the city of Abingdon".
   J.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   K.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to city ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2006 Code §
1-1-2; amd. 2016 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
CITY: The city of Abingdon, county of Knox, state of Illinois.
CITY COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of
Abingdon.
CODE: The city code of the city of Abingdon.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The mayor and aldermen of the city of Abingdon.
COUNTY: The county of Knox, state of Illinois.
FISCAL YEAR: The period beginning with May 1 and ending with (and including)
April 30 in the following calendar year.
ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES (ILCS): The Illinois Compiled Statutes, the latest
publication thereof.
ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE: 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
YEAR: A calendar year. (2006 Code §
1-1-3; amd. 2016 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2016
Code)
1-3-4: HISTORY OR SOURCE NOTES REFERENCES:
In the event that any history or source note appears in parentheses after a
section in this code, such notes are not intended to have any legal effect, but
are merely intended to indicate the source of the matter contained in the
section. Any cross references appearing in parentheses after sections in this
code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the
convenience of the user of this code and have no legal effect. These references
to history or source notes and to cross references shall not be deemed to
require the use of such notes or cross references. (2006 Code §
1-2-2)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Violation Defined
1-4-3: Application Of Provisions
1-4-4: Aiding And Abetting In An Offense
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Unless otherwise provided by a specific penalty provision within this
code, any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code shall be
fined in a sum not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   B.   Unless otherwise specifically provided by this code, a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day a violation occurs or during which a
violation continues.
   C.   A person convicted of a violation of any section of this code may be
sentenced to a term of public or community service in lieu of, or in addition
to, a fine as provided in subsection A of this section.
   D.   A person convicted of a violation of any section of this code shall be
deemed guilty of a petty offense as defined in the unified code of corrections,
adopted by law in Illinois. (2006 Code §
1-3-1)
   E.   The imposition of a penalty by fine does not prevent revocation or
suspension of a license, permit, or franchise, or other administrative action,
for any offense which is also cause for the penalty.
   F.   Violations of this code which are continuous with respect to time may
be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief, and the imposition of a
penalty does not prevent such injunctive or other equitable relief. (2006 Code
§
1-3-3)
1-4-2: VIOLATION DEFINED:
   A.   "Violation of any section of this code" means:
      1.   Performing an act which is prohibited, or made or declared unlawful,
by ordinance, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance;
      2.   Failure to perform an act which is required to be performed by
ordinance, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or
      3.   Failure to perform an act if the failure is made or declared
unlawful, by ordinance, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
   B.   "Violation of any section of this code" does not include the failure of
a city officer or employee to perform an official duty, unless the provisions
relating to the duty specify that failure to perform the duty is to be
punishable as provided in this chapter. (2006 Code §
1-3-2)
1-4-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section unless otherwise indicated. Any person
convicted of a violation of any section of this code where a duty is prescribed
or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing nature is
forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a petty
offense.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2016 Code)
1-4-4: AIDING AND ABETTING IN AN OFFENSE:
Any person who aids, abets, counsels, or encourages any violation of an
ordinance of the city shall be deemed guilty of the commission of such
violation as a principal. (2006 Code §
1-3-4)
ARTICLE A.  ADMINISTRATIVE TICKET AND COMPLAINT PROGRAM
SECTION:
1-4A-1: Scope Generally
1-4A-2: Discretion Of Issuance
1-4A-3: Payment And Compliance
1-4A-4: Court Appearance Required
1-4A-5: Specific Provisions Subject To Program
1-4A-1: SCOPE GENERALLY:
An administrative ticket and complaint may be used for those ordinance
violations provided for herein and issued by police officers and other
authorized city personnel, including, but not limited to, the building official
and the animal control officer. The administrative ticket and complaint may not
be used for violations of any ordinances comparable of those offenses specified
in Illinois supreme court rule 551, as now in force or hereafter amended,
concerning traffic offenses for which a court appearance is required; or those
violations governed by Illinois supreme court rule 552 as now in force or
hereafter amended, concerning uniform tickets and governing uniform citation
and complaint forms; and all offenses for which convictions are required to be
reported to the Illinois secretary of state pursuant to 6-204 of the Illinois
vehicle code as now in force or hereafter amended. (2006 Code §
6-6-1; amd. 2016 Code)
1-4A-2: DISCRETION OF ISSUANCE:
At the discretion of the police officer or other official or employee of the
city authorized to issue an administrative ticket and complaint, the
administrative ticket and complaint may be used in lieu of arrest. (2006 Code §
6-6-2)
1-4A-3: PAYMENT AND COMPLIANCE:
The person accused of an ordinance violation may settle the claim by paying to
the city an administration fee in the amount of the minimum fine for the
violation within fifteen (15) days of the date of the issuance and, where
compliance to correct an ordinance violation is required or indicated by the
nature of the subject matter of the violation, by satisfying the proper
authorities of the city that compliance has been completed within said fifteen
(15) days. (2006 Code §
6-6-3)
1-4A-4: COURT APPEARANCE REQUIRED:
If the person accused of the violation does not so settle the claim of the
violation, including both the payment of the administration fee and the
compliance to correct the violation, where required or indicated, the person
accused of the violation shall appear in court on the date and time indicated
in the administrative ticket and complaint, and shall be subject to the fines
and penalties set forth in the applicable provisions of this code, plus the
court costs imposed by the court pursuant to Illinois statutes. (2006 Code §
6-6-4)
1-4A-5: SPECIFIC PROVISIONS SUBJECT TO PROGRAM:
These code provisions, the violations of which are subject to the
administrative ticket program, are as follows:
Title 3, Business And License Regulations
Chapter 1, Alcoholic Beverages
3-1-18A2, A3: Possession or consumption by minor
3-1-18B1: Misrepresentation of age
3-1-20A, B, C: Public intoxication; possession of alcoholic beverages
Chapter 2, Peddlers
All sections
Chapter 3, Amusements
All sections
Chapter 4, Mobile Homes And Mobile Home Parks
All sections
Title 4, Health, Sanitation And Environment
Chapter 1, Nuisances
All sections
Chapter 2, Open Burning
All sections
Title 5, Police And Public Safety
Chapter 2, Animal Control
All sections
Chapter 3, Municipal Offenses
All sections
Chapter 4, Minors
All sections
Title 6, Motor Vehicles And Traffic
All sections, except chapter 2, article A, and except violations subject to the
following:
Illinois supreme court rule 551, traffic offenses for which a court appearance
is required, as now in force and hereafter amended.
Illinois supreme court rule 552, uniform tickets, governing uniform citation
and complaint forms, as now in force and hereafter amended.
All offenses for which convictions are required to be reported to the secretary
of state pursuant to section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code as now in force
and hereafter amended.
Title 7, Public Ways And Property
All sections
Title 8, Water And Wastewater
All sections
Title 9, Building And Development
Chapter 2, Building Code
All sections
Chapter 3, Plumbing Code
All sections
Chapter 4, Electrical Code
All sections
   Chapter 5, Mechanical Code
      All sections
   Chapter 6, Fuel Gas Code
      All sections
Chapter 7, Fence Regulations
All sections
Title 10, Zoning Regulations
All sections
(2006 Code ch. 6-6 exh. 1; amd. Ord. 2009-6, 5-4-2009; 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR
SECTION:
1-5-1: Qualifications; Term Of Office
1-5-2: Oath And Bond
1-5-3: Duties
1-5-4: Vacancy In Office; Absence Of Mayor
1-5-1: QUALIFICATIONS; TERM OF OFFICE:
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city. He shall be a
qualified elector of the city and shall have resided within the city at least
one year next preceding the election. He shall hold the office for four (4)
years and until a successor is elected and has qualified. (2006 Code §
2-1-1)
1-5-2: OATH AND BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of office, the mayor shall take and subscribe
the oath or affirmation required by the Illinois constitution and shall execute
a bond with security, to be approved by the corporate authorities. The bond
shall be payable to the city in the penal sum of three thousand dollars
($3,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the
office and payment of all monies received by the mayor, according to law and
the ordinances of the city. The oath or affirmation and the bond shall be filed
with the city clerk. (2006 Code §
2-1-2)
1-5-3: DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The mayor shall perform all the duties which are prescribed
by law, including ordinances, and shall take care that the laws and ordinances
are faithfully executed. The mayor from time to time may, and annually shall,
provide the corporate authorities information concerning the affairs of the
city and may recommend, for their consideration, measures the mayor believes
expedient. (2006 Code §
2-1-3; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Appointment Of Officers:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided by statute or by the personnel code of
the city, the mayor shall appoint, by and with the consent of the city council,
the officers of the city. Vacancies in all appointed municipal offices may be
filled in the same manner.
      2.   An appointed officer of the city may resign from office. If an
appointed officer resigns, the officer shall continue in office until a
successor has been chosen and has qualified.
      3.   If an appointed municipal officer ceases to perform the duties or to
hold the office by reason of death, permanent physical or mental disability,
conviction of a disqualifying crime, or dismissal from or abandonment of
office, the mayor may appoint a temporary successor to the officer. (2006 Code
§ 2-1-4)
   C.   Removal Of Appointed Officer: Except as otherwise provided by statute
or by the personnel code of the city, the mayor may remove any officer
appointed by the mayor, on any written charge, whenever the mayor is of the
opinion that the interests of the city demand removal. The mayor shall report
the reasons for the removal to the corporate authorities at a meeting to be
held not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days after the removal. If
the mayor fails or refuses to report to the corporate authorities the reasons
for the removal, or if the corporate authorities, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of
all members authorized by law to be elected, disapprove of the removal, the
officer thereupon shall be restored to the office from which the officer was
removed. The vote shall be by ayes and nays (or by yes and no), which shall be
entered upon the journal of the corporate authorities. Upon restoration, the
officer shall give a new bond (if applicable) and take a new oath of office. No
officer shall be removed a second time for the same offense. (2006 Code § 2-1-
6)
   D.   Supervision Of Officers: Except as otherwise provided by statute or by
the personnel code of the city, the mayor shall supervise the conduct of
officers of the city for the faithful and efficient discharge of the duties of
their respective offices. (2006 Code § 2-1-5)
   E.   Examination Of Records: The mayor, at all times, may examine and
inspect the books, records, and papers of any agent, employee, or officer of
the city. (2006 Code § 2-1-7)
   F.   Signature Requirements:
      1.   The mayor shall sign all instruments on behalf of the city which
require the signature of the chief executive officer. In all contracts in which
the city is a party, unless otherwise provided, the mayor shall sign the same
on behalf of the city, with the consent of the city council.
      2.   The mayor may designate in writing another person to affix the
signature of the mayor to any written instrument required to be signed by the
mayor. The written notice of the designation shall be sent to the corporate
authorities, stating the name of the person who has been selected and what
instruments the person will have authority to sign. A written signature of the
mayor executed by the designated person, with the signature of the designated
person underneath, shall be attached to the notice; and the notice, with the
signatures attached, shall be recorded in the journal of the corporate
authorities and then filed with the city clerk. When the signature of the mayor
is placed on a written instrument at the direction of the mayor in the
specified manner, the instrument in all respects shall be as binding on the
city as if signed by the mayor in person. (2006 Code § 2-1-9)
   G.   Call Out Militia: Subject to the authority of the governor as commander
in chief of the militia, the mayor may call out the militia to aid in
suppressing riots and other disorderly conduct, or to aid in carrying into
effect any law or ordinance. (2006 Code § 2-1-8)
1-5-4: VACANCY IN OFFICE; ABSENCE OF MAYOR:
   A.   Acting Mayor: If a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor, the vacancy
shall be filled pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois statutes. The city
council shall elect one of their members acting mayor, who shall perform all
duties and possess all rights and powers of the mayor until a successor has
been elected and has qualified. (2006 Code § 2-1-10)
   B.   Mayor Pro Tem: If the mayor is temporarily absent because of an
incapacity to perform official duties, but the incapacity does not create a
vacancy in the office, the city council shall elect one of their members to act
as mayor. The mayor pro tem, during this absence or disability, shall perform
the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the mayor, but shall not be
entitled to vote both as mayor pro tem and as alderman.
   C.   Temporary Chair: In the absence of the mayor, acting mayor, or mayor
pro tem, the city council may elect one of their members to act as a temporary
chair. The temporary chair shall have only the powers of a presiding officer
and a right to vote only in the capacity as alderman. (2006 Code § 2-1-11)
CHAPTER 6
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Composition
1-6-2: Qualifications; Terms Of Office
1-6-3: Oath Of Office
1-6-4: Rules Of Order And Procedure
1-6-5: Meetings
1-6-6: Committees
1-6-7: Ordinances, Resolutions And Motions
1-6-8: Miscellaneous Duties
1-6-1: COMPOSITION:
The city council shall consist of the mayor and eight (8) aldermen. Two (2)
aldermen shall be elected from each of the four (4) wards. (2006 Code §
2-2-1)
1-6-2: QUALIFICATIONS; TERMS OF OFFICE:
Each alderman shall be a qualified elector of the city and shall have resided
within the city at least one year next preceding election or appointment. Each
shall hold office for four (4) years until a successor is elected and
qualified. Terms of aldermen are staggered, with one-half (1/2) of the aldermen
elected every two (2) years. (2006 Code §
2-2-2)
1-6-3: OATH OF OFFICE:
Before entering upon the duties of office, each alderman shall take and
subscribe the oath or affirmation required by the Illinois constitution. The
subscribed oath or affirmation shall be filed in the office of the city clerk.
(2006 Code § 2-2-3)
1-6-4: RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE:
The city council may adopt such rules of order and procedure as it may deem
suitable for the conduct of business. On all points of order not governed by
council rules, "Robert's Rules Of Order" (Revised) shall apply. (2006 Code § 2-
2-5)
1-6-5: MEETINGS:
   A.   Mayor To Preside; Voting Restrictions: The mayor shall preside at all
meetings of the city council and shall preserve order and decorum. The mayor
shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution, or motion except: 1) where the
vote of the aldermen has resulted in a tie; 2) where one-half (1/2) of the
aldermen elected has voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution, or motion even
though there is no tie vote; or 3) where a vote greater than a majority of the
corporate authorities is required by statute or by an ordinance to adopt an
ordinance, resolution, or motion. Nothing in this subsection shall deprive an
acting mayor or mayor pro tem from voting in the capacity as alderman, but the
acting mayor or mayor pro tem shall not be entitled to another vote in the
capacity as acting mayor or mayor pro tem. (2006 Code § 2-2-11)
   B.   Open Meetings; Records Kept: The city council shall meet in accordance
with the Illinois open meetings act and shall keep a journal of its
proceedings. (2006 Code §
2-2-1)
   C.   Regular Meetings:
      1.   Days And Time: The regular meetings of the city council shall be
held in the council chambers of the city on the first and third Mondays of each
and every month at six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M.; except, when the first or
third Monday shall be a public holiday, the council shall meet on the day
following at the same hour. (2006 Code § 2-2-6; amd. Ord. 2009-8, 7-20-2009)
      2.   Adjournment: A meeting may be adjourned to be reconvened on a
specified later date and hour as may be determined by the council for the
purpose of completing unfinished business. (2006 Code § 2-2-6)
      3.   Absence From Meetings: Any alderman who is absent from more than two
(2) regular meetings of the city council during the period of May 1 through
April 30 of each year shall be assessed a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for
his/her absence from each such meeting. Payment of such penalty may be set off
against salaries due to such alderman as provided in this subsection C3. The
penalized alderman may request the city council to reconsider the imposition of
or to rescind the penalty; provided, that request is made in writing and
delivered to the city clerk prior to the next scheduled regular meeting of the
city council. (Ord. 2011-10, 11-7-2011, eff. 11-22-2011)
   D.   Special Meetings:
      1.   Special meetings of the council may be called by the mayor or any
three (3) aldermen, in which event, the meeting shall be called in the
following manner: The mayor, or three (3) aldermen, as the case may be, shall
file in the clerk's office a statement in writing setting forth the purpose of
the special meeting and directing the clerk to give notice of the same. Upon
the filing of such statement, the clerk shall cause to be served personally
upon each member of the council, or left at the member's residence or place of
business, a notice of the special meeting setting forth the purpose and the
date and time of holding the meeting. No business other than that mentioned in
the call may be transacted at the special meeting. (2006 Code § 2-2-7)
      2.   No vote of the city council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a
special meeting unless there are present at the special meeting at least as
many aldermen as were present when the vote was taken. (2006 Code § 2-2-15)
   E.   Quorum: A majority of the corporate authorities shall constitute a
quorum to do business. (2006 Code § 2-2-10)
1-6-6: COMMITTEES:
The mayor, by and with the consent of the city council, at the first regular
meeting of the council in May of each year, or as soon thereafter as may be
practical, shall appoint standing committees of the council to oversee the
respective departments of the city government. The number and category of the
committees shall be determined by the mayor. The committees have supervision
over matters ordered by the council to be done. Each committee shall report to
the council concerning its activity. (2006 Code § 2-2-8)
1-6-7: ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS:
   A.   Vote Required: The passage of all ordinances for whatever purpose, and
of any resolution or motion: 1) to create any liability against the city; or 2)
for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, shall require the
concurrence of a majority of all members then holding office on the city
council, including the mayor, unless otherwise provided by statute. The ayes
and nays (yes and no votes) shall be taken upon the question of the passage of
all ordinances, resolutions, and motions and recorded in the journal of the
council. (2006 Code § 2-2-12)
   B.   Approval Or Veto:
      1.   All resolutions and motions: a) that create any liability against
the city; b) that provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money; or
c) to sell any city property, and all ordinances passed by the city council
shall be deposited with the city clerk. If the mayor approves an ordinance or
resolution, the mayor shall sign it. Those ordinances, resolutions, and motions
which the mayor disapproves shall be returned to the city council, with the
mayor's written objections, at the next regular meeting of the city council
occurring not less than five (5) days after their passage.
      2.   The mayor may disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in any
ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation, and if so, the
remainder shall be effective. However, the mayor may disapprove entirely of any
ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation. If the mayor fails to
return any ordinance or any specified resolution or motion with his written
objections within the designated time, it shall become effective despite the
absence of the mayor's signature. (2006 Code § 2-2-13)
   C.   Reconsideration, Passing Over Veto: Every resolution and motion
specified in subsection B of this section and every ordinance that is returned
to the city council by the mayor shall be reconsidered by the city council at
the next regular meeting following the regular meeting at which the city
council receives the mayor's written objection. If, after such reconsideration,
two-thirds (2/3) of all the aldermen then holding office on the city council
agree at that regular meeting to pass an ordinance, resolution, or motion,
notwithstanding the mayor's refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective.
The vote on the question of passage over the mayor's veto shall be by ayes and
nays (yes and no votes) and shall be recorded in the journal. (2006 Code § 2-2-
14; amd. 2016 Code)
1-6-8: MISCELLANEOUS DUTIES:
   A.   Judge Of Elections: The city council shall be the sole judge of the
election to office of the aldermen, and shall also be the sole judge whether
aldermen are eligible to hold their offices under the Illinois statute
providing for qualifications to elective municipal office; provided, however, a
court shall not be prohibited from hearing and determining a proceeding in quo
warranto. (2006 Code § 2-2-4)
   B.   Determine Salaries: The city council shall determine from time to time
the salaries to be paid to the elected officials, the appointed officials, and
the employees of the city pursuant to statute. (2006 Code § 2-2-9)
CHAPTER 7
SPECIFIC CITY OFFICIALS
ARTICLE A.  CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Qualifications; Election And Term; Vacancies
1-7A-2: Oath And Bond
1-7A-3: Duties
1-7A-4: Effect Of Copies Of Certified Records
1-7A-5: Deputy Clerk
1-7A-1: QUALIFICATIONS; ELECTION AND TERM; VACANCIES:
The city clerk shall be a qualified elector of the city and shall have resided
within the city at least one year next preceding election. The clerk shall be
elected at the same time that the mayor is elected, except in the case of an
election to fill a mayoral vacancy. The clerk shall serve a four (4) year term
and until a successor is elected and qualified. If a vacancy occurs in the
office of the clerk, it shall be filled by the mayor, with the advice and
consent of the city council. The person so appointed shall hold office for the
unexpired term. (2006 Code §
2-3-1)
1-7A-2: OATH AND BOND:
Before entering the duties of office, the city clerk shall take and subscribe
the oath or affirmation required by the Illinois constitution, and shall
execute a bond with security, to be approved by the corporate authorities. The
bond shall be payable to the city in the penal sum of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the
office and the payment of all monies received by the clerk, according to law
and the ordinances of the city. The oath or affirmation shall be filed with the
city clerk, and the bond shall be filed with the city treasurer. (2006 Code §
2-3-2; amd. 2016 Code)
1-7A-3: DUTIES:
The city clerk shall:
   A.   Signature: Seal and attest all contracts of the city and all licenses
and other documents as shall require such formality. (2006 Code §
2-3-3)
   B.   Custodian Of Corporate Seal: Be the keeper of the corporate seal, to be
provided under the direction of the city council. (2006 Code § 2-3-4)
   C.   Custodian Of Documents: Serve as custodian of all documents and papers
belonging to the city, the custody and control of which are not given to other
officers. (2006 Code § 2-3-5)
   D.   Attend Meetings; Keep Record Of Proceedings: Attend all meetings of the
corporate authorities including executive sessions and keep a full record of
their proceedings in the journal, except if the clerk is the subject matter of
the meeting and his or her presence creates a conflict of interest. The record
of the proceedings shall be made available for public inspection within seven
(7) days after being approved or accepted by the corporate authorities as the
official minutes of their proceedings. (2006 Code § 2-3-6; amd. 2016 Code)
   E.   Record Ordinances And Resolutions:
      1.   Ordinances: Record in a book used exclusively for that purpose all
ordinances adopted by the city council, and make a memorandum of the date of
passage and approval and publication of each ordinance. (2006 Code § 2-3-7)
      2.   Resolutions And Orders: Record all written resolutions and orders
adopted or made by the corporate authorities and, if published, a record of the
publication. (2006 Code § 2-3-8)
   F.   Record Of Elections, Appointments, Removals, Etc.: Keep a record of the
election or appointment of all officers of the city and the date of election,
commission, death, resignation, removal, or expiration of term of office. (2006
Code § 2-3-10)
   G.   Preservation Of Records: Carefully preserve all books, records,
documents, maps, and effects of every description belonging to the city, which
are not in the actual use and possession of other city officers; and not allow
the original copy of any of such items to be taken from the clerk's office by
any person other than the clerk, the mayor, the aldermen, the city treasurer,
and the city attorney, or upon the order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(2006 Code § 2-3-11)
   H.   Serve Notices: Issue and cause to be served upon the aldermen notices
of special meetings of the city council, and notices to members of the
respective boards and commissions of the city, and to all other persons whose
attendance may be required, when so directed by the chair of the board or
commission involved. (2006 Code § 2-3-12)
   I.   Additional Duties: In addition to the foregoing duties, perform all
such other and further duties pertaining to the office as are or may be imposed
by statute or by ordinance or resolution of the city council. (2006 Code § 2-3-
13)
1-7A-4: EFFECT OF COPIES OF CERTIFIED RECORDS:
Copies of all papers duly filed in the office of the city clerk, transcripts
from the journals and other records in files in the clerk's office, and copies
of ordinances, resolutions, and other documents certified by the clerk shall be
evidence in all courts in like manner as if the originals were produced. (2006
Code § 2-3-9)
1-7A-5: DEPUTY CLERK:
   A.   Appointment; Authority: The deputy city clerk shall be appointed from
time to time by the city clerk, with the approval of the city council. The
deputy city clerk shall act during the absence or the inability of the city
clerk to act, when so authorized in writing by the city clerk or when the city
council has determined by resolution that the city clerk is temporarily or
permanently incapacitated.
   B.   Duties: Upon the authorization as provided by subsection A of this
section, the deputy city clerk may execute all documents required by law to be
executed by the city clerk and may affix the seal of the clerk whenever
required. The deputy city clerk shall also have full authority to accept
payments made to the city and to execute checks or drafts on behalf of the
city.
   C.   Bond: The deputy city clerk shall be bonded in the same amount as the
city clerk.
   D.   Compensation: Compensation for the deputy city clerk shall be
established from time to time by the city council. (2006 Code § 2-3-14)
ARTICLE B.  CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Qualifications; Election And Term; Vacancies
1-7B-2: Oath And Bond
1-7B-3: Duties Generally
1-7B-4: Deposit Of Funds
1-7B-5: Reports Required
1-7B-6: Annual Accounting
1-7B-7: Special Assessment Funds
1-7B-8: Other Duties
1-7B-9: Deputy Treasurer
1-7B-1: QUALIFICATIONS; ELECTION AND TERM; VACANCIES:
The city treasurer shall be a qualified elector of the city and shall have
resided within the city at least one year next preceding election. The
treasurer shall be elected at the same time that the mayor is elected, except
in the case of an election to fill a mayoral vacancy. The treasurer shall serve
a four (4) year term and until a successor is elected and qualified. If a
vacancy occurs in the office of the treasurer, it shall be filled by the mayor,
with the advice and consent of the city council. The person so appointed shall
hold office for the unexpired term. (2006 Code §
2-4-1)
1-7B-2: OATH AND BOND:
Before entering the duties of office, the treasurer shall take and subscribe
the oath or affirmation required by the Illinois constitution, and shall
execute a bond with security, to be approved by the corporate authorities. The
bond shall be payable to the city in a penal sum that is not less than three
(3) times the latest federal census population or any subsequent census figure
used for motor fuel tax purposes. The oath or affirmation and the bond shall be
filed with the city clerk. (2006 Code §
2-4-2)
1-7B-3: DUTIES GENERALLY:
   A.   The treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the city and shall
keep books and accounts in the manner prescribed by ordinance. The books and
accounts shall be subject to the inspection of any member of the corporate
authorities.
   B.   The treasurer shall keep a separate account of each fund or
appropriation and the debits and credits belonging to the fund or
appropriation.
   C.   The treasurer shall give every person paying money into the treasury a
receipt, specifying the date of payment and upon what account paid. The
treasurer shall file copies of the receipts with the city clerk with the
treasurer's monthly reports. If the treasurer has possession of money properly
appropriated to the payment of any warrant lawfully drawn upon the treasurer,
the treasurer shall pay the money specified in the warrant to the person
designated by the warrant. (2006 Code §
2-4-3)
1-7B-4: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
   A.   The treasurer may be required to keep all funds belonging to the city
in places of deposit designated by ordinance. When requested by the treasurer,
the corporate authorities shall designate one or more banks or savings and loan
associations in which may be kept the funds of the city in the custody of the
treasurer. The procedure to establish a depository for the city's funds, and
the change of depository, shall be pursuant to statute.
   B.   The treasurer may require any bank or savings and loan association to
deposit with the treasurer securities or mortgages that have a market value at
least equal to the amount of funds of the city deposited with the bank or
savings and loan association that exceeds the insurance limitation provided by
the federal deposit insurance corporation or the federal savings and loan
insurance corporation or their respective successors.
   C.   The treasurer shall have the powers, discretion, and authority provided
to municipal treasurers by statute. (2006 Code §
2-4-5)
1-7B-5: REPORTS REQUIRED:
   A.   At the end of every month, and oftener if required by the corporate
authorities, the city treasurer shall render an account under oath to the
corporate authorities showing the state of the treasury at the date of the
account and the balance of money in the treasury. The treasurer shall accompany
the account with a statement of all monies received into the treasury and on
what account, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by the treasurer. On
the day the treasurer renders an account, these warrants, with all vouchers
held by the treasurer, shall be delivered to the city clerk and filed, together
with the account, in the clerk's office. All paid warrants shall be marked
"paid". The treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants, which shall
describe each warrant, showing its date, amount, and number, the fund from
which paid, the name of the person to whom paid, and when paid. (2006 Code §
2-4-4; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   The treasurer shall report to the corporate authorities, as often as
they require, a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures of
the city, as shown by the treasurer's books, up to the time of the report.
(2006 Code §
2-4-6)
1-7B-6: ANNUAL ACCOUNTING:
   A.   Within six (6) months after the end of each fiscal year, the treasurer
shall prepare and file with the city clerk an account of monies received and
expenditures incurred during the preceding fiscal year. The treasurer shall
show in the account those items as required by statute.
   B.   Upon receipt of the account from the treasurer, the city clerk shall
publish an account at least once in a newspaper published in the city or, if
none, then in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city. (2006 Code
§
2-4-7)
   C.   Within six (6) months after the end of each fiscal year, the treasurer
shall file with the county collector of taxes, who collects taxes levied by the
city, a copy of the annual account described in this section, together with an
affidavit of the city clerk stating that the copy is a true and correct copy of
the annual account filed with the clerk, that it was published as required by
this section, the date of the filing and the publication, and the newspaper in
which it was published. (2006 Code § 2-4-8)
1-7B-7: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUNDS:
All money received on a special assessment shall be held by the treasurer as a
special fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement for which the
assessment was made, and the money shall be used for no other purpose, except
to reimburse the city for money expended for the improvement. (2006 Code § 2-4-
9)
1-7B-8: OTHER DUTIES:
In addition to the foregoing duties, the treasurer shall perform all such other
and further duties pertaining to the office as may be prescribed by statute, or
by ordinance or resolution of the city council. (2006 Code § 2-4-10)
1-7B-9: DEPUTY TREASURER:
   A.   Appointment: The deputy city treasurer shall be appointed from time to
time by the mayor, with the approval of the city council. The deputy city
treasurer shall act during the absence or the inability of the city treasurer
to act, when so authorized in writing by the city treasurer or when the city
council has determined by resolution that the city treasurer is temporarily or
permanently incapacitated.
   B.   Duties: Upon the authorization as provided by subsection A of this
section, the deputy city treasurer may make deposits and execute checks and
drafts for the city, and may transact any other business with any bank or
savings and loan association or other person who may so transact business with
the deputy city treasurer the same as it might do with the city treasurer.
   C.   Bond: The deputy city treasurer shall be bonded in the same amount as
the city treasurer.
   D.   Compensation: Compensation for the deputy city treasurer shall be
established from time to time by the city council. (2006 Code § 2-4-11)
ARTICLE C.  CITY COLLECTOR
SECTION:
1-7C-1: Appointment And Term
1-7C-2: Duties
1-7C-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
The city collector shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent
of the city council, and shall serve a term of one year. As an employee of the
city, he/she shall also be governed by and subject to the personnel rules of
the city. (Ord. 2008-9, 10-20-2008)
1-7C-2: DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The collector shall preserve all warrants returned to the
collector and shall keep books and accounts in the manner prescribed by the
corporate authorities. The collector shall pay weekly to the city treasurer all
monies collected thereby from any source.
   B.   Reports: When required by the corporate authorities or by ordinance,
the collector shall make a written report to the corporate authorities of
monies collected, the account on which collected, or of any other official
matter.
   C.   Accounting: The collector shall maintain a detailed account of the city
revenue and of each separate fund, crediting the same with all receipts and
charging it with all warrants drawn thereon; and shall charge each warrant to
the fund or appropriation against which it was drawn. The collector also shall
keep an accurate account of all debts due from or owing to the city, and shall
keep a list of all notes or obligations given by or payable to the city, with
the date thereof, the person to whom or by whom payable, the rate of interest
(if applicable), the time and manner in which principal and interest are
payable, and such other information as may be necessary to the full
understanding of the records.
   D.   Warrants: The collector shall keep an accurate list of all warrants
drawn upon the city treasurer, showing the date, number, and amount of each,
and the name of the person in whose favor drawn; and shall take such receipt as
necessary for the warrant drawn. All warrants drawn upon the city treasurer
shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the city clerk, and shall
specify the particular fund or appropriation to which the same is chargeable,
and the person to whom payable. (Ord. 2008-9, 10-20-2008)
ARTICLE D.  SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
SECTION:
1-7D-1: Appointment And Term
1-7D-2: Duties
1-7D-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
The superintendent of public works shall be appointed by the mayor, with the
advice and consent of the city council, and shall serve a term of one year. As
an employee of the city, he is also governed by the personnel rules of the
city. (2006 Code § 2-5-2)
1-7D-2: DUTIES:
The superintendent of public works shall be in charge of, and have complete
supervision over, the public water supply department, the city cemeteries, the
wastewater department, and the street department of the city. (Ord. 2007-2, 3-
5-2007)
ARTICLE E.  BUILDING OFFICIAL
SECTION:
1-7E-1: Appointment And Term
1-7E-2: Duties
1-7E-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
The building official shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and
consent of the city council. The term shall be for one year. (2006 Code § 2-6-
2)
1-7E-2: DUTIES:
The building official shall:
   A.   Have the duty of enforcing the ordinances concerning building, zoning,
and subdivisions.
   B.   Investigate all violations of those ordinances set out in subsection A
of this section and is authorized to file complaints on behalf of the city for
the prosecution of persons for violations.
   C.   Investigate applications for building permits and determine whether or
not a building permit shall issue. (2006 Code § 2-6-1)
CHAPTER 8
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-8-1: State Regulations Adopted
1-8-2: Definitions
1-8-3: Interpretation
1-8-4: Prohibited Acts
1-8-5: Penalties
1-8-6: Amendments
1-8-7: Unconstitutionality Of Provisions
1-8-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The regulations of section 5-15 1  and article 10 2  of the state officials and
employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq. (hereinafter
referred to as the "act" in this chapter), are hereby adopted by reference and
made applicable to the officers and employees of the city to the extent
required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5. (2006 Code § 2-8-1)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10-10 - 10-40.
1-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be
defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c). (2006 Code §
2-8-1)
1-8-3: INTERPRETATION:
This chapter does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinance or policy which regulates the conduct of city officers and employees.
To the extent that any such existing ordinance or policy is less restrictive
than this chapter, however, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail in
accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a).
(2006 Code § 2-8-1)
1-8-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Gifts:
      1.   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited
or accepted under the act by any officer or any employee of the city is hereby
prohibited.
      2.   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to
any officer or employee of the city under the act is hereby prohibited.
   B.   Political Activities: The participation in political activities
prohibited under the act by any officer or employee of the city is hereby
prohibited. (2006 Code § 2-8-1)
1-8-5: PENALTIES:
The penalties for violations of this chapter shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act. (2006 Code § 2-8-1)
1-8-6: AMENDMENTS:
Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date hereof
shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to
the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited
political activities. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional
for adoption by the city shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the city council. (2006 Code § 2-8-1)
1-8-7: UNCONSTITUTIONALITY OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this chapter shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeal or
rehearing. This chapter shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
city council if the act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme
court.
   B.   If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional
but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not
address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act, as adopted by
this chapter, shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
chapter relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the city council. (2006 Code § 2-8-1)
CHAPTER 8
ELECTIONS
ARTICLE A.  RECALL ELECTIONS 1
SECTION:
1-8A-1: Recall Of Officials
1-8A-2: Petition Procedure
1-8A-3: Protest Procedure
1-8A-4: Insufficient Petition
1-8A-5: Sufficient Petition
1-8A-6: Resignation Of Officer
1-8A-7: Official Recall Ballot
1-8A-8: Result Of Election
1-8A-9: Nomination Of Candidates
1-8A-10: Recall After Six Months
1-8A-11: Second Petition
 
Notes
1 1. CRS § 31-4-502.
1-8A-1: RECALL OF OFFICIALS:
Every elected officer of the town may be recalled from office at any time by
the electors entitled to vote for a successor of such incumbent, through the
procedure provided for in this chapter. (1997 Code § 2.32.010; amd. 2016 Code)
1-8A-2: PETITION PROCEDURE:
The procedure to effect the recall of an elected officer of the town shall be
as follows: (1997 Code § 2.32.020; amd. 2016 Code)
   A.   A petition shall be signed by electors entitled to vote for a successor
of the incumbent sought to be recalled, equal in number to twenty five percent
(25%) of all ballots cast at the last preceding town election demanding an
election of the successor to the officer named in the petition.
   B.   The petition shall be filed with the town clerk.
   C.   Such petition shall contain a general statement, in not more than two
hundred (200) words of the grounds on which recall is sought.
   D.   Any recall petition may be circulated and signed in sections, provided
each section shall contain a full and accurate copy of the title and text of
the petition.
   E.   Each signer must add his signature, the date of signing, and his place
of residence, giving his street number, if any.
   F.   The person circulating such sheet must make and subscribe an oath on
the sheet that the signatures thereon are genuine, and a false oath, wilfully
so made and subscribed by such person, shall be perjury and punished as such.
(1997 Code § 2.32.020)
1-8A-3: PROTEST PROCEDURE:
All petitions shall be deemed and held to be sufficient if they appear to be
signed by the requisite number of signers who shall be deemed and held to be
qualified electors, unless a protest in writing under oath shall be filed with
the town clerk by a qualified elector.
   A.   Such protest must be filed within fifteen (15) days after the petition
is filed.
   B.   The protest must set forth specifically the grounds of such protest.
   C.   The clerk shall forthwith mail a copy of such protest to the persons
named in such petition as representing the signers thereof, together with a
notice fixing a time for hearing such protest not less than five (5) nor more
than ten (10) days after such notice is mailed.
   D.   All hearings shall be held before the clerk and all testimony shall be
under oath.
   E.   Such hearings shall be summary and not subject to delay and must be
concluded within thirty (30) days after such petition is filed. (1997 Code §
2.32.030)
   F.   The result of the hearing shall be certified to the persons
representing the signers of such petition and the officer sought to be
recalled. (1997 Code § 2.32.030; amd. 2016 Code)
   G.   The finding as to the sufficiency of the petition may be reviewed by
any state court of general jurisdiction in the county. (1997 Code § 2.32.030)
1-8A-4: INSUFFICIENT PETITION:
In case the petition is not sufficient, it may be withdrawn by the person or a
majority of the persons representing the signers of such petition, and, within
fifteen (15) days thereafter, may be amended and refiled as an original
petition. (1997 Code § 2.32.040)
1-8A-5: SUFFICIENT PETITION:
When such petition is sufficient, the clerk shall forthwith submit the
petition, together with a certificate of its sufficiency, to the board of
trustees. The board shall thereupon order and fix the date for holding an
election, not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days from
the date of the submission of said petition. If a town election is to be held
within ninety (90) days after the date of submission of the petition, the
recall election shall be held as a part of the election. (1997 Code § 2.32.050)
1-8A-6: RESIGNATION OF OFFICER:
If such officer shall offer his resignation, it shall be accepted, and the
vacancy caused by such resignation, or from any other cause, shall be filled as
provided by law; but the person appointed to fill such vacancy shall hold his
office only until the person elected at the recall election shall qualify. If
such officer shall not resign within five (5) days after the sufficiency of the
recall petition shall have been sustained, the board of trustees shall make, or
cause to be made, publication of notice for holding of such election, and the
same shall be conducted, returned, and the result thereof declared in all
respects as in the case of other town elections. (1997 Code § 2.32.060)
1-8A-7: OFFICIAL RECALL BALLOT:
   A.   On the official ballot at such elections shall be printed in not more
than two hundred (200) words, the reasons set forth in the petition for
demanding the officer's recall, and in not more than three hundred (300) words
there shall also be printed, if desired by him, the officer's justification of
his course in office. If such officer shall resign at any time subsequent to
filing of the official ballot, the recall election shall be called
notwithstanding such resignation.
   B.   There shall be printed on the official ballot, as to every officer
whose recall is to be voted on, the words, "Shall (name of person against whom
recall petition is filed) be recalled from office of (title of office)?"
Following such question shall be the words "Yes" and "No" on separate lines
with a blank space at the right of each, in which the voter shall indicate, by
marking a cross (X), his vote for or against such recall.
   C.   On such ballots, under each question, there shall also be reprinted the
names of those persons who have been nominated as candidates to succeed the
person sought to be recalled; but no vote cast shall be counted for any
candidate for such office, unless the voter also voted for or against the
recall of such person thought to be recalled from office. The name of the
person against whom the petition is filed shall not appear on the ballot as a
candidate for the office. (1997 Code § 2.32.070)
1-8A-8: RESULT OF ELECTION:
   A.   If a majority of those voting on the question of the recall of any
incumbent from office shall vote "No", the incumbent shall continue in office.
If a majority shall vote "Yes", such incumbent shall thereupon be deemed
removed from office upon the qualification of his successor.
   B.   If the vote had in such recall election shall recall the officer, then
the candidate who has received the highest number of votes for the office
thereby vacated shall be declared elected for the remainder of the term, and a
certificate of election shall be forthwith issued to him by the canvassing
board. In case the persons who received the highest number of votes shall fail
to qualify within fifteen (15) days after the issuance of a certificate of
election, the office shall be deemed vacant, and shall be filled according to
law. (1997 Code § 2.32.080)
1-8A-9: NOMINATION OF CANDIDATES:
Candidates for the office may be nominated by petition, as now provided by law,
which petition shall be filed with the town clerk not less than twenty (20)
days before the recall election. (1997 Code § 2.32.090; amd. 2016 Code)
1-8A-10: RECALL AFTER SIX MONTHS:
No recall petition shall be circulated or signed against any officer until he
has actually held his office for at least six (6) months, unless he holds his
office by virtue of appointment to fill a vacancy. (1997 Code § 2.32.100)
1-8A-11: SECOND PETITION:
After one recall petition and election, no further petition shall be filed
against the same officer during the term for which he was elected, unless the
petitioners signing the petition shall equal fifty percent (50%) of the ballots
cast at the last preceding town election. (1997 Code § 2.32.110)
CHAPTER 9
CODE OF ETHICS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Purpose
1-9-2: Definitions
1-9-3: Applicability
1-9-4: Restrictions Generally
1-9-5: Conflict Of Interest Disclosure; Procedure
1-9-6: Guidelines; Potential Conflicts Of Interest
1-9-7: Violations; Penalties
1-9-8: Guideline Violations
1-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public confidence in the town
government and to provide guidance to the trustees of the town board and
members of the boards, commissions and other authorities appointed by the town
board and town administrator concerning real or apparent conflicts of interest.
(1997 Code § 2.52.010; amd. 2016 Code)
1-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined and shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless it is apparent from
the context that a different meaning is intended:
BOARD: The following boards, commissions or other bodies or authorities, and
any other boards appointed by law or ordinance of the town:
   A.   Board of trustees;
   B.   Board of adjustment;
   C.   Board of appeals;
   D.   Airport development committee;
   E.   Akron library board;
   F.   Akron volunteer firemen's pension board;
   G.   Town of Akron housing authority;
   H.   Senior and community center.
BOARD MEMBER: A member of any board appointed by the town administrator or town
board of trustees whether under charter, ordinance or state law, including
regular and alternate members; such does not include or cover any compensated
full time or part time town employee unless such person is also a board member.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Any personal or property interest, or any other kind of
pecuniary interest or any other private interest held by an individual trustee
or board member which may conflict or interfere with or otherwise influence, or
which may reasonably be perceived by the public as influencing the conduct of
public duties.
TRUSTEE: A member of the board of trustees. (1997 Code § 2.52.020; amd. 2016
Code)
1-9-3: APPLICABILITY:
Unless otherwise required by law, the provisions of this chapter will be
applicable law governing conflicts of interest within the town. (1997 Code §
2.52.030)
1-9-4: RESTRICTIONS GENERALLY:
The following restrictions shall apply to all town trustees and all board
members:
   A.   No town trustee or board member may use any information obtained by
virtue of this public position in furtherance of any personal or pecuniary
interest or to further the personal or pecuniary interest of any other person.
Confidential or privileged information shall not be disclosed except as
provided by law.
   B.   No town trustee or board member may take any final action or vote to
render any final decision or determination on any particular item or matter
within the province of the board where:
      1.   The individual member has a conflict of interest, other than the
common public interest, with regard to that particular item or matter before
the board; or
      2.   Any member of his family may personally benefit from the final
action, decision or determination regarding a particular item or matter before
the board.
   C.   No town trustee or board member will be a party, by himself or through
a firm appearing on behalf of such a party, in a lawsuit in state court wherein
the town is also a party without the consent of the town board being first
requested and obtained. (1997 Code § 2.52.040; amd. 2016 Code)
1-9-5: CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Disclosure Required: In the event that any town trustee or board member
has any conflict of interest of which he is aware, the town trustee or board
member shall declare such interest to the town board of trustees or board of
which he is a member. In the event that any town trustee or board member is
aware that he could potentially be construed as having a conflict of interest,
the town trustee or board member shall disclose such potential conflict of
interest to the town trustees or board of which he is a member.
   B.   Conflict Established; Taking Action: If any town trustee or board
member fails to declare or disclose such interest, or where such person
discloses a potential conflict of interest, the remaining members of the board
shall establish by a majority vote whether said interest does in fact
constitute a conflict of interest. When such conflict of interest is declared
or established, the remaining trustees or board members shall take any action
they deem to be in the best interest of the town.
   C.   Removal From Board During Consideration: When the conflict of interest
is declared or established as provided for above, the town trustee or board
member with such an interest shall remove himself from the town trustees or
board before the matter is being considered. After the final decision is made
by the town trustees or board with regard to the particular matter upon which
the town trustee or board member has such an interest, he may return and resume
his duties as a member of the town trustees or board. (1997 Code § 2.52.050;
amd. 2016 Code)
1-9-6: GUIDELINES; POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
All town trustees and board members shall be guided by the following general
directives in dealing with potential conflicts of interest:
   A.   All town trustees and board members should avoid any conflicts of
interest or appearance of conflicts of interest.
   B.   The town board and town administrator shall thoroughly examine the
background of all applicants for real or potential conflicts of interest, and
the appearance thereof, prior to appointing any board member.
   C.   All town trustees and board members should avoid the receipt of any
compensation, gift, payment of expense, reward, gratuity or any item of value
tendered by a person where such a person has an interest in some particular
matter pending before the town trustees or board.
   D.   A town trustee or board member may be a member of a firm which
represents another person before the town board or another board; except, such
circumstances shall be conclusively deemed to be a conflict of interest for
such town trustee or board member.
   E.   A town trustee or board member may appear before the town board or any
other board urging an argument concerning general town issues and policies.
(1997 Code § 2.52.060; amd. 2016 Code)
1-9-7: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any town trustee or board member who violates any of the provisions of sections
1-9-4 and
1-9-5 of this chapter shall be subject to the following penalties:
   A.   In all cases, the determination of the town board as to whether there
has been a violation shall be final.
   B.   In the case of a town board member, if a violation is established to
the satisfaction of a majority of the town board, such violation shall be
grounds for an official reprimand by the town board.
   C.   In the case of a board member, if a violation is established to the
satisfaction of a majority of the town board, such violation shall be grounds
for an official reprimand by the town board and grounds for termination of such
person's appointment to any board of which he is a member. If the town board
votes to terminate the appointment of a board member upon such grounds, the
town board may appoint another person to fulfill the term of the individual
removed from office. (1997 Code § 2.52.070; amd. 2016 Code)
1-9-8: GUIDELINE VIOLATIONS:
Any apparent violation of any of the provisions of section
1-9-6 of this chapter may be referred to the town board for investigation and
discussion by any town official, board or citizen of the town. If, upon
investigation and discussion, the town board finds that a violation of the
guidelines contained in section
1-9-6 of this chapter has occurred, the town board may caution or reprimand the
town board member, or board member responsible therefor or take such other
action as it deems to be in the best interests of the town. (1997 Code §
2.52.080; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 9
DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES
ARTICLE A.  EQUAL EMPLOYMENT AND BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES
SECTION:
1-9A-1: City Policy
1-9A-2: Definitions
1-9A-3: Unlawful Employment Practices
1-9A-4: Affirmative Action Requirements For City Contracts
1-9A-5: Affirmative Action Program
1-9A-6: Existing Matters
1-9A-1: CITY POLICY:
It is hereby declared to be the employment policy of the city, without in any
way precluding the city and/or any vendors doing business with the city and its
employees from selecting between persons of equal merit and capabilities, to
encourage equal employment and business opportunity or apprenticeship
opportunity without discrimination because of race, color, sex, religion,
national origin, ancestry, birthplace, or age and to concurrently protect
employers, labor organizations, and employment agencies from unfounded charges
of discrimination. (2006 Code § 3-5-1)
1-9A-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used herein, unless a different meaning appears clearly from the context,
the following words or phrases will have the meanings provided in this section:
AGE: Shall be limited to individuals who are at least forty (40) years of age
but less than sixty six (66) years of age.
CITY OR CITY OF ABINGDON: The city, as a body corporate and politic.
CONTRACTOR: Persons who contract with the city in a total amount greater than
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for any single contract in the current or
preceding fiscal year.
DISCRIMINATE AND DISCRIMINATION: Any difference in treatment based on race,
color, sex, religion, ancestry, national origin, birthplace, or age.
EMPLOY: To use or be entitled to the use and benefit of the services of a
person as an employee.
EMPLOYEE: Any and all persons who perform services for an employer for
compensation, whether in the form of wages, salary, commission, or otherwise,
excluding the parents, spouse or children of the employer.
EMPLOYER: The city and any contractors or vendors doing business with the city
and its employees.
EMPLOYMENT: The state of being employed as an employee by an employer.
EMPLOYMENT AGENCY: Any person who regularly undertakes, with or without
compensation, to procure employees for an employer or to procure for employees
opportunities to work for an employer.
HIRE: To engage or contract for, or attempt to engage or contract for, the
services of any person as an employee.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: Any person, employee representation committee, organization
or plan in which employees participate, and which exists wholly or in part for
the purpose of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning
grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours or other terms or
conditions of employment or of other mutual aid or protection in relation to
employment, and shall include, without limitation, any conference, general
committee, joint board or joint council.
PERSON: One or more individuals, labor organizations, partnership associations,
corporations, legal representatives, agents, mutual companies, joint stock
companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, public bodies, or public
corporations doing business with the city, any department or unit thereof, or
any contractors or vendors doing business with the city and its employees.
VENDORS: Persons who have sold more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in
worth of goods or services to the city in the current or preceding fiscal year.
(2006 Code § 3-5-3)
1-9A-3: UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES:
   A.   It shall be an unlawful employment practice:
      1.   For an employer to fail or refuse to hire any person or otherwise
discriminate against any person or employee with respect to application,
hiring, training, apprenticeship, tenure, promotion, upgrading, compensation,
layoff, discharge, or any term or condition of employment because of race,
color, sex, religion, ancestry, national origin, place of birth, or age.
      2.   For an employer, employment agency or labor organization to
establish, announce or follow a policy of denying or limiting, through a quota
system or otherwise, the employment of membership opportunities of any person
or group or persons because of race, color, sex, religion, ancestry, national
origin, place of birth, or age.
      3.   For an employer, labor organization, employment agency or any joint
labor management committee controlling apprentice training programs to deny or
withhold from any person the right to be admitted to or participate in a
guidance program, an apprenticeship training program, or on the job training
program, or any other occupational training program because of race, color,
sex, religion, ancestry, national origin, place of birth, or age.
      4.   For an employer, employment agency or labor organization to require
of any applicant for employment or membership any information concerning race,
color, sex, religion, ancestry, national origin, place of birth, or age;
provided, that this subsection A4 shall not be construed to prohibit the
keeping of such records as are necessary to implement an affirmative action
program as required by section
1-9A-4 of this article, or as required by law.
      5.   For an employer, employment agency or labor organization to publish
or circulate, or to cause to be published or circulated, any notice or
advertisement relating to employment or membership which indicates any
discrimination because of race, color, sex, religion, ancestry, national
origin, place of birth, or age.
      6.   For an employment agency to fail or refuse to classify properly or
refer to employment or otherwise discriminate against any person because of
race, color, sex, religion, ancestry, national origin, place of birth, or age.
      7.   For an employer to confine or limit recruitment or hiring of
employees, with intent to circumvent the spirit and purpose of this article, to
any employment agency, employment service, labor organization, training school,
training center or any other employee referring source which serves persons who
are predominately of the same race, color, sex, religion, ancestry, national
origin, place of birth, or age.
      8.   For any labor organization to discriminate against any person in a
way which would deprive or limit his or her employment opportunities or
otherwise adversely affect his or her status as an applicant for employment or
as an employee with regard to tenure, compensation, promotion discharge or any
other terms, conditions or privileges directly or indirectly related to
employment because of race, color, sex, religion, ancestry, national origin,
place of birth, or age.
      9.   For an employer, employment agency or labor organization to
discriminate against any person because he or she opposed any practice
forbidden by this article or because he or she made a complaint or testified or
assisted in any manner in any investigation or proceeding under this article.
      10.   For any person, whether an employer, employment agency or labor
organization, to aid, incite, compel, coerce or participate in the doing of any
act declared to be an unlawful employment practice by this article, or to
obstruct or prevent any person from enforcing or complying with the provisions
of this article or to attempt, directly or indirectly, to commit any act
declared by this article to be an unlawful employment practice.
      11.   For an employer, employment agency or labor organization to inquire
on a written application whether a job applicant has ever been arrested;
provided, that this subsection A11 shall not be so construed to prohibit the
obtaining of information or records concerning the conviction of any
individual. (2006 Code § 3-5-4)
   B.   Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of the provisions of
this section may file a written complaint, explaining his or her grievance to
the human relations commission as outlined in the city's human relations
commission ordinance. (2006 Code § 3-5-5)
1-9A-4: AFFIRMATIVE ACTION REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY CONTRACTS:
   A.   The city shall not contract with any contractor, purchase goods or
services from any vendor, maintain any financial relations with any financial
institution, or use the services of any labor organizations or member thereof
which, if found to be in violation of the provisions of subsection 1-9A-3A of
this article by the human relations commission, except where said contractor,
vendor or financial institution is the sole source of the particular product or
service being sought by the city and said product or service is essential for
the governmental operations of the city.
   B.   The city shall not contract with any contractor or vendor, maintain any
financial relations with any financial institution, or use the services of any
labor organization or member thereof which does not, upon written request by
the city, submit a written commitment to provide equal employment
opportunities. Such commitment would:
      1.   Set out and agree to maintain specific employment or membership
practices and policies sufficient to achieve equal opportunity.
      2.   Set out goals for participation by minority, racial and ethnic
groups, and female persons qualified by or for training or through previous
work experience. This subsection B2 will not infringe upon the right of the
employer to determine the need for qualifications of the employee.
      3.   Agree to submit to the city, upon request, written evidence of the
effectiveness of the above required practices, policies and goals.
      4.   Agree to submit to the city, upon request, statistical data
concerning employee composition on race, color, sex, and job description.
      5.   Agree to distribute copies of the above commitment to all persons
who participate in recruitment, screening, referral, and selection of job
applicants, prospective job applicants or members.
      6.   Agree to require any subcontractor to submit to the city a written
commitment which contains the provisions required by subsections B1 through B5
of this section.
   C.   All contracts by and between the city and its contractors and vendors
for the purchase by the city of goods and/or services shall contain the
following clauses:
The contractor/vendor will not discriminate against any employee or applicant
for employment because of race, color, sex, religion, ancestry, national
origin, place of birth, or age. The contractor/vendor will take affirmative
action to comply with the provisions of the Equal Employment and Business
Opportunities Ordinance of the city and will require, upon written request by
the city, a written commitment to comply with those provisions. The contractor/
vendor will distribute copies of this commitment to all persons who participate
in recruitment, screening, referral and selection of job applicants,
prospective job applicants, members, or prospective subcontractors.
The contractor/vendor agrees that the provisions of the Equal Employment and
Business Opportunities Ordinance of the city is hereby incorporated by
reference, as if set out verbatim.
   D.   Any contractor, vendor, financial institution or labor organization
contracting with the city will be required to submit to the city, upon written
request by the city, compliance reports containing such information as to the
practices, policies, programs and statistics of employee or membership
composition on race, color, sex, age, and job description, as may be prescribed
by the city, and will require any subcontractor to submit a compliance report
upon written request by the city.
   E.   In the event that any contractor, vendor, financial institution or
labor organization contracting with the city fails to comply with the equal
employment and business provisions and the affirmative action provisions of
this article, the city, at its option, may do any or all of the following:
      1.   Cancel, terminate or suspend the contract in whole or in part.
      2.   Declare the contractor, vendor, financial institution or labor
organization ineligible for further contracts with the city for a calendar
year.
      3.   Recover from the contractor or vendor by setoff against the unpaid
portion of the contract price, or otherwise pursuant to this contract, the sum
of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day, as liquidated damages and not as a penalty,
for each day that the contractor or vendor shall fail to comply with these
provisions of the contract, as determined by the human relations commission in
accordance with its rules and regulations, the said sum being fixed and agreed
upon by and between the contractor and the city because of the impracticability
and extreme difficulty of fixing and ascertaining the actual damages which the
city would sustain in the event of such a breach of contract, and said amount
is agreed to be the amount of damages which the city would sustain.
      4.   Impose such other sanctions as may be recommended by the human
relations commission pursuant to this article or other ordinance. (2006 Code §
3-5-6)
1-9A-5: AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAM:
The mayor and city council will develop and maintain an affirmative action
program to achieve in city employment practices the equal employment policy
that is described in section
1-9A-1 of this article. (2006 Code § 3-5-7)
1-9A-6: EXISTING MATTERS:
Nothing in this article shall in any way obviate the need with any resolution
previously adopted by the city before the effective date hereof, pertaining to
unfair employment practices and the applicability of the equal employment
opportunity clause to contracts entered into by the city. (2006 Code § 3-5-8)
ARTICLE B.  DISCRIMINATION IN HOUSING
SECTION:
1-9B-1: Declaration Of Policy
1-9B-2: Definitions
1-9B-3: Prohibited Acts
1-9B-4: Penalty
1-9B-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
   A.   In furthering the policy of the state of Illinois as expressed in its
constitution and other laws and in order that the safety and general welfare,
peace and health of all the inhabitants of the city may be ensured, it is
hereby declared the policy of the city to assure equal opportunity to all
residents, regardless of race, color, religion, national original or ancestry,
sex, creed, or disability to live in decent, sanitary, healthful, standard
living quarters. (Ord. 2015-14, 10-5-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   It is the policy of the city that no owner, lessee, sublessee,
assignee, managing agent, or other person, firm or corporation having the right
to sell, rent, or lease (or otherwise control) any housing accommodation and/or
real property within the city, or any agent of these, shall refuse to sell,
rent, lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of
persons such housing accommodations and/or real property because of race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such
person or persons or discriminate against any person or persons because of
race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability
in the conditions, terms, privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any
housing accommodation and/or real property or in the furnishing of facilities
and/or services in connection therewith.
   C.   Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that will promote maximum
choice within the community's total housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic, and
economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation and racially inclusive
patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities. (Ord. 2015-14,
10-5-2015)
1-9B-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following
terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings as described in this
section:
DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL, STANDARD LIVING QUARTERS: Housing which is in
sound, clean and weathertight condition in conformance with applicable local,
state and national codes.
DISCRIMINATE OR DISCRIMINATION: Any difference expressed in any way toward a
person or persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental or
financing for housing accommodation and/or real property in regard to such
sale, exchange, rental, lease or finance because of the race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such person.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any person, institution or business entity of any kind
which loans money to persons and receives as security for said loans a secured
interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: Includes any building, structure, or portion thereof
which is used or occupied, or maintained, arranged or designed to be used or
occupied, as a home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings,
or any real estate so used, designed or intended for such use.
OWNER: Any person/persons who hold legal or equitable title to or own any
beneficial interest in any real property or who hold legal or equitable title
to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property and/or housing accommodations.
REAL ESTATE BROKER: Any person, partnership, association, corporation and/or
agent thereof who, for a fee or other valuable consideration, offers, sells,
purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange
or rental, of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or
collects rental for the use of housing accommodation and/or real property of
another.
REAL PROPERTY: Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure or housing
accommodations within the corporate limits of the city of Abingdon, Illinois.
(Ord. 2015-14, 10-5-2015)
1-9B-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sublessee,
real estate broker or salesman, financial institution or employee of the
financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any or all of the foregoing, to
discriminate against any person/persons because of their race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability with regard to the sale,
exchange or rental, or any dealing concerning any housing accommodation and/or
real property.
   B.   In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real
estate broker or employee thereof, owner or other person, or financial
institution dealing with housing or real property in the city:
      1.   To discriminate against any person in the availability of or the
price, terms, conditions, or privileges of any kind relating to the sale,
rental, lease, or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real property in
the city or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection
therewith.
      2.   To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated, any
notice, statement or advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to use any form
of application for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of real property,
or to make any record of inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase,
rental or lease of such real estate, which expresses directly or indirectly any
discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex,
creed or disability of any person.
      3.   To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing
loans, accepting mortgages, or otherwise obtaining or making available funds
for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or
maintenance of any housing accommodation and/or real property.
      4.   To solicit for the sale or lease, or list for the sale or lease, of
any housing accommodation and/or real property on the grounds of loss of value
because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person
or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed or disability.
      5.   To distribute or cause to be distributed written material or
statements designed to induce any owner of any housing accommodation and/or
real property to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or
prospective change in the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
sex, creed, or disability of persons in the neighborhood.
      6.   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or
the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any housing accommodation and/
or real property for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale
or listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or
disability in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in
the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located.
      7.   For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent or
otherwise deal with such owner's housing accommodations and/or real property
with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion, national origin
or ancestry, sex, creed or disability.
      8.   For an owner to refuse to sell, rent or otherwise deal with any
housing accommodation and/or real property because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or disability of the proposed buyer or
tenant. (Ord. 2015-14, 10-5-2015)
1-9B-4: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. This section shall in no way
abrogate or impair the right of the city to specifically enforce, by any legal
means, any of the provisions of this article. (Ord. 2015-14, 10-5-2015)
ARTICLE C.  POLICY PROHIBITING SEXUAL HARASSMENT 1
SECTION:
1-9C-1: Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-9C-2: Definition Of Sexual Harassment
1-9C-3: Procedure For Reporting An Allegation Of Sexual Harassment
1-9C-4: Prohibition On Retaliation For Reporting Sexual Harassment Allegations
1-9C-5: Consequences Of A Violation Of The Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-9C-6: Consequences For Knowingly Making A False Report
 
Notes
  1. This policy was drafted using the Illinois Department of Human Rights
1 Sexual Harassment Model Policy and has been modified to conform to Public Act
  100-0554.
1-9C-1: PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts have
determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under title VII
of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a
right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment
is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual
orientations. It is a policy of the City of Abingdon to prohibit harassment of
any person by any Municipal official, Municipal agent, Municipal employee or
Municipal agency or office on the basis of sex or gender. All Municipal
officials, Municipal agents, Municipal employees and Municipal agencies or
offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any person, regardless of any
employment relationship or lack thereof. (Ord. 2017-8, 12-18-2017)
1-9C-2: DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   A.   This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in the
Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual harassment as:
Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct of a
sexual nature when:
      1.   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment,
      2.   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or
      3.   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
   B.   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
      1.   Verbal: Sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor, and
jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature.
      2.   Non-verbal: Suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls", "smacking"
or "kissing" noises.
      3.   Visual: Posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
      4.   Physical: Touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching, brushing
the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
      5.   Textual/electronic: "Sexting" (electronically sending messages with
sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually explicit
language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of electronic
communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line postings,
blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and Twitter).
The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to determine.
On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more subtle and
depends, to some extent, on individual perception and interpretation. The
courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what would offend a
"reasonable person". (Ord. 2017-8, 12-18-2017)
1-9C-3: PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes herself/himself
to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident(s) as
directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his position to
the offending employee, and her/his immediate Supervisor. It is not necessary
for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual harassment,
including the following:
   A.   Electronic/Direct Communication: If there is sexual harassing behavior
in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly express
her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the offending
behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent messages are
needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
   B.   Contact With Supervisory Personnel: At the same time direct
communication is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or
intimidated by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the
immediate Supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a
Director of Human Resources, an ethics officer, the City Manager or
Administrator, or the Chief Executive Officer of the Municipality.
The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual harassment must
not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there are no witnesses
and the victim fails to notify a Supervisor or other responsible officer, the
Municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of the harassment.
   C.   Resolution Outside Municipality: The purpose of this policy is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
Municipality. However, all Municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within one hundred eighty (180)
days of the alleged incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint
with the EEOC must be filed within three hundred (300) days.
Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what was said
or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not limited to,
written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and investigated
regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the Municipality.
However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment charges and
the difficulties associated with their investigation and the questions of
credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a vital component
of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome. (Ord. 2017-8, 12-18-2017)
1-9C-4: PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ALLEGATIONS:
   A.   No Municipal official, Municipal agent, Municipal employee or Municipal
agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any Municipal
employee due to a Municipal employee's:
      1.   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this policy,
      2.   Provision of information related to or testimony before any public
body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation of this
policy, or
      3.   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
For the purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the reprimand,
discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or change in
the terms or conditions of employment of any Municipal employee that is taken
in retaliation for a Municipal employee's involvement in protected activity
pursuant to this policy.
No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a report made
in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will be protected
from retaliation.
   B.   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act 1  provides whistleblower protection
from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, or
denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in retaliation for an employee who
does any of the following:
      1.   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a Supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, State agency, or
other State employee that the State employee reasonably believes is in
violation of a law, rule, or regulation,
      2.   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member, State agency or other State
employee, or
      3.   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act 2 , an employer may not retaliate against an
employee who discloses information in a court, an administrative hearing, or
before a legislative commission or committee, or in any other proceeding, where
the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or regulation. In addition, an
employer may not retaliate against an employee for disclosing information to a
government or law enforcement agency, where the employee has reasonable cause
to believe that the information discloses a violation of a State or Federal
law, rule, or regulation.
According to the Illinois Human Rights Act 3 , it is a civil rights violation
for a person, or for two (2) or more people to conspire, to retaliate against a
person because he/she has opposed that which he/she reasonably and in good
faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment, because he/she has made a
charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an
investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois Human Rights Act.
An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or passed over
for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may file a
retaliation charge - due within one hundred eighty (180) days (IDHR) or three
hundred (300) days (EEOC) of the alleged retaliation. (Ord. 2017-8, 12-18-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/15-10.
2 2. 740 ILCS 174/15(a), (b).
3 1. 775 ILCS 5/6-101.
1-9C-5: CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION OF THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
Municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this policy or the
prohibition on sexual harassment contained in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
5-65, may be subject to a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per
offense, applicable discipline or discharge by the Municipality and any
applicable fines and penalties established pursuant to local ordinance, State
law or Federal law. Each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any
discipline imposed by the Municipality shall be separate and distinct from any
penalty imposed by an ethics commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a
court of law or a State or Federal agency. (Ord. 2017-8, 12-18-2017)
1-9C-6: CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT:
A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser using the
sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping sexual
harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false report is
not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the seriousness
of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is a severe
offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of
this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
Municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreements.
In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act to
an ethics commission, an inspector general, the State police, a State's
Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official is guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor. An ethics commission may levy an administrative fine
of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) against any person who intentionally
makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation. (Ord. 2017-8, 12-18-2017)
CHAPTER 10
ELECTION WARDS
SECTION:
1-10-1: Wards Established
1-10-2: First Ward
1-10-3: Second Ward
1-10-4: Third Ward
1-10-5: Fourth Ward
1-10-1: WARDS ESTABLISHED:
The city shall remain divided into four (4) wards, named and designated ward 1,
ward 2, ward 3, and ward 4, respectively, which may also be referred to as
first ward, second ward, third ward, and fourth ward, respectively. (2006 Code
§
1-4-1)
1-10-2: FIRST WARD:
Ward 1 shall be that part of the city lying east of the centerline of Monroe
Street and north of the centerline of Jackson Street, the boundary being
described as follows:
Commencing at the center of Monroe Street at the north corporate limit of the
city; then south along the center line of Monroe Street to its intersection
with the center line of Jackson Street; then east along the center line of
Jackson Street to the east corporate limit of the city.
(2006 Code §
1-4-2)
1-10-3: SECOND WARD:
Ward 2 shall be that part of the city lying west of the centerline of Monroe
Street and north of the centerline of Jackson Street, the boundary being
described as follows:
Commencing at the center of Monroe Street at the north corporate limit of the
city; then south along the center line of Monroe Street to its intersection
with the center line of Jackson Street; then west along the center line of
Jackson Street to the west corporate limit of the city.
(2006 Code §
1-4-3)
1-10-4: THIRD WARD:
Ward 3 shall be that part of the city lying south of the centerline of Jackson
Street and west of the centerline of Monroe Street between Jackson Street and
Martin Street, and west of the centerline of Western Avenue between Martin
Street and the centerline of Lower Street, and west of the centerline of South
Main Street between the centerline of Lower Street and the south corporate
limit of the city, the boundary being described as follows: (2006 Code §
1-4-4)
Commencing at the center line of Jackson Street at the west corporate limit of
the city; then east along the center line of Jackson Street to its intersection
with the center line of Monroe Street; then south along the center line of
Monroe Street to its intersection with the center line of Martin Street; then
south along the center line of Western Avenue to the center line of Lower
Street; then east along the center line of Lower Street to its intersection
with the center line of South Main Street; then south along the center line of
South Main Street to the south corporate limit of the city.
(2006 Code §
1-4-4; amd. 2016 Code)
1-10-5: FOURTH WARD:
Ward 4 shall be that part of the city lying south of the centerline of Jackson
Street and east of the centerline of Monroe Street between Jackson Street and
Martin Street, and east of the centerline of Western Avenue between Martin
Street and the centerline of Lower Street, and east of the centerline of South
Main Street between the centerline of Lower Street and the south corporate
limit of the city, the boundary being described as follows: (2006 Code § 1-4-5)
Commencing at the center line of Jackson Street at the east corporate limit of
the city; then west along the center line of Jackson Street to its intersection
with the center line of Monroe Street; then south along the center line of
Monroe Street to its intersection with the center line of Martin Street; then
south along the center line of Western Avenue to the center line of Lower
Street; then east along the center line of Lower Street to its intersection
with the center line of South Main Street; then south along the center line of
South Main Street to the south corporate limit of the city.
(2006 Code § 1-4-5; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 11
RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTIONS
SECTION:
1-11-1: Entry At Reasonable Times
1-11-2: Entering Occupied Premises
1-11-3: Controlling Provisions
1-11-1: ENTRY AT REASONABLE TIMES:
Whenever any officer or employee of the town is authorized to enter any
building or premises for the purpose of making an inspection to enforce any
ordinance, he may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to
inspect the same; provided, that he shall effect entry in the manner provided
in section
1-11-2 of this chapter, except in emergency situations, or when consent of the
person having charge or control of such building or premises has been otherwise
obtained. (1997 Code § 1.08.010)
1-11-2: ENTERING OCCUPIED PREMISES:
Any authorized officer or employee of the town may enter upon or into any lot,
house or other building or premises, with proper respect for the occupant's and
owner's constitutional rights, to examine the same and shall be free from any
action or liability on account thereof. The inspection shall be made at
reasonable hours after twenty four (24) hours' written notice to the owner or
occupant. If consent to such entry is not given, the authorized officer or
employee shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
(1997 Code § 1.08.020; amd. Ord. 527, 8-3-2015)
1-11-3: CONTROLLING PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall be controlling over any other ordinance or part of an
ordinance on the same subject, whether heretofore or hereafter adopted, unless
such ordinance or part of an ordinance provides differently by an express
reference to this chapter. Notwithstanding any other ordinance of the town,
whether heretofore or hereafter adopted, it shall not be a violation of
ordinance to refuse or fail to consent to an entry for inspection. (1997 Code §
1.08.030)
CHAPTER 12
MUNICIPAL COURT
SECTION:
1-12-1: Definitions
1-12-2: Qualified Municipal Court Of Record Created
1-12-3: Court Rules
1-12-4: Annual Appropriations
1-12-5: Municipal Judge And Municipal Prosecutor
1-12-6: Commencement Of Action
1-12-7: Trial By Jury
1-12-8: Administrative Fees And Surcharge For Municipal Court
1-12-9: Fines And Penalties
1-12-10: Fines Paid To Town Treasurer
1-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
MUNICIPAL JUDGE: Police magistrate or police judge.
QUALIFIED MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD: A municipal court established by, and
operating and conforming with, local ordinances containing provisions requiring
the keeping of a verbatim record of the proceedings and evidence of trials by
other electric devices or stenographic means, and requiring as a qualification
for the office of judge of such court that he has been admitted to, and is
currently licensed in, the practice of law in Colorado. (1997 Code § 2.44.010;
amd. 2016 Code)
1-12-2: QUALIFIED MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD CREATED:
A municipal court of record is established in accordance with Colorado Revised
Statutes section 13-10-102(3), as amended. (1997 Code § 2.44.020; amd. 2016
Code)
1-12-3: COURT RULES:
The court shall be governed by the Colorado municipal court rules of procedure
as promulgated by the supreme court of Colorado, April 1, 1970, and as may
thereafter be amended. Appeals shall be taken only in accordance with the
rules. (1997 Code § 2.44.140)
1-12-4: ANNUAL APPROPRIATIONS:
The board of trustees shall annually appropriate an amount sufficient to pay
the salary of the town attorney's office and the office of the municipal judge,
providing the clerical help, office help, office expenses, and expenses of
supplies necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (1997 Code §
2.44.030)
1-12-5: MUNICIPAL JUDGE AND MUNICIPAL PROSECUTOR:
   A.   Appointment And Removal:
      1.   Appointment; Qualifications: The municipal court shall be presided
over by a municipal judge, who shall be appointed after each biennial election
by the municipal governing body, and may be reappointed for a subsequent term
or terms, except that the initial appointment under this section may be for a
term of office which expires on the date of the next election of the municipal
governing body. In order to qualify the court as a qualified municipal court of
record, the judge of such court shall be an attorney who has been admitted to
and is currently licensed in the practice of law in Colorado. Any vacancy in
the office of municipal judge shall be filled by appointment of the municipal
governing body for the remainder of the unexpired term. (1997 Code § 2.44.040;
amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   Additional Judges: The municipal governing body may appoint such
additional municipal judges or assistant judges as may be necessary to act in
case of temporary absence, sickness, disqualification or other inability of the
presiding municipal judge to act.
      3.   Presiding Judge: In the event that more than one municipal judge is
appointed, the municipal governing body shall designate a presiding municipal
judge, who shall serve in this capacity during the term for which he was
appointed.
      4.   Removal: A municipal judge may be removed during his term of office
only for a cause. A judge may be removed for cause if:
         a.   He is found guilty of a felony or any other crime involving moral
turpitude;
         b.   He has a disability which interferes with the performance of his
duties and which is, or is likely to become, of a permanent character;
         c.   He has wilfully or persistently failed to perform his duties; or
         d.   He is habitually intemperate. (1997 Code § 2.44.040)
   B.   Qualifications: Because the court is a qualified municipal court of
record, the court shall keep a verbatim record of the proceedings and evidence
at trials by either electric devices or stenographic means. The qualifications
for the office of judge are that the judge has been admitted to and is
currently licensed in the practice of law in Colorado. (1997 Code § 2.44.050)
   C.   Oath And Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the
municipal judge shall take and subscribe, before a judge of a court of record,
and file with the board an oath or affirmation that he will support the
constitution of the United States and the constitution and laws of the state of
Colorado and the ordinances of the town and will faithfully perform the duties
of his office. The municipal judge shall give bond to the town in the amount of
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) which shall be approved by the board and be
conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties of the office of the
municipal judge, and for the faithful accounting for and payment of all monies
coming into his hands by virtue of the office. (1997 Code § 2.44.060)
   D.   Salary: The annual salary of the municipal judge shall be set by the
board and payable as other salaries to municipal employees. The board shall
from time to time budget and appropriate monies necessary for the compensation
of the municipal judge. (1997 Code § 2.44.070)
   E.   Presiding Judge; Powers: The presiding municipal judge shall have full
power and authority to make and adopt rules and regulations for conducting the
business of the municipal court. Such rules and regulations shall be reduced to
writing. (1997 Code § 2.44.080)
   F.   Ex Officio Clerk: The judge shall also be ex officio clerk of the court
unless a separate clerk of the municipal court shall have been appointed by the
judge by and with the consent of the board. (1997 Code § 2.44.090)
   G.   Powers And Procedures: The municipal judge of any municipal court shall
have all judicial powers relating to the operation of his court, subject to any
rules of procedure governing the operation and conduct of municipal courts
promulgated by the Colorado supreme court. The presiding municipal judge of any
municipal court shall have authority to issue local rules of procedure
consistent with any rules of procedure adopted by the Colorado supreme court.
(1997 Code § 2.44.110)
   H.   Municipal Prosecutor: A municipal prosecutor shall be appointed after
each biennial election and shall prosecute all municipal court cases. Vacancy
provisions shall be the same as for all others. (2016 Code)
1-12-6: COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION:
   A.   Filing Of Action Or Summons: Any action or summons brought in any
municipal court to recover any fine or enforce any penalty or forfeiture under
any ordinance shall be filed in the corporate name of the municipality in which
the court is located by and on behalf of the people of the state of Colorado.
Any process issued from or out of a municipal court shall run in the corporate
name of the municipality by and on behalf of the people of the state of
Colorado. Processes from any municipal court shall be executed by any
authorized law enforcement officer from the municipality in which the court is
located.
   B.   Summons From Another Jurisdiction: Any authorized law enforcement
officer may execute within such officer's jurisdiction any summons, process,
writ or warrant issued by a municipal court from another jurisdiction arising
under the ordinances of such municipality for an offense which is criminal or
quasi-criminal. For the purposes of this section, traffic offenses shall not be
considered criminal or quasi- criminal offenses unless penalty points may be
assessed under Colorado Revised Statutes section 42-2-127(5)(a) to (5)(cc). The
issuing municipality shall be liable for and pay all costs, including costs of
service or incarceration incurred in connection with such service or execution.
   C.   Appearance Of Witnesses; Fee: The clerk of the municipal court shall
issue a subpoena for the appearance of any witness in municipal court upon the
request of either the prosecuting municipality or the defendant. The subpoena
may be served upon any person within the jurisdiction of the court in the
manner prescribed by the rules of procedure applicable to municipal courts. Any
person subpoenaed to appear as a witness in municipal court shall be paid a
witness fee in the amount of five dollars ($5.00). (1997 Code § 2.44.100)
1-12-7: TRIAL BY JURY:
In any action before municipal court in which the defendant thereto is entitled
to a jury trial by the constitution or the general laws of the state, such
party shall have a jury by request. The jury shall consist of three (3) jurors,
unless in the case of a trial for a petty offense a greater number, not to
exceed six (6), is requested by the defendant. (1997 Code § 2.44.130)
1-12-8: ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AND SURCHARGE FOR MUNICIPAL COURT:
   A.   In any case set before the court on a show cause hearing, the municipal
court judge shall assess a fee as determined from time to time by the board of
trustees, in addition to all other fines, costs, and surcharges.
   B.   In all cases, except where the defendant is adjudged to be not guilty
by the court, an administrative surcharge as determined from time to time by
the board of trustees shall be imposed.
   C.   In all cases, except where the defendant is adjudged to be not guilty
by the court, court costs as determined from time to time by the board of
trustees shall be imposed. (Ord. 471, 9-7-2004; amd. 2016 Code)
1-12-9: FINES AND PENALTIES:
The municipal judge shall be empowered in his discretion to assess costs
against any defendant who, after trial, is found guilty of an ordinance
violation. Such costs for trial to the court or for trial by jury shall not
exceed such amounts as determined from time to time by the board of trustees.
(1997 Code § 2.44.120; amd. 2016 Code)
1-12-10: FINES PAID TO TOWN TREASURER:
All fines or other monies collected in the municipal court for the violation of
this code or any of the ordinances of the town shall be reported by the judge
and paid to the town treasurer each month. (1997 Code § 2.44.150)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Appointment Term
2-1-2: Chairperson
2-1-3: Quorum
2-1-1: APPOINTMENT TERM:
All persons appointed to a board or commission of the city shall continue to
serve until that person's successor has been appointed and qualified, unless
otherwise specifically provided by ordinance. (2006 Code § 2-7-1-1)
2-1-2: CHAIRPERSON:
If the ordinance establishing a board or commission does not provide for the
appointment of its chairperson by the mayor or otherwise, the persons
comprising the membership of the board or commission shall elect from its
membership one member who shall serve as chairperson of that board or
commission. The chairperson so elected shall preside over the meetings of the
board or commission, shall serve as chairperson for a term of one year, and
shall be eligible for reelection as chairperson. (2006 Code § 2-7-1-3)
2-1-3: QUORUM:
A quorum of a board or commission of the city shall consist of a majority of
those presently holding office on that board or commission. (2006 Code § 2-7-1-
2)
CHAPTER 2
PLAN COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Composition And Officers
2-2-2: Duties
2-2-1: COMPOSITION AND OFFICERS:
   A.   Composition: The plan commission shall be composed of the same persons
who are members of the zoning board of appeals. (2006 Code § 2-7-2-1)
   B.   Officers: The chair and the secretary of the plan commission shall be
the same persons who are the chair and the secretary of the zoning board of
appeals. If either of those officers are not present at any hearing of the plan
commission, the members of the plan commission then present shall select a
chair pro tem or a secretary pro tem, as the case may be, from among the
members present. (2006 Code § 2-7-2-4)
2-2-2: DUTIES:
   A.   The plan commission is hereby designated as the commission to conduct
hearings as required by the Illinois statutes whenever proposed amendments to
the zoning ordinances of the city are considered and shall also conduct
hearings on other matters where required by statute or ordinance.
   B.   Whenever the corporate authorities desire to adopt a new zoning
ordinance, the plan commission is designated as the zoning commission with the
duty to recommend the boundaries of districts and appropriate regulations to be
enforced therein pursuant to the Illinois statutes, unless the corporate
authorities determine to have a separate commission appointed by the mayor,
subject to confirmation by the city council. (2006 Code § 2-7-2-2)
CHAPTER 3
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-3-1: State Regulations Adopted
2-3-2: Board Created; Composition; Term
2-3-3: Powers And Duties
2-3-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-2-1 et seq., are hereby
adopted. (2006 Code § 2-7-4-1)
2-3-2: BOARD CREATED; COMPOSITION; TERM:
There is hereby created a board of local improvements for the city. The board
shall consist of three (3) persons: the mayor, the city engineer and the
superintendent of public works. If any of said persons, other than the mayor,
is unavailable to serve, the mayor shall appoint an alderman from the city
council, with the consent of the city council. The members of the board shall
serve for a term of one year. (2006 Code § 2-7-4-2; amd. 2016 Code)
2-3-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The board shall have the powers and perform the duties assigned thereto
under the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-2-1 et seq., as such
now exists or as may hereafter be amended. (2006 Code § 2-7-4-3)
   B.   The board is authorized and empowered to adopt rules and regulations
governing the proceedings of the board, fixing the time of meetings of the
board, and for public hearings of petitions and other matters as may come
before the board. (2006 Code § 2-7-4-4)
CHAPTER 4
HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-4-1: Commission Created; Composition
2-4-2: Qualifications
2-4-3: Appointment And Terms
2-4-4: Officers And Meetings
2-4-5: Powers And Duties
2-4-6: Procedures For Complaints Other Than Against The City
2-4-7: Procedures For Complaints Against The City
2-4-1: COMMISSION CREATED; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a human relations commission, which commission shall be
composed of five (5) members. (2006 Code § 2-7-5-1)
2-4-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
Each member of the human relations commission shall be a qualified elector of
the city and shall have resided therein at least one year preceding his
appointment. (2006 Code § 2-7-5-1)
2-4-3: APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
   A.   Each member of the human relations commission shall be appointed by the
mayor, with the consent of the city council.
   B.   The five (5) members first appointed after the effective date hereof
shall serve for the following terms:
      1.   Three (3) commissioners, one of whom shall be designated by the
mayor as chair, shall serve for two (2) years; and
      2.   Two (2) commissioners shall serve for one year.
   C.   The successors of all such individual five (5) members of the
commission shall serve for terms of two (2) years. All such appointments to
fill vacancies shall be made in like manner as the case of the initial
commissioners.
   D.   A commissioner having been duly appointed shall continue to serve after
the expiration of his term until his successor has been appointed. All terms
shall expire on June 30 in their final year. (2006 Code § 2-7-5-1)
2-4-4: OFFICERS AND MEETINGS:
The human relations commission shall meet and elect a vice chair and a
secretary from their members as soon as possible after their appointment by the
mayor and confirmation by the city council. The commission shall hold regular
annual meetings and such other meetings as may be necessary, and said meetings
shall be held in the city hall or some other suitable place. (2006 Code § 2-7-
5-3)
2-4-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The commission shall advise and consult with the mayor and city council
on matters involving racial, religious, and ethnic prejudices or discrimination
and recommend such action as it may deem appropriate to effectuate this policy.
   B.   The commission shall have and exercise the power to:
      1.   Act to eliminate unlawful practices relating to the affirmative
action plan, the fair housing ordinance, the equal employment and business
opportunity ordinance, or any other ordinance or resolution assigned to the
commission by the city council.
      2.   Receive, initiate, and investigate complaints alleging
discrimination as outlined in the ordinances of the commissioners'
jurisdiction. Any complaint initiated by the commission shall be in writing,
shall be signed by the chair or vice chair of the commission and shall fully
set forth the circumstances of the alleged violation and the source of all
information upon which the complaint is based, including the names and
addresses of all complainants. Such written complaint shall be served upon the
party alleged to be in violation of the ordinances under the commissioners'
jurisdiction.
      3.   Seek conciliation of, hold hearings on and make findings of fact
with respect to any such complaint.
      4.   Recommend the issuance of orders subject to approval by the city
council and publish its findings of fact and recommend orders in accordance
with the provisions of the ordinances under the commission's jurisdiction after
submission to the city council.
      5.   Render from time to time, but not less than each year, a written
report to the city council of its activities and recommendations with respect
to the ordinances under the commission's jurisdiction, which written reports
shall be made public after submission to the city council.
      6.   Adopt, after approval of the city council, such rules and
regulations as may be necessary or desirable to carry out the purposes of the
ordinances under the jurisdiction of the commission. (2006 Code § 2-7-5-4)
2-4-6: PROCEDURES FOR COMPLAINTS OTHER THAN AGAINST THE CITY:
   A.   Complaint; Conciliation:
      1.   Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of any provision
of any ordinance under the jurisdiction of the commission may file with the
commission a written verified complaint setting forth his grievance. The
complaint shall state: a) the name and address of the complainant; b) the name
and address of the person against whom the complaint is brought, if known to
the complainant; and c) the alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation of
the ordinance; and such complaint shall state the name and address of all
persons believed to have knowledge concerning the alleged facts. The commission
shall provide a printed form of complaint for the use of aggrieved persons.
      2.   After the filing of any complaint, the commission shall serve a copy
of the complaint on the party or parties charged, and the chair or vice chair
shall designate a panel, comprised of three (3) or more commission members, to
make a prompt investigation in connection therewith.
      3.   If such panel shall determine, after such investigations, that
probable cause exists for the allegations of the complaint: a) the panel shall
set a date for a meeting; and b) at said meeting, the panel or any member
thereof shall interview the complainant and the person or persons against whom
the complaint has been directed, and shall attempt to resolve the complaint by
all proper methods of conciliation and persuasion. (2006 Code § 2-7-5-4)
      4.   Meetings or efforts by the commission conciliate a complaint of
discrimination filed under any of the ordinances of the commission's
jurisdiction shall not be subject to the provision of "an act in relation to
meetings", as amended, appearing in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq.;
provided, however, that no final action for the recommendation of a penalty by
the commission shall be taken except at a meeting open to the public. (2006
Code § 2-7-5-4; amd. 2016 Code)
      5.   If at any time within sixty (60) days after the date of filing of
the complaint, the panel shall determine that attempts at conciliation would
not be in furtherance of the objectives of any ordinance under the jurisdiction
of the commission, the commission shall thereupon proceed promptly to a full
hearing of the complaint, in accordance with subsection B of this section.
   B.   Hearing:
      1.   The hearing shall be conducted by the commission, or a panel
thereof, upon due and reasonable notice to all parties. The commission shall
have power to administer oaths and to take sworn testimony. Any party alleged
to have violated any ordinance under the jurisdiction of the commission shall
be entitled to be represented by counsel and shall have the right to call
witnesses in his own behalf and to cross examine witnesses.
      2.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the commission shall render to the
city council a written report and recommendations, which shall also be served
by mail upon the complainant and the party or parties charged. No report shall
be delayed more than sixty (60) days after the date of the first issuance of
notice for commencement of a hearing.
   C.   Enforcement:
      1.   The commission shall be empowered, at the conclusion of proceedings
held under subsection B of this section, to recommend to the city council that
the council order any person found to be in violation of any ordinance under
the jurisdiction of the commission to cease and desist from any practice of
violation, upon such terms as shall be necessary and proper for the enforcement
of any ordinance under the jurisdiction of the commission.
      2.   At the conclusion of the hearing proceedings held under subsection B
of this section, the commission shall be empowered, as a part of its report, to
recommend to the city council that it direct the city attorney to:
         a.   Apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for such relief as
may seem to the court appropriate for the enforcement of any ordinance under
the jurisdiction of the commission and the elimination of any violation
thereof.
         b.   In the case of any unlawful practice or violation of any
ordinance under the jurisdiction of the commission by any person in the course
of performing under a contract or subcontract with the state or any political
subdivision or agency thereof, or with the United States Of America or any
agency or instrumentality thereof, to petition or institute proceedings with
such contracting agency for the purpose of causing it to terminate such
contract or any portion thereof, either absolutely or on condition of
compliance with the provisions of any ordinance under the jurisdiction of the
commission.
      3.   After receipt of the recommendation of the commission, the city
council may issue such cease and desist orders and may direct such action by
the city attorney, including procedures as in subsection C2 of this section, as
shall be necessary for the enforcement of any ordinance under the jurisdiction
of the commission.
   D.   Limitation Of Time To File Complaints: Any complaint filed hereunder
with the commission must be filed within thirty (30) days after the alleged
discriminatory violation occurred, or it shall be barred. (2006 Code § 2-7-5-4)
2-4-7: PROCEDURES FOR COMPLAINTS AGAINST THE CITY:
Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation by the city or its officers
or employees of any ordinance under the jurisdiction of the commission shall
follow the complaint, conciliation and hearing procedures established in
subsections 2-4-6A and B1 of this chapter, and shall comply with the limitation
requirement established in subsection 2-4-6D of this chapter. Subsections 2-4-
6B2 and C of this chapter, concerning recommendations and enforcement, however,
shall be inapplicable. Instead, at the conclusion of the hearing, the
commission may render a written report and recommendations to such state or
federal agencies as the commission deems necessary and appropriate and, in such
event, shall serve copies by mail upon the complainant, party or parties
charged and the city council. No report shall be delayed more than sixty (60)
days after the date of the first issuance of notice for commencement of a
hearing. (2006 Code § 2-7-5-5)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-1-1: Short Title
3-1-2: Interpretation
3-1-3: Definitions
3-1-4: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
3-1-5: License And Compliance Required
3-1-6: Ineligibility For License
3-1-7: Application For License
3-1-8: Classification Of Licenses; Fees
3-1-9: Number Of Licenses
3-1-10: Expiration Of License; Proration Of Fee
3-1-11: Display Of License
3-1-12: Limitations On And Conditions Of License
3-1-13: Renewal Of License; Restrictions
3-1-14: Change Of Location
3-1-15: Location Restrictions
3-1-16: Premises Requirements; Right Of Entry
3-1-17: Closing Hours; Presence On Premises
3-1-18: Persons Under Twenty One
3-1-19: Prohibited Conduct On Licensed Premises
3-1-20: Additional Prohibited And Restricted Acts
3-1-21: Recordkeeping
3-1-22: Suspension Or Revocation Of License; Penalties
3-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited as the ABINGDON LIQUOR CONTROL
ORDINANCE. (2006 Code §
3-2-1)
3-1-2: INTERPRETATION:
Whenever reference herein is made to the Illinois liquor control act, it shall
mean and refer to the liquor control act of 1934, as amended, 235 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq. (2006 Code §
3-2-1)
3-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases used in this chapter which are defined in the liquor
control act of 1934, as now or hereafter amended, shall have the meanings given
to said words and phrases in that act. For the purposes of this chapter, the
terms "liquor" and "alcoholic liquor" are synonymous, unless the context
otherwise requires, and shall include beer, wine, spirits, and all other
intoxicating liquors, unless otherwise specified.
LICENSEE: Any person, partnership, corporation, or club holding a license under
the provisions of this chapter.
NUDE: A state of dress or undress that exposes to view:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola,
but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by
a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel,
provided the areola is not exposed; or
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn, simulates
human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
   A.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts.
   B.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.
   C.   Masturbation, actual or simulated.
   D.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or
tumescence.
   E.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsection A, B, C, or D of this definition. (2006 Code
§
3-2-2; amd. Ord. 2015-12, 9-8-2015)
3-1-4: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
   A.   Mayor Serve As; Authority:
      1.   The mayor of the city shall be the local liquor control commissioner
for the territory within the corporate limits of the city and shall be charged
with the administration of the applicable provisions of the Illinois liquor
control act and the provisions of this chapter, as well as such ordinances and
resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted.
      2.   The local liquor control commissioner is authorized to make such
rules as may be necessary in the performance of his duties and to aid in the
administration of this chapter and to effectuate its purposes.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The local liquor control commissioner shall have the
powers and duties provided in this chapter, plus the powers and duties provided
in the Illinois liquor control act. (2006 Code §
3-2-3)
3-1-5: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell, barter, transport, deliver, solicit or receive
orders for, keep or expose for sale, keep with intent to sell, or furnish any
alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes for sale at retail in any area within
the corporate limits of the city without first having a valid liquor license
issued by the local liquor control commissioner of the city. It shall be
unlawful for a licensee to operate in violation of the terms of a liquor
license or the provisions of this chapter. (2006 Code §
3-2-4)
3-1-6: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No retail liquor license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who is not a bona fide resident of the city of Abingdon or the
county of Knox prior to the making of the application for such license.
   B.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   C.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   D.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law, if the commissioner determines, after investigation, that such person has
not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust.
   E.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame.
   F.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   G.   A person whose license issued under the Illinois liquor control act has
been revoked for cause.
   H.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   I.   A partnership, unless all of the members of such partnership shall be
qualified to obtain a license.
   J.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the city
of Abingdon or the county of Knox.
   K.   A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a
foreign corporation which is qualified to transact business in Illinois.
   L.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   M.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of alcoholic liquor, or has
forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for such violation.
   N.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license
is sought, unless he has a written lease thereon for the full period for which
the license is to be issued.
   O.   Any law enforcing public official, mayor, or alderman of the city; and
no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly,
in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
   P.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   Q.   Any person or other entity who is not eligible for a state retail
liquor dealer's license.
   R.   A person who has been convicted of a federal or state gambling offense.
(2006 Code § 3-2-6)
   S.   A person who is prohibited under 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-2.
(2016 Code)
3-1-7: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   No retail liquor license shall, at any time after the effective date
hereof, be granted by the local liquor control commissioner except as hereafter
provided. The local liquor control commissioner shall grant retail liquor
dealers' licenses in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the state of
Illinois and the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Any person requiring a license under this chapter shall make written
application for a retail liquor dealer's license to the local liquor control
commissioner and shall file the application with the city clerk who shall
provide a blank form for that purpose. The application shall be completed and
signed by the applicant, if an individual; or by each and every member of the
partnership, if the applicant is a partnership; or by the duly authorized
president and secretary if a corporation or club; and shall be verified by oath
or affidavit and shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name, age, date of birth, address, and telephone number of the
manager or agent who conducts the business and the applicant in the case of an
individual; and in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share
in the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation for profit or of a
club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized and the
names and addresses of the officers and directors or any stockholder owning in
the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock (if said stockholder
should be a corporation, then disclosure of the stockholders of that
corporation as specified herein should be made) and any and all information
which may be reasonably requested by the local liquor control commissioner in
order to determine whether the applicant, manager and other individuals,
officers, directors, or shareholders named therein properly qualify under the
terms of this chapter.
      2.   The citizenship of the applicant and his place of birth; and if a
naturalized citizen, the name and place of his naturalization.
      3.   The character of business of the applicant; and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
      4.   The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character; and in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued.
      5.   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license.
      6.   The name and address of the landlord if the premises is leased, and
the date of expiration of the lease. (2006 Code §
3-2-5)
3-1-8: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; FEES:
   A.   Definition: For the purposes of this section, the term "primary
business is the sale of food and beverage" means that over sixty percent (60%)
of the gross revenues of the licensee is derived from the sale of food and
beverage.
   B.   Classes And Fees Established: The licenses for the sale of liquor
within the city are divided into the following classes and require payment of
the following annual fees:
      1.   Class 2 License: Class 2 license, which shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption on or off the premises where sold. The annual
fee for such license shall be one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100.00).
This license shall be issued only to a licensee whose primary business is the
sale of food and beverage and not video gaming.
      2.   Class 2-A License: Class 2-A license, which shall authorize the sale
of alcoholic liquor for consumption on or off the premises where sold. The
annual fee for such license shall be one thousand four hundred dollars
($1,400.00). This license shall be issued only to a licensee whose primary
business is the sale of food and beverage and not video gaming.
      3.   Class 3 License: Class 3 license, which shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor in its original package and not to be consumed in the premises
where sold. The annual fee for such license shall be five hundred dollars
($500.00). This license shall be issued only to a licensee whose primary
business is the sale of food and beverage and not video gaming.
      4.   Class 3-A License: Class 3-A license, which shall authorize the sale
of alcoholic liquor in its original package and not to be consumed on the
premises where sold. The annual fee for such license shall be eight hundred
dollars ($800.00). This license shall be issued only to a licensee whose
primary business is the sale of food and beverage and not video gaming.
      5.   Class 4 License: Class 4 license, which shall authorize the sale of
beer for consumption on or off the premises where sold. The fee for such
license shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). This license shall be
issued only to a licensee whose primary business is the sale of food and
beverage and not video gaming.
      6.   Class 4-A License: Class 4-A license, which shall authorize the sale
of beer for consumption on or off the premises where sold. The fee for such
license shall be six hundred dollars ($600.00). This license shall be issued
only to a licensee whose primary business is the sale of food and beverage and
not video gaming. (Ord. 2015-12, 9-8-2015)
3-1-9: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
No more than ten (10) licenses shall be in force at any time within the city.
(2006 Code § 3-2-9; amd. Ord. 2010-10, 12-6-2010)
3-1-10: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; PRORATION OF FEE:
Each license shall terminate on April 30 next following its issuance. The
license fee shall be paid in advance and there shall be no refund of any
portion of the fee; except, that the fee to be paid shall be reduced in
proportion to the number of full calendar months which have expired in the year
prior to the issuance of the license. (2006 Code § 3-2-7)
3-1-11: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The certificate of license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be
displayed by the licensee in a prominent place in the licensed establishment.
(2006 Code § 3-2-12)
3-1-12: LIMITATIONS ON AND CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Any license issued hereunder shall embrace only one place of business.
   B.   A retail liquor dealer's license shall be a purely personal privilege,
good for a period not to exceed one year after issuance (unless sooner revoked
or terminated as herein provided), and shall not constitute property; nor shall
it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution; nor shall it be
alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being
encumbered or hypothecated.
   C.   Such license shall cease and terminate upon the death of the licensee
and shall not descend by the laws of intestate succession or be transferable by
testamentary disposition; provided, however, that the executor or administrator
of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or
bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may
continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under the order of a
court of competent jurisdiction, and may exercise the privileges of the
deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or
such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of such license, but in no
event for a period longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy, or
insolvency of such licensee.
   D.   Any change made with respect to ownership of any share of stock of a
corporation which is a licensee shall be reported immediately to the local
liquor control commissioner.
   E.   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to any
and all amendments to this chapter which may be hereafter enacted, and any and
all rules adopted by the local liquor control commissioner. (2006 Code § 3-2-
15)
3-1-13: RENEWAL OF LICENSE; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Renewal Requirements:
      1.   Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof,
provided he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which
such renewal license is sought is suitable for such purpose, and provided the
licensee complies with the ordinances and regulations then in force and effect
in the city governing the issuance of retail liquor licenses.
      2.   Renewal privileges provided herein shall not be construed as a
vested right to prevent the local liquor control commissioner from decreasing
the number of licenses to be issued within the city in accordance with the then
existing ordinances of the city.
      3.   The applicant shall pay all fees required at the time the renewal
application is made.
      4.   All applications for renewal shall be submitted no more than thirty
(30) days prior to the expiration of the existing license.
      5.   Each application shall be made and shall proceed in the same manner
as provided in section
3-1-7 of this chapter. (2006 Code § 3-2-16)
   B.   Delinquent Taxes Prohibited:
      1.   No license shall be renewed by the local liquor control commissioner
if the Illinois department of revenue, or any other appropriate department or
agency of the state of Illinois, has reported to the Illinois liquor control
commission, and such information has been conveyed to the city, that such
licensee is delinquent in filing any required tax return or paying any amount
owed to the state of Illinois, until the applicant for renewal is issued a
certificate by the department of revenue stating that all delinquent returns or
amounts owed have been paid by the guaranteed remittance, or a payment
agreement to pay all amounts owed has been accepted in writing by the
department of revenue and such writing has been furnished to the city.
      2.   No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be renewed by the local liquor control commissioner if the applicant is
delinquent in the payment of any tax owed to the city. Prior to the issuance of
the renewal, the applicant must provide documentation that the tax owed to the
city has been satisfied by payment in a method approved by the city clerk.
(2006 Code § 3-2-22)
3-1-14: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A license issued hereunder shall permit the sale of liquor only in the premises
described in the application and license. The location may be changed only upon
written authorization to make such change issued by the local liquor control
commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new
location complies with the provisions of this chapter. Application for change
of location shall be made on a form approved by the local liquor control
commissioner and furnished by the city clerk. (2006 Code § 3-2-13)
3-1-15: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued pursuant to this chapter for any premises which is
within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school, or nursing home facility.
(2006 Code § 3-2-13)
3-1-16: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
   A.   The licensed premises shall at all times be kept in a clean, orderly,
and sanitary condition and shall comply with all building, maintenance and
safety ordinances of the city.
   B.   The premises shall be conducted by the licensee in a quiet, decent, and
respectable manner.
   C.   Entry shall be granted for admittance to the premises at any time upon
the verbal request of the local liquor control commissioner or any police
officer of the city for the purpose of determining whether or not the Illinois
liquor control act or the provisions of this chapter are being violated.
Refusal of such admittance shall be unlawful. (2006 Code § 3-2-18)
3-1-17: CLOSING HOURS; PRESENCE ON PREMISES:
   A.   Hours Closed; Exceptions: Licensed premises under the provisions of
this chapter shall be closed as follows:
      1.   Class 2 License: Each class 2 licensed premises shall be closed
between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. of the next day; except, it may remain open after twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight on Friday and Saturday and until one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Saturday
and Sunday and shall remain closed the remainder of Sunday.
      2.   Class 2-A License: Each class 2-A licensed premises shall be closed
between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. of the next day; except, it may remain open after twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight on Friday and Saturday until one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Saturday and
Sunday and may further remain open on Sunday between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
      3.   Class 3 License: Each class 3 licensed premises shall be closed
between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. of the next day and shall remain closed the remainder of Sunday.
      4.   Class 3-A License: Each class 3-A licensed premises shall be closed
between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. of the next day and may remain open on Sunday between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
      5.   Class 4 License: Each class 4 licensed premises shall be closed
between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. of the next day and shall remain closed the remainder of Sunday.
      6.   Class 4-A License: Each class 4-A licensed premises shall be closed
between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. of the next day and may remain open on Sunday between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
      7.   New Year's Eve: Notwithstanding subsections A1 through A6 of this
section, each class of licensee shall be permitted to remain open on any Sunday
that falls on December 31 between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) P.M. on
December 31 and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on January 1.
   B.   Presence On Premises After Hours: It shall be unlawful to sell liquor
or to permit any person, except the licensee and his employees or agents or
members of their immediate families, to be on the premises of the licensee
during any time the licensed premises is required to be closed. (2006 Code § 3-
2-10; amd. Ord. 2013-6, 7-1-2013; 2016 Code)
3-1-18: PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE:
   A.   Prohibitions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or his agent or any other
person to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years except as provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
16.1. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor,
shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the
age of twenty one (21) years. (2006 Code § 3-2-14; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of
alcoholic liquor in violation of this section. The consumption of alcoholic
liquor by any person under twenty one (21) years of age is forbidden. Any
person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited
because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of such liquor.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom the sale, gift, or
delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age to have alcoholic
liquor in his possession.
   B.   Identification Requirements And Restrictions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years, for the purpose of buying, accepting or receiving alcoholic liquor from
a licensee, to represent that he is twenty one (21) years of age or over.
      2.   If a licensee or his agents or employees believes or has reason to
believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of
the nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or
delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification,
containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his
official duties.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer, alter, or deface
any identification card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a
false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by means
of false information. (2006 Code § 3-2-14)
   C.   Exemptions: The possession and dispensing or consumption by a person
under twenty one (21) years of age of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a
religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by said person under the
direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent of such person in the
privacy of a home, is not prohibited by this section. (2006 Code § 3-2-14; amd.
2016 Code)
   D.   Penalty: Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be fined
in an amount of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (2006 Code § 3-2-14)
3-1-19: PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   No person holding a retail liquor dealer's license shall allow or
permit any drunken or intoxicated person to be or remain upon the licensed
premises or any adjacent room to or connected therewith.
      2.   No loud, obscene or boisterous talking, lewd touching, or disorderly
conduct shall be permitted on the licensed premises.
   B.   Nudity; Specific Sexual Activities:
      1.   Nudity: No licensee, nor any agent or employee of the licensee,
shall appear, be present, or perform while nude upon the licensed premises, nor
shall any such licensee, or any agent or employee of the licensee, allow or
permit any other person on the licensed premises to appear, be present, or
perform while nude upon the licensed premises.
      2.   Specified Sexual Activities: No licensee, nor any agent or employee
of the licensee, shall conduct or perform any specified sexual activity upon
the licensed premises, nor shall any such licensee, or any agent or employee of
the licensee, allow or permit any other person to conduct or perform any
specified sexual activity upon the licensed premises.
      3.   Effect Of Provisions 1 : The provisions of subsections B1 and B2 of
this section shall be in effect for all licenses issued after the effective
date of said provisions. The provisions of subsections B1 and B2 of this
section shall be in effect for all licenses issued prior to the effective date
of said provisions upon the renewal of such licenses. (2006 Code § 3-2-17)
   C.   Sales To Certain Persons: A licensee shall not sell, deliver, or give
any alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated person. (2006 Code § 3-2-17; amd. 2016
Code)
   D.   Gambling: The licensee shall not engage in, permit, or suffer any form
of illegal gambling on the licensed premises. (2006 Code § 3-2-17)
 
Notes
1 1. Effective date May 28, 1999.
3-1-20: ADDITIONAL PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED ACTS:
   A.   Public Intoxication: No person shall appear in a public place while
intoxicated so that such person constitutes a nuisance or a threat to the
health or safety of any person, including himself or herself.
   B.   Possession In Public: No person shall appear in a public place with
possession of any alcoholic liquor except in the original container and with
the seal unbroken, unless such person is on the premises of a licensee duly
licensed under the provisions of this chapter, or in a public place designated
and authorized by the city during a special event.
   C.   Consumption During Prohibited Hours: No person shall consume any
alcoholic liquor on the premises of a licensee during the hours when liquor is
prohibited from being sold. (2006 Code § 3-2-19)
   D.   Transporting Liquor: Except as provided in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-502(c), it shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry,
possess, or have any alcoholic liquor within any passenger area of any motor
vehicle except in the original container and with the seal unbroken. (2006 Code
§ 3-2-20; amd. 2016 Code)
3-1-21: RECORDKEEPING:
The local liquor control commissioner shall keep, or cause to be kept, a
complete record of all licenses issued and all applications for licenses,
whether or not issued. The records shall be kept on file in the office of the
city clerk. (2006 Code § 3-2-11)
3-1-22: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; PENALTIES:
   A.   Suspension Of License: The local liquor control commissioner may
suspend any retail liquor dealer's license for any violation of one or more
provisions of this chapter or for any violation of any state law pertaining to
the sale of alcoholic liquor or for any violation of any other ordinance or
resolution relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted by the city, or for
any violation of any rule or regulation promulgated by the local liquor control
commissioner pursuant to his authority under the provisions of this chapter.
The period of suspension shall be for up to and including thirty (30) days.
However, no license shall be suspended until after a public hearing conducted
by the local liquor control commissioner, with prior written notice of not less
than three (3) days to the licensee, affording the licensee an opportunity to
appear and defend.
   B.   Revocation Of License:
      1.   The local liquor control commissioner may revoke any retail liquor
dealer's license for any violation of one or more provisions of this chapter or
for any violation of any state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor,
or for any violation of any other ordinance or resolution relating to alcoholic
liquor as may be enacted by the city, or for any violation of any rule or
regulation promulgated by the local liquor control commissioner pursuant to his
authority under the provisions of this chapter. However, no license shall be
revoked until after a public hearing conducted by the local liquor control
commissioner, with prior written notice of not less than three (3) days to the
licensee, affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend.
      2.   If any applicant for a license under this chapter makes a false
statement or fraudulent statement in the application, and the license is
issued, the false statement or fraudulent statement shall constitute cause for
revocation of the license by the local liquor control commissioner.
   C.   Procedures:
      1.   In all hearings held pursuant to this section, all evidence shall be
reduced to writing, and the local liquor control commissioner shall maintain an
official record of the proceedings.
      2.   The procedure of each proceeding held pursuant to this section shall
be governed by the provisions of the Illinois liquor control act 1  then in
effect.
   D.   Summary Closure Of Premises: If the local liquor control commissioner
has reason to believe any continued operation of a licensed premises will
immediately threaten the welfare of the community, he may, upon the issuance of
a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or
hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days,
and shall provide the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period.
   E.   Fines:
      1.   In addition to any suspension, the local liquor control commissioner
may levy a fine against the licensee for the violation(s). The fine shall not
exceed:
         a.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first violation within a
twelve (12) month period.
         b.   One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a second
violation within a twelve (12) month period.
         c.   Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a third
violation within a twelve (12) month period.
      2.   Each day in which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. (2006 Code § 3-2-21)
   F.   General Penalty: Unless a specific penalty provision in this chapter is
applicable, any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine pursuant to section
1-4-1 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on
which a violation occurs or continues to occur. (2006 Code § 3-2-23)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/7-5 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
PEDDLERS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definitions; Exceptions
3-2-2: License And Display Required; Fees
3-2-3: Application For License; Issuance; Contents Of License
3-2-4: Prohibited Acts; Revocation Of License
3-2-5: Penalty
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Definitions: Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by
context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. The
singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular.
The masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter, and vice versa.
The term "shall" means mandatory and the term "may" is permissive. The
following terms shall have the definitions given to them:
PEDDLER: The term "peddler" shall mean a person who goes from house-to-house,
door-to-door, business-to- business, street-to-street, or any other type of
place-to- place, for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing
for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale,
the goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property, that the
person is carrying or otherwise transporting. The term peddler shall mean the
same as the term hawker. Unless expressly set forth or necessarily implied from
the context, the term "peddler" shall include the definition of "solicitor",
and "transient merchant".
SOLICITOR: The term "solicitor" shall mean a person who goes from house-to-
house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type
of place-to-place, for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders
for goods, wares, products, merchandise, other personal property, or services,
of which he or she may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be
described in a catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or performance
shall occur at a later time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not
remove a person from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the
person's activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above.
The term solicitor shall mean the same as the term canvasser.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: The term "transient merchant" shall mean a person who
temporarily sets up business out of a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other
portable shelter, or empty store front for the purpose of exposing or
displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering goods,
wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property, and who does not
remain or intend to remain in any one location for more than seven (7)
consecutive days. (Ord. 2018-3, 5-21-2018; amd. Ord. 2018-8, 11-19-2018)
   B.   Exceptions To Definitions: For the purpose of the requirements of this
chapter, the terms "peddler", "solicitor", and "transient merchant" shall not
apply to:
      1.   Any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale garden or
agricultural produce raised by such person.
      2.   Any person representing a nonprofit civic, charitable, school,
cultural or recreational organization.
      3.   Any salesman who has established customers to whom periodic
deliveries are made and who makes calls upon prospective customers in that
salesman's regular service area.
      4.   Any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods,
wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property, to a retailer of the
item(s) being sold by the wholesaler.
      5.   Any person who makes initial contacts with other people for the
purpose of establishing or trying to establish a regular customer delivery
route for the delivery of perishable food and dairy products such as baked
goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any person making deliveries of
perishable food and dairy products to the customers on his or her established
regular delivery route.
      6.   Any persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as garage
sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons participating
in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market, shall be exempt from the
definitions of peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants, as shall be
anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or any officer
of the court conducting a court ordered sale. (Ord. 2018-3, 5-21-2018)
3-2-2: LICENSE AND DISPLAY REQUIRED; FEES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity to engage in
business within the City as a peddler without first having obtained a license.
   B.   Any one person or other entity engaging in business within the City as
a peddler who employs or otherwise includes more than one person engaging in
such business, each individual peddler is required to have a license. (2006
Code §
3-4-2)
   C.   The license shall be worn by each peddler, solicitor and/or transient
merchant in a conspicuous place on the person of each peddler, solicitor and/or
transient merchant while so engaged in business.
   D.   For each license required, the following fees shall be paid in full
prior to issuance of each license, to-wit:
      1.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the issuance of the license, plus
twenty dollars ($20.00), per person, per day, for each day the license is in
effect for any license issued for a period not in excess of ten (10) days; or
      2.   One hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) for the issuance of the
license, plus twenty dollars ($20.00), per person, per day, for each day the
license is in effect for any license issued for a period in excess of ten (10)
days but not exceeding sixty (60) days. (Ord. 2018-3, 5-21-2018)
3-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE; CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
   A.   An application for each license shall be made to the City Clerk on
forms prescribed by the Corporate Authorities which shall specify the following
information:
      1.   Applicant's full legal name.
      2.   All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to
which applicant officially answers.
      3.   Names and descriptions of all the persons proposed to be used in
this City during the period for which application is made.
      4.   Full address of applicant's permanent residence.
      5.   Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence.
      6.   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed,
operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent.
      7.   The telephone number that applicant can be reached while conducting
business within the City, including the location where a transient merchant
intends to set up business.
      8.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has, and/or any of
the persons to be used in this City during the period for which application is
made have, been convicted within the last five (5) years of a felony,
misdemeanor for violation of any State or Federal Statute or any local
ordinance, other than traffic offenses.
      9.   A list of the three (3) most recent locations where the applicant
has conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant.
      10.   Proof of any required County license.
      11.   Written permission of the property owner or the property owner's
agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant.
      12.   All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council.
(Ord. 2018-3, 5-21-2018)
   B.   Each applicant shall also exhibit two (2) valid means of identification
to the City Clerk. (2006 Code §
3-4-3)
   C.   Within two (2) business days of the making of the application, the City
Clerk shall issue the license, if all of the requirements of this chapter have
been met and the City Clerk has determined that:
      1.   The applicant's ability to conduct the business for which the
license is being sought in an honest and legal manner or that will not
adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City.
Such violations shall include, but not be limited to: burglary, theft, larceny,
swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or
threatened physical harm against another person.
      2.   No license issued to any applicant for the purpose of conducting
business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant has been revoked within
the past five (5) years.
      3.   The applicant has a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad
business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence of more
than two (2) complaints against the applicant with the Better Business Bureau,
the Attorney General's Office, any other similar business or consumer rights
office or agency, or the City of Abingdon, within the preceding twelve (12)
months, or five (5) such complaints filed against the applicant within the
preceding five (5) years. (Ord. 2018-3, 5-21-2018)
   D.   Each license issued shall state on its face the date on which it
expires. (2006 Code §
3-4-3)
3-2-4: PROHIBITED ACTS; REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   a. Unless otherwise provided in subsection A1b of this section, it
shall be unlawful for any peddler to conduct business at any residential unit
earlier than nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
(2006 Code §
3-4-4; amd. 2016 Code)
         b.   It shall be unlawful for ice cream truck salesmen to conduct
business at any residential unit earlier than nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or later
than eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. (Ord. 2011-6, 6-20-2011; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to attempt to sell or sell any
merchandise, other chattel, or service other than those specified in the
peddler's application for a license, or to make any material misrepresentation
concerning the merchandise, other chattel, or service, or to engage in any
fraudulent conduct.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to refuse to leave the premises
of any residential unit after having been requested by the owner or other
occupant to leave.
      4.   In the event that the premises of any residential unit is posted
against solicitation by means of a notice prominently displayed, upon which is
printed "No Peddlers" or "No Solicitors", it shall be unlawful to engage in
business as a peddler on such premises. For the purpose of this subsection A4,
a residential unit shall be deemed to be posted against peddlers if there is
exhibited on or near the main entrance to the premises, or on or near the main
door to any residential unit located on the premises, a sign at least three
inches by four inches (3" x 4") in size which bears either of the above legends
in letters at least one-third inch (1/3") in height. (2006 Code §
3-4-4)
      5.   Any unlawful act described as fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect
statements on the application form.
      6.   A complaint by a citizen of the City of Abingdon regarding the
peddler of harassment, badgering, refusal to leave complainant's residence when
requested.
      7.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made during the course
of the licensed activity.
      8.   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could have
been denied under this chapter.
      9.   The revocation within the past five (5) years of any license issued
to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler,
solicitor, or transient merchant. (Ord. 2018-3, 5-21-2018)
   B.   Revocation Of License: Any unlawful act described in subsection A of
this section is cause for revocation of any or all licenses issued to that
person. Revocation of any license may be effected by the Mayor. (2006 Code §
3-4-4)
3-2-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in an amount
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day a violation occurs or during which a violation continues.
The imposition of any penalty by fine as provided by this section does not
prevent the revocation of any license for any offense which is also cause for
the penalty. (Ord. 2018-3, 5-21-2018)
CHAPTER 3
AMUSEMENTS
SECTION:
3-3-1: License Required
3-3-2: License Fees
3-3-3: Penalty
3-3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the businesses
described in section
3-3-2 of this chapter without first having obtained a license and paid the
applicable license fee as required by section
3-3-2 of this chapter. (2006 Code §
3-1-2)
3-3-2: LICENSE FEES:
The following amusement license fees are imposed upon persons who offer the
public the following designated types of services:
   A.   Proprietors of establishments using pool or billiard tables shall pay
the sum of sixty five dollars ($65.00) annually, payable on April 1 of each
year.
   B.   Carnival operators shall pay the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per
day for each day of operation.
   C.   Proprietors of bowling alley establishments shall pay the sum of
fifteen dollars ($15.00) per alley, payable annually on April 1 of each year.
   D.   Proprietors of establishments in which any gaming or amusement device
is located shall pay the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) for each device, payable
annually on April 1 of each year. This subsection is not applicable to any
device or machine which provides only musical entertainment. (2006 Code §
3-1-2)
3-3-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day a violation occurs or during which a violation continues.
The imposition of a penalty by fine as provided by this section does not
prevent the revocation of any license for any offense which is also cause for
the penalty. (2006 Code §
3-1-3; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 4
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: Mobile Homes Permitted In Parks Only
3-4-3: Mobile Home Parks
3-4-3-1:    License Requirements
3-4-3-2:    Utilities
3-4-3-3:    Register Required
3-4-3-4:    Compliance With State Regulations
3-4-4: Zoning Regulations
3-4-5: Penalty
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated
below:
IMMOBILIZED MOBILE HOME: A mobile home served by individual utilities, resting
on a permanent perimeter foundation which extends below the established frost
depth with the wheels, tongue and hitch removed and the home secured in
compliance with the mobile home tiedown act 1 .
INDIVIDUAL UTILITIES: The provision for each mobile home of a separate metered
connection to electrical service; separately tapped water service from an
approved public water supply or a separate private water supply; and a
separately tapped connection to an approved public sewer system or a separate
private sewage disposal system.
MOBILE HOME: A structure designed for permanent habitation and so constructed
as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently attached to
its frame, from the place of its construction to the location, or subsequent
locations, at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and designed to
permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more persons. The
term "mobile home" shall include, but not be limited to, manufactured homes
constructed after June 30, 1976, in accordance with the federal national
manufactured housing construction and safety standards act of 1974 (42 USC
section 5401 et seq.).
MOBILE HOME PARK: A tract of land or two (2) or more contiguous tracts of land
upon which contain sites with the necessary utilities for one or more
independent mobile homes for permanent habitation either free of charge or for
revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, vehicle, or
enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such mobile
home park. Separate ownership of contiguous tracts of land shall not preclude
the tracts of land from common licensure as a mobile home park if they are
maintained and operated jointly. Neither an immobilized mobile home nor a
motorized recreational vehicle shall be construed as being a part of a mobile
home park. (2006 Code §
3-3-1)
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
3-4-2: MOBILE HOMES PERMITTED IN PARKS ONLY:
No person shall maintain any mobile home for human habitation on any lot or
parcel of ground within the city except in a licensed mobile home park. (2006
Code §
3-3-2)
3-4-3: MOBILE HOME PARKS:
3-4-3-1: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain or
operate any mobile home park in the city without first having obtained a
license. (2006 Code §
3-3-3)
   B.   Ineligibility For License:
      1.   No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a
felony, or to any partnership or corporation if any partner or officer thereof
has been convicted of a felony.
      2.   No mobile home park shall employ any person as managing agent or to
fill any other position placing such employee in charge of the mobile home park
if such person has been convicted of a felony. (2006 Code § 3-3-9)
   C.   Application For License: Application for a license shall be made in
writing to the city clerk on such form as established by the corporate
authorities, and shall contain the name of the applicant, the location of the
proposed park, the number of mobile homes to be accommodated, and proof of
compliance with the zoning ordinances of the city. (2006 Code §
3-3-3)
   D.   License Fee:
      1.   Fee Established: The annual fee for a license shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00), plus one dollar ($1.00) for each mobile home over five (5)
for which accommodations are provided, due and payable each May 1. Whenever the
number of mobile homes is increased, it shall be reported to the city clerk,
and the additional fee, if any, necessitated by such increase shall be paid
before any additional space is put to use. (2006 Code § 3-3-5; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   Proration Of Fee: When a license is granted or accommodations are
increased during the license year, the fee shall be prorated on the basis of
the number of months remaining in the license year. (2006 Code § 3-3-6)
   E.   License Year: The license year shall be from May 1 to April 30 of the
following year. (2006 Code § 3-3-7; amd. 2016 Code)
   F.   Revocation Of License: Any licensee violating any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to revocation of his license previously issued
hereunder. (2006 Code § 3-3-14)
3-4-3-2: UTILITIES:
   A.   Water And Sewer Facilities: Each mobile home park shall comply with the
ordinances governing the public water supply and the wastewater systems of the
city. (2006 Code § 3-3-10)
   B.   Garbage And Refuse Collection: The mobile home park shall provide for
the collection and removal of garbage and other household waste, and shall
maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary condition. (2006 Code § 3-3-11)
   C.   Lighting: The mobile home park shall be kept adequately lighted at all
times so that the grounds shall be safe for occupants and visitors. (2006 Code
§ 3-3-12)
3-4-3-3: REGISTER REQUIRED:
The owner of the mobile home park shall at all times maintain a register in
which the name of the owner or other occupant of each mobile home shall be
recorded, together with his permanent address, the state license registration
number of the mobile home, if any, and the license number of the motor vehicle,
if any, which towed the mobile home to the mobile home park, plus the date and
hour of arrival and departure. The register shall at all times be available for
inspection by the mayor and the chief of police. (2006 Code § 3-3-8)
3-4-3-4: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Each licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Illinois mobile
home park act 1  and the regulations promulgated thereunder as now exist and
are hereafter amended.
   B.   Each licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Illinois mobile
home tiedown act 2  and the regulations promulgated thereunder as now exist and
are hereafter amended. (2006 Code § 3-3-13)
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq. 77 Ill. adm. code 860.10 et seq.
2 1. 210 ILCS 120/1 et seq. 77 Ill. adm. code 870.10 et seq.
3-4-4: ZONING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Each mobile home park shall be contained only within a mobile home park
district pursuant to the zoning provisions of the city contained in title 10 of
this code.
   B.   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a plat or
drawing showing the size and location of all spaces and structures. (2006 Code
§ 3-3-4)
3-4-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day a violation occurs or during which a violation continues.
The imposition of a penalty by fine as provided by this section does not
prevent the revocation of any license for any offense which is also cause for
the penalty. (2006 Code § 3-3-15; amd. 2016 Code)
TITLE 4
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Nuisances Prohibited
4-1-2: Nuisances Enumerated
4-1-3: Abatement Provisions
4-1-3-1:    Weeds
4-1-3-2:    Rats
4-1-3-3:    Garbage And Trash
4-1-3-4:    Open Cisterns
4-1-3-5:    Abandoned Wells
4-1-4: Penalty
4-1-1: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
No person shall commit any act or omission that is declared by this chapter to
be a nuisance. (2006 Code §
6-4-2)
4-1-2: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
The following acts or omissions thereof are hereby declared to be nuisances:
   A.   Allowing premises to become nauseous or offensive to persons in the
vicinity, including dilapidation.
   B.   Owning, keeping, or permitting the use of any premises in or on which
cattle or other livestock or other animals shall be confined or kept, so as to
be offensive to those residing in the vicinity or to be in an offensive,
nauseous, or filthy condition.
   C.   Owning, possessing, or permitting the use of any premises for any noisy
or boisterous activity which disturbs the peace of the neighborhood in which
the premises is situated, or which creates a dangerous condition or a condition
detrimental to health.
   D.   Keeping or maintaining any premises for the purpose or encouragement of
any illegal activity.
   E.   Causing to be discharged, placed, or thrown, or causing to flow any
nauseous, foul, offensive, or putrid liquid or substance from any premises to
any street, alley, or adjacent premises. (2006 Code §
6-4-1)
   F.   Allowing to develop any noxious weed of any height, and any other
"weed", hereby defined as to include all rank vegetable growth exceeding eight
inches (8") in height. "Noxious weeds" are hereby defined as those
characterized by the exhalation of unpleasant or noxious odors, or concealing
filthy deposits, or having equivalent characteristics. (Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-
2007)
   G.   Causing or permitting grass, leaves, underbrush, or other combustible
matter to be collected, to be deposited, or to remain on one's premises in such
quantities and in such condition as to materially increase the danger to
property of others from fire.
   H.   Permitting or allowing garbage, junk, trash, debris, or discarded
material or property to exist upon the premises other than in a proper
container.
   I.   Placing, depositing, or storing dirt, rock, brick, rubble, or other
similar used building materials on a residential lot.
   J.   Maintaining an unsightly yard or area where junk, wrecked, or disabled
automobiles, trucks, equipment, or other such matter is allowed to accumulate.
   K.   Obstructing any watercourse, ravine, or gutter so as to cause water to
stagnate therein; or to permit foul or stagnant water to stand upon any
premises to the prejudice of others.
   L.   Obstructing or encroaching upon public highways, streets, alleys, and
sidewalks; or obstructing or encroaching upon private ways to the prejudice of
the owner thereof.
   M.   Allowing rats or a rat harborage to exist on any premises in such
numbers as to constitute an infestation.
   N.   Maintaining or permitting to exist any open "cistern" as, defined in
subsection 4-1-3-4A of this chapter, or any "abandoned well", as defined in
subsection 4-1-3-5A of this chapter.
   O.   Placing, other than on an established pick up day, a burn barrel or
other receptacle used to collect garbage or other refuse, within the front yard
of any premises; or placing such receptacle less than a distance of twenty feet
(20') from any house, or less than five feet (5') from any garage, shed, tree,
power pole, or other burnable object, when such container is used for the
purpose of burning; or placing such receptacle within a side yard or back yard
facing a city street less than fifty feet (50') from the middle of such street;
provided, however, that if the owner or other possessor of premises believes it
to be impossible to avoid the prohibitions of this subsection, such person
shall notify the city and shall request a variance or exception from this
subsection, and the city council may grant or deny such variance or exception.
(2006 Code §
6-4-1)
4-1-3: ABATEMENT PROVISIONS:
4-1-3-1: WEEDS:
   A.   Notice To Abate:
      1.   In the event weeds are allowed to exist on any premises in violation
of this chapter, the city shall cause a notice to abate to be placed on the
premises by a visible sign; and shall serve a weed and trimming notice either
personally on, or by regular mail to, the person whose name and address are
listed on the assessor's records. A mailing notice shall be deemed to have
commenced to run from the date the notice is mailed. A notice shall be deemed
sufficient although the person to whom it is directed refuses delivery or if it
is not deliverable.
      2.   The text of the notice shall contain the date; a brief description
of the violation; the address or other description of the property sufficient
for identification thereof; and a statement that if the weeds are not abated
within five (5) days, the city will provide for the abatement of the weeds, and
the costs and expenses related to such abatement, the filing of a lien, and any
foreclosure of the lien shall be charged to the person described in subsection
A1 of this section.
      3.   Only one weed and trimming notice shall be required to be sent per
property during any one calendar year. In the event any subsequent violation is
observed during the same calendar year, the city may proceed as set forth in
subsection B of this section without further notice.
   B.   Abatement By City: Upon the refusal or neglect to comply with the weed
and trimming notice within five (5) days of its delivery or mailing, the city
shall have the power to enter upon the premises, or to authorize its agent to
do so, and abate the weeds. The city may grant a onetime five (5) day extension
per calendar year to the compliance deadline established in the weed and
trimming notice if requested by the responsible party.
   C.   Costs And Expenses: The actual costs of abatement of the weeds,
eradication of noxious weeds, costs of processing the bill, mailing or serving
documents, recording documents, and any other expense shall be billed to the
person described in subsection A1 of this section on the assessor's records. A
statement for costs shall be served either personally or by regular mail and
shall include:
      1.   A reference to the ordinance violated;
      2.   Identification of the property where the violation occurred
sufficient for the identification thereof;
      3.   The amount of money representing the costs and expenses incurred or
payable for the service;
      4.   The date or dates when the costs and expenses were incurred by the
city; and
      5.   A statement that if the bill is not paid in full within fifteen (15)
days, a late fee will be added to the bill, and the city will prepare and file
a lien with the county recorder. (Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-2007)
   D.   Lien Provisions:
      1.   If said costs and expenses are not paid within fifteen (15) days of
the mailing of the statement, the city may proceed to perfect and enforce a
lien upon the real estate as provided by state law in 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-20-7 and/or 5/11-20-15, as now in force and hereafter amended. A
notice of the lien filed shall be served either personally or by ordinary mail
to the person listed on the assessor's records, informing the person that a
lien has been filed. (Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-2007; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   Upon payment of the costs and expenses and the lien release fee by
any person interested in such property after a notice of the lien has been
filed, the lien shall be released by the city and filed of record as in the
case of filing of the notice of lien.
      3.   The city may proceed to foreclose the lien as authorized by the
statutes of the state of Illinois. The costs of foreclosure incurred by the
city, including all court costs, attorney fees, advances to preserve the
property, and other costs related to the enforcement of the lien, plus
statutory interest where applicable, are a lien on the real estate and are
recoverable by the city from the owner of the subject real estate in addition
to any rights in the property obtained by the foreclosure procedures under the
laws of the state of Illinois.
   E.   Application To Gardens: A notice to abate shall not be issued for weeds
in gardens during the regular growing season. When the city determines that a
garden ceases production, all provisions of this section to abate shall be
enforced. (Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-2007)
4-1-3-2: RATS:
   A.   Notice To Control Or Exterminate: In the event any rat infestation
exists in violation of this chapter, the city shall give a written notice to
the owner, occupant, agent, or other person having control of the premises to
prevent the ingress of rats to the property and to exterminate the rats
therein.
   B.   Control Or Extermination By City: If the ingress of rats to such
property is not blocked or the rats therein not exterminated within a period of
fifteen (15) days after such notice is served, the city or its agent shall have
the power to take the steps necessary to prevent such ingress and to effect
such extermination. (2006 Code §
6-4-4)
   C.   Control And Extermination Costs; Lien Provisions: The expenses incurred
by the city shall be billed to and paid by the owner or such other person
having control of the premises. If the expense is not paid within thirty (30)
days after billing, the city may proceed to perfect and enforce a statutory
lien on the premises as provided by state law in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-20-8 and/or 5/11-20-15, as now or hereafter amended. (2006 Code §
6-4-4; amd. 2016 Code)
   D.   Service Of Notice And Bill: The notice provided by subsection A of this
section and the billing provided by subsection C of this section may be served
personally on the owner, occupant, agent, or other person having control of the
premises, or may be sent by mail to the last known address of such person.
(2006 Code §
6-4-4)
4-1-3-3: GARBAGE AND TRASH:
   A.   Notice To Remove: If any garbage, junk, trash, debris, or discarded
materials or property exists upon the premises other than in a proper
container, the city shall give a written notice to the owner, occupant, agent,
or other person having control of the premises to remove such items from the
premises. The notice shall be reasonably specific in describing the items to be
removed.
   B.   Removal By City: If the items are not removed from the premises within
ten (10) days after the notice is served, the city or its agent shall have the
power to remove all such items from the premises. In addition to or in lieu of
the removal of the items, any person who fails to remove the items after due
notice to do so shall be fined in accordance with this code. (2006 Code §
6-4-5)
   C.   Removal Costs; Lien Provisions: The expense incurred by the city in
removing the items shall be billed to and paid by the owner, or such other
person having control of the premises. If the expense is not paid within thirty
(30) days after billing, the city may proceed to perfect and enforce a
statutory lien on the premises as provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-20-13 and/or 5/11-20-15, as now or hereinafter amended. (2006 Code §
6-4-5; amd. 2016 Code)
   D.   Service Of Notice And Bill: The notice provided by subsection A of this
section and the billing provided by subsection C of this section may be served
personally on the owner, occupant, agent, or other person having control of the
premises, or may be sent by mail to the last known address of such person.
(2006 Code §
6-4-5)
4-1-3-4: OPEN CISTERNS:
   A.   Definition: As used in this chapter, "cistern" means an underground
artificial reservoir or tank designed for storing water.
   B.   Notice To Fill Or Cover; Requirements: Upon written notice by the city
of any open cistern, the owner of the premises shall cause the cistern to be
either completely filled to ground level with suitable solid permanent fill
materials or covered with a proper cap or seal. Suitable solid permanent fill
materials for cisterns shall include sand, gravel, or dirt. No material of a
hazardous, decomposable, or unsanitary nature shall be utilized as fill. A
proper cap or seal for cisterns shall consist of concrete with a thickness of
at least three and one-half inches (31/2") and large enough to cover the entire
opening and overlap at least two inches (2") around the opening.
   C.   Filling Or Covering By City; Costs: If the open cistern is not either
properly filled or properly covered within fifteen (15) days after service of
the written notice, the city shall have the power to enter upon such premises,
or to authorize its agent to do so, and either to properly fill or to properly
cover such cistern. The expense of filling or covering the open cistern by the
city or its agent shall be paid by the owner. If the expense is not paid within
thirty (30) days after notice of such expense has been given to the owner, the
city may proceed to commence legal action against the owner for the collection
of the expenses.
   D.   Service Of Notice And Bill: The notice provided by subsection B of this
section and the billing provided by subsection C of this section may be served
personally on the owner or may be sent by first class mail to the last known
address of the owner, as shown on the assessor's records. (2006 Code §
6-4-6)
4-1-3-5: ABANDONED WELLS:
   A.   Definition: As used in this chapter, "abandoned well" means a potable
water well or any other type of well which is no longer used for the purpose
for which it was intended.
   B.   Notice To Seal; Requirements: Upon written notice by the city of any
abandoned well, the owner shall cause the well to be properly sealed. A proper
seal shall be in accordance with the most current rules of the Illinois
department of public health or other appropriate state agency concerning the
sealing of abandoned wells.
   C.   Sealing By City; Costs: If an abandoned well is not properly sealed
within fifteen (15) days after service of the written notice, the city shall
have the power to enter upon the premises or to authorize its agent to do so,
and to properly seal the well. The expense of sealing the well by the city or
its agent shall be paid by the owner. If the expense is not paid within thirty
(30) days after notice of such expense has been given to the owner, the city
may proceed to commence legal action against the owner for the collection of
the expenses.
   D.   Service Of Notice And Bill: The notice provided by subsection B of this
section and the billing provided by subsection C of this section may be served
personally on the owner or may be sent by first class mail to the last known
address of the owner, as shown on the assessor's records. (2006 Code §
6-4-7)
4-1-4: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
fined in a sum of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (2006 Code §
6-4-9)
ARTICLE A.  INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
4-1A-1: Definition
4-1A-2: Nuisance Declared; Removal Required
4-1A-3: Towing Vehicles
4-1A-4: Request For Hearing
4-1A-5: Release Of Vehicle
4-1A-6: Hearing Procedure
4-1A-7: Exemptions From Provisions
4-1A-8: Penalty
4-1A-1: DEFINITION:
In this article, the term "inoperable motor vehicle" means:
   A.   Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven (7) days,
the engine, wheels, or one or more other part or parts have been removed, or on
which the engine, wheels, or one or more other part or parts have been altered,
damaged, or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven
under its own motor power; or
   B.   Any motor vehicle which is not properly and currently registered in
compliance with the motor vehicle registration requirements of the state of
Illinois; or
   C.   Any motor vehicle for which the required liability insurance coverage
has not been obtained in compliance with the mandatory insurance requirements
of the state of Illinois. (2006 Code §
6-4-8)
   D.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, an inoperable motor vehicle
is not a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being
driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service, repairs,
and which in the opinion of the chief of police, based upon reasonable
information and belief, is a motor vehicle being serviced, conditioned,
repaired and retained for use in an upcoming demolition race or event. (Ord.
2016-11, 8-1-2016)
4-1A-2: NUISANCE DECLARED; REMOVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   All inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or private property,
shall be considered a nuisance. It is unlawful for any person to fail to remove
an inoperable motor vehicle under that person's control after notice from the
city to do so.
   B.   In addition to or in lieu of the towing which is authorized in this
article, any person who fails to remove any inoperable vehicle under that
person's control after due notice shall be subject to the provisions of this
article. (2006 Code §
6-4-8)
4-1A-3: TOWING VEHICLES:
   A.   Pretowing Notice: The city shall serve notice to the address of the
owner of an inoperable motor vehicle as indicated in the most current
registration records of the state of Illinois, or the registration records of
another state, if applicable. If the secretary of state or other appropriate
state official reports that it does not have the name of the owner, or any
other person claiming to have a legal interest in the vehicle, the city shall
publish a notice once each week for two (2) successive weeks in the local
newspaper. The notice shall explain the right to a hearing before the
inoperable motor vehicle is removed. The notice shall state that the inoperable
vehicle will be removed after seven (7) days from issuance of the notice, or
seven (7) days from the date of the last publication if the notice is
published, unless the owner or other person claiming interest in the vehicle
makes a written request for a hearing within that time.
   B.   Authorization For Towing: The towing of vehicles by the city, or its
approved towing service operators, shall be authorized only by the city police
department. Towed vehicles shall be impounded at facilities designated by the
police department until lawfully claimed or disposed of.
   C.   Notice Of Towing And Impoundment:
      1.   Within fifteen (15) days after towing a vehicle pursuant to this
article, a notice of towing and impoundment shall be served at the address of
the owner of the vehicle affording the opportunity for a hearing.
      2.   The notice shall include information explaining the right to a
hearing. If the city has towed a vehicle licensed in another state, inquiry by
computer, telephone, or letter shall be made to the secretary of state or other
appropriate official of that particular jurisdiction for the most current
registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and notice shall be
mailed to the address furnished. If the secretary of state or other appropriate
official reports that it does not have the name of the owner, and the city has
previously published notice pursuant to subsection A of this section and has
not received written response from a person claiming to be the owner or to have
a legal interest in the inoperable vehicle, no further notice is required.
      3.   In each case, the notice shall specify:
         a.   A description of the vehicle;
         b.   The present location of the impounded vehicle;
         c.   The factual basis for the tow and the citation and the language
of the ordinance which authorizes the tow;
         d.   The opportunity to request a hearing and the procedure for filing
a written request for hearing;
         e.   A statement that a request for hearing must be filed within
thirty (30) days from mailing of the notice; and
         f.   The address of the office to which the request for the hearing
must be made.
      4.   Where, upon reasonable inquiry, the owner, lienholder, or other
person entitled to possession of the vehicle cannot be determined, such vehicle
may be disposed of in accordance with state law. (2006 Code §
6-4-8)
4-1A-4: REQUEST FOR HEARING:
   A.   A request for posttow hearing may be made by mail to the office of the
city police department within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the
notification of tow, or release of the vehicle, whichever occurs first;
otherwise, the right to the hearing shall be deemed waived.
   B.   Towing service personnel receiving a request for hearing shall direct
the owner to the city police department.
   C.   Any police department personnel receiving an inquiry for a hearing
shall direct the person making the inquiry to the office of the city police
department. (2006 Code §
6-4-8)
4-1A-5: RELEASE OF VEHICLE:
   A.   Before the owner of any vehicle impounded shall be permitted to remove
the vehicle, the owner or other person entitled to possession shall furnish
evidence of identity and ownership of the vehicle or right to possession, sign
a receipt for the vehicle, and pay the total amount due for towing and storage.
   B.   The owner or other person entitled to possession shall pay fees
established by the towing operator. The owner or other such person may pay the
full amount of fees and subsequently request a hearing.
   C.   The owner may make a written request for hearing at the time of
obtaining the vehicle. In that case, the owner shall submit the written request
by mail to the office of the city police department and shall obtain from the
towing operator immediate release of the vehicle after full payment of all such
fees currently owing. A hearing shall take place within fifteen (15) days after
such release and request unless the vehicle owner requests a later date.
   D.   If the owner wishes a hearing but cannot or does not wish to post the
current amount of towing and storage fees, the owner may submit the written
request for hearing to the office of the city police department and shall allow
the motor vehicle to remain impounded. In such case, the owner may request
either:
      1.   A hearing to be held within seventy two (72) hours of the request,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays; or
      2.   A hearing within fifteen (15) days of such request on a date
acceptable to the vehicle owner, the towing operator, the city police
department, and the city. (2006 Code §
6-4-8)
4-1A-6: HEARING PROCEDURE:
   A.   The owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle towed, or to be
towed, shall be provided the opportunity for a pretow or a posttow hearing to
determine the validity of such tow.
   B.   The city chief of police or another officer designated by him shall be
the hearing officer and shall conduct the hearing. The hearing officer shall
have the authority to require the presence of the person who ordered the tow
and to request the presence of any other witnesses at such hearing.
   C.   The hearing shall take place as follows:
      1.   In those instances where the vehicle has not yet been towed, the
hearing shall take place prior to the towing.
      2.   In those instances where the vehicle has been released upon the full
payment currently owing for towing and storage charges, the hearing shall take
place within fifteen (15) days after the release of such vehicle.
      3.   In those instances where the vehicle is still impounded, the hearing
shall take place within seventy two (72) hours or fifteen (15) days, as set
forth in subsection 4-1A-5D of this article.
   D.   The duties of the hearing officer are as follows:
      1.   The hearing officer shall have the authority to designate a hearing
date and time, and to inform the owner of the date, time and place of the
hearing.
      2.   The hearing officer shall review all evidence presented by the
vehicle owner and the city and make a finding as to the lawful authority of the
tow based upon the preponderance of the evidence presented. The city shall make
a showing of probable cause to establish the validity of the tow in accordance
with city ordinances. The burden of proof shall be on the vehicle owner to show
that the tow was invalid and unauthorized under the cited ordinances. The
decision will uphold the tow unless the owner has shown by a preponderance of
the evidence that the tow was unlawful.
      3.   For each hearing, the hearing officer shall complete a vehicle tow
hearing decision as set forth in subsection E of this section and supply a copy
thereof to the owner by mail.
   E.   After receiving all relevant evidence, within five (5) working days,
the hearing officer shall make one or more of the following written findings,
which must be incorporated into the vehicle tow hearing decision:
      1.   Tow Authorized: The towing and storage of the vehicle was or is
authorized by law.
      2.   Tow Not Authorized: There was no authorization under law for the
towing and storage of the vehicle, or the law enforcement agent causing the
vehicle to be towed did not comply with the requirements of this article
authorizing the tow. The owner may be entitled to total or partial
reimbursement for towing and storage fees, if any. The specific amount due the
owner shall be stated in the decision. Reimbursement in the event of an
unauthorized tow shall be made to the owner by the city.
      3.   Request Not Timely: The request for hearing was not made within
thirty (30) days of the mailing of notice of towing or it was not made on the
date the vehicle was released from the towing company, whichever was earlier.
      4.   Owner Failed To Appear; No Continuance Requested: A hearing was
requested, but the person requesting the hearing failed to appear or failed to
properly request a continuance.
   F.   All vehicle tow hearing decisions, towing reports, and any associated
police reports or documents shall be retained by the city for a period of at
least three (3) years after each hearing, or three (3) years after each tow if
no hearing was requested or held.
   G.   Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, any towing
service operator authorized to perform tows on behalf of the city police
department must perform its services subject to the provisions of this article.
   H.   The hearing shall be conducted according to rules and regulations
promulgated by the city and shall determine the validity of the impoundment or
tow of the vehicle. If the hearing officer sustains the validity of the tow,
the owner or person entitled to possession will be required to pay all unpaid
towing and storage fees before obtaining the release of the vehicle. If the
hearing officer determines the tow to be unauthorized, the towing operator
shall be paid by the owner for towing and storage charges prior to release of
the motor vehicle, and the vehicle owner shall be entitled to prompt
reimbursement by the city. (2006 Code §
6-4-8)
4-1A-7: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Nothing in this article shall apply to:
   A.   Any motor vehicle that is kept totally enclosed within a building when
not in use.
   B.   Operable historical vehicles over twenty five (25) years of age.
   C.   A motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in the
wrecking or junking of motor vehicles and licensed by the state.
   D.   A motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being
driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair
operations. (2006 Code §
6-4-8)
4-1A-8: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined in a sum
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). (2006 Code §
6-4-8)
CHAPTER 2
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definition
4-2-2: Burning Regulations
4-2-3: Penalty
4-2-1: DEFINITION:
The word "person", as used in this chapter, shall include the person conducting
the burning and the owner or other possessor of the property on which the
burning takes place. (2006 Code §
6-7-2)
4-2-2: BURNING REGULATIONS:
   A.   No person shall burn, or allow to be burned, any material within the
city, except landscape waste upon the premises where it is produced and at the
times provided herein. (2006 Code §
6-7-1)
   B.   Burning shall be allowed from January 1 through December 31 of each
year between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. until seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on
Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday of each week.
   C.   Notwithstanding the restrictions of subsection B of this section,
burning shall be allowed: 1) for the purposes of family events, cookouts, use
of fire pits, etc., if approved in advance by the city police department; and
2) for cleanup after a weather related emergency, which state of emergency has
been declared by the mayor. (Ord. 2011-3, 5-2-2011)
   D.   No burning of any landscape waste whatsoever shall be allowed within
the city on any Sunday or Monday.
   E.   Burning shall be considered to continue so long as a fire remains
smoldering.
   F.   The allowance of burning during the times set forth in this section
does not relieve any person from the provisions contained in chapter 1 of this
title prohibiting nuisances. (2006 Code §
6-7-1)
4-2-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), and each day during which any such violation shall occur
shall be deemed a separate offense. (2006 Code §
6-7-3)
CHAPTER 3
POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES
SECTION:
4-3-1: Application Requirements
4-3-2: Filing Fee
4-3-3: Public Comments; City Council Decision
4-3-4: Compliance With State Regulations
4-3-1: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No site location approval for the development or construction of a new
pollution control facility within the city may be granted by the city council
unless an application is filed for approval of such site.
   B.   The application of the proposal shall show sufficient details
describing the proposed facility in order to demonstrate compliance with the
Illinois environmental protection act, plus the applicant shall deposit with
the city clerk at the time of filing the application a filing fee deposit as
follows:
 
Type Of Facility     Required Filing Fee Deposit
Inert waste landfill    $3,000.00
 
Provided, however, that in the event the city is the applicant, no filing fee
deposit will be required. (Ord. 1995-11, 11-6-1995)
4-3-2: FILING FEE:
   A.   Purpose: The filing fee is intended to defray the reasonable and
necessary costs incurred by the city in conducting the siting review process in
order to fulfill the requirements of the Illinois environmental protection act.
   B.   Disposition And Use Of Fee: The city clerk and the city treasurer shall
cause said filing fee deposit to be placed into a noninterest bearing account
within a federally insured financial institution. Records shall be kept of the
expenses incurred by the city and periodically reported to the city council and
the applicant. The city may draw upon the application fee deposit in the amount
of the reported incurred expenses from time to time.
   C.   Supplemental Deposit: In the event that, following any draws from the
filing fee deposit fund, the remaining balance is fifteen percent (15%) or less
of the amount of the original filing fee deposit, the city may, when authorized
by the city council, make written demand upon the applicant for a supplemental
deposit sufficient to return the fund to the amount of the original filing fee
deposit. The applicant shall have ten (10) days following receipt of the demand
in which to make the supplemental deposit with the city clerk. Failure of the
applicant to comply shall entitle the city to inform the applicant that the
city will cease review of the application and will deny the application. (Ord.
1995-11, 11-6-1995)
4-3-3: PUBLIC COMMENTS; CITY COUNCIL DECISION:
Any person may file written comments with the city clerk concerning the
appropriateness of the proposed site for its intended purpose. Such written
comments shall be mailed or delivered to the office of the city clerk, Abingdon
City Hall, 114 East Meek Street, Abingdon, IL 61410, as provided by the
Illinois environmental protection act. The city council shall make the decision
with regard to the application and shall approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the proposed site location. The decision of the city council shall
be by resolution, in writing, in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois
environmental protection act. (Ord. 1995-11, 11-6-1995)
4-3-4: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REGULATIONS:
The application and the proceedings by the city for review and public hearing
shall be in compliance with the Illinois environmental protection act. (Ord.
1995-11, 11-6-1995)
TITLE 5
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Department Created; Composition
5-1-2: Chief Of Police
5-1-3: Oath Of Office
5-1-4: Part Time Police
5-1-5: Temporary Police
5-1-6: General Powers
5-1-7: Personnel Rules
5-1-8: Auxiliary Police
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a department of police, which shall be known as the
ABINGDON POLICE DEPARTMENT. The department shall consist of the chief of
police, who shall be director of the department, and such other police officers
as may be determined from time to time by the city council. (2006 Code §
6-1-1)
5-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Appointment And Term: The chief of police shall be appointed by the
mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, at the second regular
meeting of the city council in May of each year, or as soon thereafter as
practicable. The term of office shall be one year, unless removed for cause and
until the successor shall be appointed and qualified.
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The chief of police shall serve as the chief administrative officer
of the police department and the commanding officer of the city police force,
subject to the mayor and the rules and regulations prescribed by the city
council; and shall be responsible for the performance by the police department
of all its functions including, but not limited to, the enforcement of all
ordinances of the city and all statutes of the state of Illinois effective in
the city, and to preserve order and prevent infraction of the law.
      2.   The chief of police shall be authorized to serve summons and other
process and may grant permission to other officers of the police department to
do so.
      3.   The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations
for the guidance of the members of the department, subject to the approval of
the city council. (2006 Code §
6-1-2)
5-1-3: OATH OF OFFICE:
The chief of police and all members of the police force shall, before they
enter their office, take the oath prescribed for city officers. (2006 Code §
6-1-3)
5-1-4: PART TIME POLICE:
   A.   All part time police officers shall be qualified to enter and
successfully complete any training mandated by the ILETSB.
   B.   Part time police officers shall have all the responsibilities of full
time police officers and such other specific duties as assigned by the general
orders of the police department. Part time police officers shall not be
assigned to supervise or direct full time police officers.
   C.   Part time police officers shall not work more than one thousand three
hundred fifty (1,350) hours within a calendar year. (Ord. 2012-5, 5-21-2012)
   D.   Any person employed as a part time police officer must meet the
following standards:
      1.   Be of good moral character, temperate habits, sound health and
physically able to perform all assigned duties.
      2.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      3.   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      4.   Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
      5.   Possess no prior felony convictions. (Ord. 2012-5, 5-21-2012; amd.
2016 Code)
5-1-5: TEMPORARY POLICE:
Whenever the mayor shall deem it necessary to temporarily increase the number
of police officers, the mayor may appoint in writing one or more reputable
citizens as temporary police officers, whose powers and duties shall be the
same as other police officers. The mayor shall report all such temporary
appointments to the city council at its next regular meeting, and the city
council may continue or discontinue the same in its discretion. The person or
persons so appointed shall receive such reasonable compensation as may be
provided by the city council. (2006 Code §
6-1-4)
5-1-6: GENERAL POWERS:
All persons possessing the power and authority of police officers shall have
the power to arrest in accordance with the laws of the state of Illinois. They
shall also have power within the corporate limits of the city to serve and
execute warrants and other legal process. (2006 Code §
6-1-5)
5-1-7: PERSONNEL RULES:
Each member of the police department shall be subject to the personnel rules
and the personnel policies and procedures of the city contained in the
"Personnel Policies And Procedures Manual". (2006 Code §
6-1-6)
5-1-8: AUXILIARY POLICE:
   A.   The mayor may appoint, with the approval of the city council, at any
time, any number of auxiliary police to serve without pay from the city, to act
as watchmen in and about shops, factories, buildings, parks, cemeteries, and
other places, and to perform such other functions authorized by law. They shall
have all the qualifications required in the case of regular police; except,
that the minimum age requirement shall be eighteen (18) years. They shall take
and subscribe the same oath and exercise the same powers, and be subject to the
rules and regulations of the police department, so far as the same may be
applicable to them, but shall not be paid anything by the city for their
services unless called upon by the mayor to assist the regular police, when, in
such case, they may be paid not to exceed the amount per day paid for like
services performed by other special police. They shall wear their appropriate
identification when performing any official duty.
   B.   The mayor may, from time to time, set a limit on the auxiliary police
force as to the number of persons who shall be members thereof. (2006 Code § 6-
1-7)
   C.   All auxiliary police officers shall be trained in accordance with
ILETSB requirements. (Ord. 2010-8, 12-6-2010)
   D.   No member of the auxiliary police force shall carry arms except when so
authorized by specific order of the mayor or chief of police and unless they
have successfully completed the forty (40) hour mandatory firearms training
course; and no member under the age of twenty one (21) shall be so authorized.
(2006 Code § 6-1-7; amd. Ord. 2010-8, 12-6-2010)
   E.   No member of the auxiliary police shall wear auxiliary police
identification when not on duty. (2006 Code § 6-1-7)
   F.   Auxiliary police officers, when on duty, shall be conservators of the
peace and shall have the powers specified in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
3.1-15-25. (Ord. 2010-8, 12-6-2010; amd. 2016 Code)
   G.   The auxiliary police shall be bound by rules and regulations of the
city council or, in the absence of any applicable rule or regulation, then by
orders of the mayor or the chief of police.
   H.   The auxiliary police may adopt rules and regulations, but they shall
not become effective until approved by the city council. (2006 Code § 6-1-7)
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
ARTICLE A.  NUISANCES GENERALLY
SECTION:
5-1A-1: Nuisance Designated
5-1A-2: County Health Department Powers
5-1A-3: Notice To Abate
5-1A-4: Declaration Of Nuisance By Board
5-1A-5: Abatement Without Notice
5-1A-6: Assistance To Abate Authorized
5-1A-7: Recovery Of Expenses
5-1A-8: Authority To Enter On Property
5-1A-1: NUISANCE DESIGNATED:
Anything which is injurious to the health or morals or indecent or offensive to
the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is declared a nuisance and as
such shall be abated. (1997 Code § 8.28.010)
5-1A-2: COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT POWERS:
   A.   Powers: The county health department has the full power to take all
measures necessary to promote the health and cleanliness, to abate all
nuisances of every description on public and private property; to prevent the
introduction of spreading within the town of malignant, contagious and
infectious diseases and to remove, detain, isolate or quarantine any person or
persons attacked by or having any such disease, or having been exposed thereto;
to promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to perform its
functions.
   B.   Enforcement Authority: The county health department shall have the
authority to enforce such rules of the health department of the state as are
applicable to particular situations. (1997 Code § 8.28.020)
5-1A-3: NOTICE TO ABATE:
Any state of things prohibited by this article shall be deemed a nuisance and
any person who shall hereafter make or cause such nuisance to exist shall be
deemed the author thereof; provided, that any person who shall have possession
or control of any private ground or premises, whether he is owner thereof or
not, in or upon which any such nuisance shall exist or may be found, whether
such nuisance has been heretofore or shall be hereafter created, shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense, as the author of a nuisance, for every
period of forty eight (48) hours continuance of such nuisance after due notice
given to abate the same. The written notice of forty eight (48) hours may be
given and served by the chief of police or other officers as he may designate.
(1997 Code § 8.28.030)
5-1A-4: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE BY BOARD:
In the event that any such nuisance within or upon any private premises or
grounds is not abated forthwith after the notice herein provided shall be
given, the board of trustees may declare the same to be a nuisance and order
the chief of police to abate the same, which order shall be executed without
delay; and the chief of police shall have the authority to call for the
necessary assistance therefor. (1997 Code § 8.28.040)
5-1A-5: ABATEMENT WITHOUT NOTICE:
In case of any such nuisance in or upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk,
highway or public grounds in the town, the chief of police or town
administrator may abate the same forthwith without such notice given. (1997
Code § 8.28.050)
5-1A-6: ASSISTANCE TO ABATE AUTHORIZED:
Any officer who shall be duly authorized to abate any nuisance specified in
this article shall have authority to engage the necessary assistance, and incur
the necessary expenses thereof. (1997 Code § 8.28.060)
5-1A-7: RECOVERY OF EXPENSES:
The expense incurred by the town in abating any nuisance may be recovered back
by proper action from the creator thereof. (1997 Code § 8.28.070)
5-1A-8: AUTHORITY TO ENTER ON PROPERTY:
The mayor, chief of police, trustees or any other persons who may be directed
or deputized by the board of trustees may enter upon or into any lot, house or
other building or premises, with proper respect for the occupant's and owner's
constitutional rights, to examine the same and to ascertain whether any such
nuisance exists, and shall be free from any action or liability on account
thereof. The inspection shall be made at reasonable hours after twenty four
(24) hours' written notice to the owner or occupant, unless exigent
circumstances exist that require immediate action. Said notice shall be
delivered to the owner and occupant and posted on the premises where the public
nuisance exists. If the owner or occupant cannot be found after reasonable
inquiry, posting shall be sufficient notice. Said twenty four (24) hour notice
can be waived upon consent of the owner or occupant. (Ord. 527, 8-3-2015)
ARTICLE B.  SPECIFIC NUISANCES
SECTION:
5-1B-1: Unwholesome Businesses
5-1B-2: Junkyards And Dumping Grounds
5-1B-3: Discharge Of Nauseous Liquids
5-1B-4: Stale Matter
5-1B-5: Sewer Inlet
5-1B-6: Slaughterhouse
5-1B-7: Dead Animals, Removal
5-1B-8: Stagnant Ponds
5-1B-9: Open Wells, Cisterns Or Excavations
5-1B-10: Noisemaking Devices To Attract Children
5-1B-11: Handbills, Posters And Placards
5-1B-12: Solicitors And Transient Vendors
5-1B-13: Storage Of Grain
5-1B-1: UNWHOLESOME BUSINESSES:
Offensive or unwholesome businesses or establishments are prohibited. From and
after the effective date hereof, it is unlawful for any person of any kind to
allow or suffer upon his premises or any premises which he is entitled to
possess any offensive or unwholesome business or establishment within the town,
or within one mile beyond the outer limits of the town as such outer limits are
now, or may be hereafter, constituted. (1997 Code § 8.32.010)
5-1B-2: JUNKYARDS AND DUMPING GROUNDS:
All places used or maintained as junkyards, or dumping grounds, or for the
wrecking or disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any
kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn out, wrecked or abandoned
automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers, boats and house trailers, or machinery
of any kind, or of any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of
any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other persons,
which places are kept in such manner as to essentially interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others, are declared to be a
nuisance. (1997 Code § 8.32.020)
5-1B-3: DISCHARGE OF NAUSEOUS LIQUIDS:
It is unlawful to discharge out of or from, or permit to flow from any house or
place, foul or nauseous liquid or substance of any kind whatsoever, into or
upon any adjacent ground or lot, or into any street, alley or public place in
the town. (1997 Code § 8.32.030)
5-1B-4: STALE MATTER:
It is unlawful to keep, collect or use or cause to be kept, collected or used
in the town any stale, putrid or stinking fat or grease or other matter. (1997
Code § 8.32.040)
5-1B-5: SEWER INLET:
It is unlawful to deposit in or throw into any sewer, sewer inlet or privy
vault that shall have a sewer connection, any article whatsoever that might
cause such sewer, sewer inlet or privy vault, to become nauseous or offensive
to others or injurious to public health. (1997 Code § 8.32.050)
5-1B-6: SLAUGHTERHOUSE:
No slaughterhouse or other place for slaughtering animals shall be kept within
the town. (1997 Code § 8.32.060)
5-1B-7: DEAD ANIMALS, REMOVAL:
When any animal shall die in the town, it shall be the duty of the owner or
keeper thereof to remove the body of such animal forthwith beyond the limits of
the town. If such body shall not forthwith be removed, the same shall be deemed
a nuisance, and such owner or keeper shall cause a nuisance to exist. When the
body of any such dead animal shall be in any street, highway or public grounds
in the town, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause such body to
be removed forthwith beyond the limits of the town. (1997 Code § 8.32.070)
5-1B-8: STAGNANT PONDS:
Any cellar, vault, drain, sewer, pond of water, or other place, upon or within
any private premises or grounds, in the town, that shall be nauseous or
offensive to others, or injurious to public health, through an accumulation or
deposition of nauseous, offensive or foul water, or other substances, shall be
deemed a nuisance. This applies in all cases for which no other specific
provisions are made in this article or any other ordinance of the town. (1997
Code § 8.32.080)
5-1B-9: OPEN WELLS, CISTERNS OR EXCAVATIONS:
It is declared that excavations exceeding five feet (5') in depth, cisterns and
wells or an excavation used for storage of water are public nuisances unless
the same are adequately covered with a locked lid, or other covering weighing
at least sixty (60) pounds or are securely fenced with a solid fence to a
height of at least five feet (5') and it is unlawful for any person to permit
such nuisance to remain on premises owned or occupied by him. (1997 Code §
8.32.090)
5-1B-10: NOISEMAKING DEVICES TO ATTRACT CHILDREN:
The use of bells, whistles, sirens, music horns or any other noisemaking
devices for the purpose of attracting children or minors to any vehicle upon
the streets, highways, rights of way, alleys or public ways of the town for the
purpose of selling, distributing or giving away any product whatsoever, to such
minors, is declared to be a public nuisance and hazard and is expressly
prohibited and shall be unlawful, excepting such activities carried on as part
of duly authorized public parades or processions. (1997 Code § 8.32.100)
5-1B-11: HANDBILLS, POSTERS AND PLACARDS:
Any handbill, poster, placard or painted or printed matter which shall be
stuck, posted or pasted upon any public or private house, store or other
buildings, or upon any fence, power pole, telephone pole, or other structure
without the permission of the owner, agent or occupant of the house, shall be
deemed a nuisance. (1997 Code § 8.32.110)
5-1B-12: SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT VENDORS:
   A.   Invitation Required: The practice of going in and upon private
residences, business establishments or offices in the town by solicitors,
peddlers, hawkers, itinerant and transient vendors of merchandise, not having
been requested or invited so to do by the owner or owners, occupant or
occupants of such private residences, business establishments or offices for
the purpose of soliciting orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise or
for the purpose of disposing of or peddling or hawking the same, is declared to
be a nuisance and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor.
   B.   Enforcement: The law enforcement officers of the town are required and
directed to suppress the same, and to abate any such nuisance as directed in
subsection A of this section; provided, however, that it is intended that the
provisions of this section shall apply to practices described in subsection A
of this section which are conducted by itinerants and transients and not by
those who have been requested or invited by the owner or occupant of private
residences, business establishments or offices; provided, further, that the
provisions of this section shall not apply to farmers selling any food item
raised or produced by them, provided such food item or items show reasonable
health standards. (1997 Code § 8.32.120)
5-1B-13: STORAGE OF GRAIN:
It is determined and declared that storage of grain in open lots, and storage
of grain in buildings or bins in residential areas in the town is unsafe to the
health of the community; that such storage endangers the health of the
community, and it is declared that the remedying of such condition insofar as
it is possible to do so at this time is in the public interest, and this
section is to aid in its remedy.
   A.   Open Areas: No grain shall henceforth be stored in the open within the
corporate limits of the town.
   B.   Buildings Or Bins: No grain shall henceforth be stored in buildings or
bins, within the following described part of the town:
Commencing at the intersection of First Street with the West City Limit Line of
said Town, and running thence along First Street East to the east line of Itea
Street; thence North along the east line of Itea Street and its northerly
projection to Eighth Street or its easterly projection, thence West along
Eighth Street to the West side of Custer Street and its Northerly projection,
thence North to the North line of Block 9, Hueske Addition to the Town of
Akron, thence West along the North line of the Hueske Addition to the City
Limit Line of said Town; thence South along said Line to the point of
beginning.
   (1997 Code § 8.32.130)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-2-1: Interpretation
5-2-2: Animals At Large
5-2-3: Confinement Of Animals
5-2-4: Treatment Of Animals
5-2-5: Nuisance Animals
5-2-6: Dogs Or Cats In Heat
5-2-7: Dead Animals
5-2-8: Animal Houses
5-2-9: Removal Of Waste Matter
5-2-10: Dangerous Animals
5-2-11: Burning Animal Matter Prohibited
5-2-12: Rabies Control
5-2-13: Abingdon Fall Festival; Farm Animals
5-2-14: Impoundment Liabilities
5-2-15: Exemptions From Provisions
5-2-16: Penalties
5-2-1: INTERPRETATION:
Unless the context dictates otherwise, any reference within the provisions of
this chapter to "animal" or "animals" shall include dogs, cats, livestock,
poultry, fish, birds, and reptiles. (2006 Code § 6-5-26)
5-2-2: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
   A.   Dogs, Cats And Domestic Pets:
      1.   Running At Large Prohibited: No person shall own or keep any dog,
cat, or other animal as a domestic pet which is at large within the city. Any
such animal which goes onto any public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public
place, or onto any private property other than that of the owner or keeper of
such animal, shall be deemed to be at large, unless such animal is firmly held
on a leash, or is in an enclosed vehicle, or is then and there under the
complete control of a competent person.
      2.   Impoundment And Disposition:
         a.   Any such animal found at large shall be impounded by the animal
control officer; provided, however, that any fierce, vicious dog or other
animal which cannot safely be captured may be slain by the animal control
officer or by any police officer.
         b.   Impoundment shall be at the animal shelter of the Knox County
Humane Society in Galesburg, Illinois. (2006 Code §
6-5-13)
   B.   Livestock:
      1.   Running At Large, Tying To Graze Prohibited: No cattle, horses,
swine, sheep, goats, poultry or other livestock or animals shall run at large
within the city. No person shall picket or tie any such animal in any of the
streets of the city for the purpose of grazing or feeding.
      2.   Impoundment, Redemption And Disposition: Any animal running at large
or improperly tied shall be impounded by the animal control officer or any
member of the city police department. Any animal so impounded shall be taken to
the premises of a duly licensed doctor of veterinary medicine for proper care.
All charges imposed by such doctor of veterinary medicine shall be paid to the
city by the owner or custodian of the animal, and the animal shall not be
redeemed and released by the doctor of veterinary medicine until such charges
have been paid. The procedure for payment and redemption shall be the same as
that provided in subsection A of this section. If the owner or custodian in
control of any animal still impounded fails to redeem such animal within five
(5) days, the doctor of veterinary medicine shall dispose of said animal by
sale or humane killing and shall bill the city for any charges remaining unpaid
after applying any sale proceeds first to such charges. Dogs, cats, and other
animals which are domestic pets shall be governed by subsection A of this
section. (2006 Code §
6-5-7)
5-2-3: CONFINEMENT OF ANIMALS:
The owner or custodian of any animal shall keep such animal confined to his own
premises if necessary to avoid annoyance or disturbance in the neighborhood.
(2006 Code §
6-5-6)
5-2-4: TREATMENT OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Food And Water: The owner or keeper of any animal shall provide food
and water of adequate quality for animals in accordance with the needs of such
animal. (2006 Code § 6-5-16)
   B.   Shelter: The owner or custodian of any animal shall provide adequate
shelter from the elements for such animal. For such animals which are kept out
of doors, adequate shelter shall be a structure with a top and enclosed sides,
except for an opening large enough for the passage of such animal. (2006 Code §
6-5-17)
   C.   Veterinary Care: The owner of any animal shall, when necessary to
prevent suffering of such animal, provide veterinary care for such animal.
(2006 Code § 6-5-18)
   D.   Cruelty To Or Endangering Animals: No person shall be cruel to any
animal. No person shall throw or deposit any poisonous substance on any exposed
or private place where it may endanger any animal. (2006 Code § 6-5-19)
   E.   Abandonment: No person shall abandon any animal within the city. (2006
Code § 6-5-20)
5-2-5: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
Any person, firm or corporation who keeps or maintains any animal herein
mentioned within the corporate limits of the city shall do so in such a manner
that no nuisance is created thereby and no inconvenience or disturbance results
to persons living in the vicinity, by reason of noise, odor or other cause.
(2006 Code §
6-5-2)
5-2-6: DOGS OR CATS IN HEAT:
The owner or keeper of any female dog or cat shall, during the period when said
female dog or cat is in heat, keep said female dog or cat confined so that said
female dog or cat cannot come into contact with male dogs or cats except for
the purpose of planned breeding. (2006 Code §
6-5-9)
5-2-7: DEAD ANIMALS:
   A.   Prohibited Disposal: No person shall deposit, place or throw any dead
or fatally sick or injured animal or part thereof onto any public or private
place, or into any reservoir, or on the banks of any stream, lake, pond, sewer,
well, or other body of water. (2006 Code § 6-5-22)
   B.   Burial: All dead animals, or parts thereof, may be buried at a distance
of not less than one hundred feet (100') of any residence or well, and the
carcass shall be placed underground and well covered with dirt at least four
feet (4') underground to the upper part of the carcass. (2006 Code § 6-5-23)
   C.   Immediate Disposal: No person shall fail to dispose immediately of any
dead animal found upon the property under such person's possession or control.
(2006 Code § 6-5-24)
   D.   Transporting: No person shall carry or convey any dead animal along any
street, alley or public place, unless the same is so covered that no part of it
is exposed to view and no odor emanates therefrom. (2006 Code § 6-5-25)
5-2-8: ANIMAL HOUSES:
   A.   Location: No doghouse, shelter, kennel, dog run or other such structure
used to house dogs or any other animal shall be so located so that any portion
of any such doghouse, shelter, kennel, dog run, or other such structure is
closer than ten feet (10') from the line of the adjoining property. (2006 Code
§ 6-5-14)
   B.   Clean And Sanitary Premises: The owner or custodian of any animal shall
maintain the premises wherein such animal is kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, free from rodents, vermin and disagreeable odors. (2006 Code § 6-5-
15)
5-2-9: REMOVAL OF WASTE MATTER:
The owner or keeper of any animal which deposits fecal waste on any public
place or private property other than that of the owner or keeper shall be
responsible for the removal of any solid waste material deposited by such
animal while on any such public place or private property. (2006 Code §
6-5-10)
5-2-10: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
The members of the police department and the animal control officer are
authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any kind when necessary for the
protection of any person. (2006 Code §
6-5-8)
5-2-11: BURNING ANIMAL MATTER PROHIBITED:
No person shall burn any feathers, hides, or any other animal matter within the
city. (2006 Code § 6-5-21)
5-2-12: RABIES CONTROL:
   A.   Dogs:
      1.   Rabies Inoculation Required: No dog shall be on any public street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public place or on the private property of any person
unless said dog shall have a collar firmly attached around its neck with a tag
attached evidencing a current rabies inoculation in accordance with the
provisions of the Illinois animal control act 1  and any person owning or
having in such person's custody or control a dog which does not have a collar
firmly attached around its neck with a tag attached evidencing a current rabies
inoculation in accordance with said animal control act shall keep such dog
confined in an enclosed area on such person's premises at all times. (2006 Code
§
6-5-11)
      2.   Dog Bites To Humans: The owner or person having custody of any dog
which bites any human being shall notify the city animal control officer and
the county administrator for animal control within twenty four (24) hours;
shall keep such dog locked up in an enclosure for a period of ten (10) days
following the time the dog has bitten the human; and shall have the dog
examined by a licensed doctor of veterinary medicine at the beginning and end
of said ten (10) day period. (2006 Code §
6-5-12)
   B.   Cats:
      1.   Rabies Inoculation Required: No cat more than six (6) months of age
owned by a person or in that person's custody or control shall be on any public
street, sidewalk, alley or other public place, or on the private property of
any person other than such owner or custodian, unless said cat shall have a
collar firmly attached around its neck with a tag evidencing a current rabies
inoculation attached. Any person owning or having in his custody or control a
cat which does not have such a collar firmly attached around its neck with a
tag evidencing a current rabies inoculation shall keep such cat confined in an
enclosed area on such person's premises at all times. (2006 Code §
6-5-4)
      2.   Cat Bites To Humans: The owner or person having custody of any cat
which bites any human being shall notify the city health officer or the city
animal control officer within twenty four (24) hours; shall keep such cat
locked up in an enclosure for a period of ten (10) days following the time the
cat has bitten the human; and shall have the cat examined by a duly licensed
doctor of veterinary medicine at the beginning and end of said ten (10) day
period. (2006 Code §
6-5-5)
   C.   Animals Other Than Dogs And Cats Biting Humans: The owner or person
having custody of any animal (other than a dog or cat) which bites any human
being shall follow the procedure prescribed in subsection B2 of this section
for a bite by a cat. (2006 Code §
6-5-3; amd. 2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
5-2-13: ABINGDON FALL FESTIVAL; FARM ANIMALS:
The association conducting the annual Abingdon Fall Festival and the annual
calf sale and weigh in shall be permitted to bring livestock, poultry and other
farm animals within the city limits in such area as designated by the mayor or
by the city council, and subject to the other provisions of this chapter. (2006
Code § 6-5-27)
5-2-14: IMPOUNDMENT LIABILITIES:
   A.   City: Whenever any animal is impounded pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, no provision herein shall be construed to imply any duty on the
animal control officer, health officer, chief of police, any member of the city
police department, any doctor of veterinary medicine or any official, employee
or agent of the city, or any other person who takes action pursuant to the
provisions herein, to inquire into the ownership of any animal so impounded or
to notify any owner or keeper thereof that said animal has been impounded,
unless the owner's or keeper's name and address or telephone number shall be
affixed to a collar or tag firmly attached to such animal, and in such event,
reasonable notice shall be given by the city animal control officer to such
person. (2006 Code § 6-5-28)
   B.   Owner Or Pound Keeper: Each owner or keeper of an animal which has been
impounded at the animal shelter of the Knox County Humane Society in Galesburg,
Illinois, as provided in subsection 5-2-2A of this chapter shall be liable to
the city for all fees, costs, and other expenses charged to the city by the
Knox County Humane Society by reason of the impoundment. Upon notification by
the city to such owner or keeper as to the amount(s) incurred, the owner or
keeper shall reimburse the city within ten (10) days from such notification.
Upon failure to remit such amount(s) to the office of the city clerk within
such ten (10) days, the amount(s) may be included as an item of restitution in
addition to the fine provided by section
5-2-16 of this chapter in an ordinance prosecution, or the city may seek such
restitution against the owner or keeper in a civil action. (2006 Code § 6-5-31)
5-2-15: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Upon a proper showing, and upon due and convincing proof being made to the city
council of unique and unusual circumstances under which the strict enforcement
of this chapter would result in extreme and particular hardship for the person,
firm or corporation involved, the city council may grant special permission to
such person, firm or corporation to do some act contrary to the letter of this
chapter; provided, that such permission may be granted only after a public
hearing has been held by the city council after notice of the time and place of
such hearing has been published at least one time in a secular newspaper of
general circulation published regularly in the city, said notice to be
published not less than ten (10) days prior to such hearing. A fee of fifteen
dollars ($15.00) shall accompany any request for such special permission. (2006
Code § 6-5-29)
5-2-16: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of section
5-2-2 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as follows:
      1.   Not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for a first offense;
      2.   Not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) and not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a second offense, whether or not the
violation involves the same or a different animal;
      3.   Not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a third offense, whether or not the
violation involves the same or a different animal; and
      4.   Not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each succeeding offense, whether or not the
violation involves the same or a different animal.
   B.   Any person violating any other provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and each day during which any such
violation shall occur shall be deemed a separate offense. (2006 Code § 6-5-30)
ARTICLE A.  VICIOUS DOGS
SECTION:
5-2A-1: Definitions
5-2A-2: Keeping Vicious Dogs
5-2A-2-1:    Determination Of Vicious Dog
5-2A-2-2:    Licensing Requirements
5-2A-2-3:    Confinement Requirements
5-2A-2-4:    Impoundment; Redemption; Disposition
5-2A-2-5:    Reporting Requirements Of Licensee
5-2A-2-6:    Signs Posted
5-2A-2-7:    Spaying Or Neutering Required
5-2A-2-8:    Failure To Comply
5-2A-2-9:    Revocation Of License
5-2A-2-10:    Exemptions
5-2A-2-11:    Penalties
5-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ANIMAL: Any and all types of animals, both domesticated and wild, male and
female, singular and plural.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner and not under the immediate control of
either the owner or a person the owner has designated to be in control.
However, if an animal under the control of a city official or veterinarian
escapes and runs loose, it shall not be considered "at large".
BITE OR BITING: The infliction of a break in the skin or a wound by the teeth
of an animal.
CONFINEMENT STRUCTURE: A securely locked pen, kennel or structure of at least
six feet (6') in height designed and constructed for the keeping of a vicious
dog and designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards
set forth herein. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a
secure top attached to the sides, as well as be suitable to prevent the entry
of young children. All structures used to confine vicious dogs must be locked
with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure and
left unattended. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to
the sides of the pen, or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground
not less than two feet (2'). All structures erected to house vicious dogs must
comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All such
structures must be adequately lighted, ventilated and kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS: Shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following:
   A.   Overloading, overdriving, overworking, beating, torturing, abusing,
tormenting, knowingly poisoning, knowingly attempting to poison, mutilating or
killing any animal, or causing or knowingly permitting the same to be done.
   B.   Working any old, lame, infirm, sick or disabled animal, or causing or
knowingly permitting the same to be done.
   C.   Unnecessarily failing to provide an animal in one's charge or custody
as owner or otherwise with proper food, drink and sanitary shelter.
   D.   Abandoning any old, lame, infirm, sick or disabled animal by leaving
such animal on any highway or public way or in any other place where it may
suffer injury, hunger, exposure or become a public charge.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any individual dog which, when either unmuzzled, unleashed, or
unattended by its owner, or a member of its owner's family, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack
upon streets, sidewalks, any public grounds or places, or private property not
owned or controlled by the owner.
DOG: Any and all animals of the canine species.
FIGHT: A prearranged conflict between two (2) or more animals but does not
include a conflict that is unorganized or accidental.
IMPOUNDED: Taken into the custody of the public pound in the city.
K-9 PATROL DOG OR POLICE DOG: A professionally trained dog used by law
enforcement officers for law enforcement purposes and activities. Such dogs are
defined by their law enforcement function and do not include dogs privately
owned by a law enforcement officer that are not trained and used for actual law
enforcement.
LEASH: A cord, chain, rope, strap or other such physical restraint having a
minimum tensile strength of not less than three hundred (300) pounds.
MUZZLE: A device constructed of strong, soft material or a metal muzzle
designed to prevent the dog from biting any person or animal. The muzzle must
be made in a manner which will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with
its vision or respiration, but must prevent it from biting any person or
animal.
NIP: To pinch or squeeze with teeth with no breaking of the skin or tissue.
OWNER: A. Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department owning,
harboring or keeping an animal within the city.
   B.   For purposes of this article, the person last issued a dog license
shall be presumed to be the owner of such dog.
   C.   A person harboring or keeping an unlicensed animal in the city for a
period of five (5) days shall be presumed to be the owner of such animal.
RUN LINE: A system of tying a dog in place with either a rope or chain having a
minimum tensile strength of not less than three hundred (300) pounds and not
exceeding ten feet (10') in length. The rope or chain must be securely fastened
to a permanent, nonmovable object and must prevent the dog from climbing,
digging, jumping or otherwise escaping under its own volition.
SEVERE INJURY: Any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring
lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery.
TAKE: To hunt, shoot, pursue, lure, kill, destroy, capture, gig or spear, trap
or ensnare, or harass, or to attempt to do so.
TRAP: To capture, or attempt to capture, by setting or placing a leghold trap,
body gripping trap, cage or live trap or other similar device to capture, hold
or kill game or furbearing animals.
VICIOUS DOG: A. Any individual dog that, when unprovoked, bites or attacks a
human being or other animal either on public or private property.
   B.   In addition to subsection A of this definition, any individual dog
because it:
      1.   Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack without
provocation, to cause injury, or to otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or domestic animals; or
      2.   Is owned or harbored primarily, or in part, for the purpose of
dogfighting or is trained for dogfighting; or
      3.   Is reported to be a dangerous dog upon two (2) separate occasions.
   C.   No dog shall be deemed "vicious" if it bites, attacks, or menaces a
trespasser on the property of its owner, anyone assaulting its owner, anyone
who has tormented or abused it, or is a professionally trained dog used for law
enforcement or guard duties. (Ord. 2015-17, 11-16-2015)
5-2A-2: KEEPING VICIOUS DOGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, own, or in any way possess
within the corporate limits of the city a vicious dog, subject to the
exceptions and standards of this section. (Ord. 2015-17, 11-16-2015)
5-2A-2-1: DETERMINATION OF VICIOUS DOG:
   A.   Investigation; Notice Requirements:
      1.   Any law enforcement officer or animal control officer employed by or
under contract with the city who suspects that a dog may be vicious within the
meaning of this article may conduct an investigation to determine whether or
not the dog has committed any act or displays any characteristics which qualify
it as a vicious dog. If, upon the completion of such investigation, the officer
concludes that the dog is a vicious dog, such officer shall issue a written
notice of determination which includes at least the following:
         a.   A description of the dog.
         b.   Information available concerning the ownership of the dog.
         c.   A statement or conclusion that the dog is a vicious dog within
the meaning of this article.
         d.   A description of the investigation conducted by the officer and
what acts or characteristics discovered during the investigation led the
officer to conclude that the dog is a vicious dog.
         e.   Notice to the owner that the vicious dog must be licensed and
housed in accordance with the requirements of this article.
         f.   Notice that the owner may appeal the determination of the officer
to the mayor or his designee within ten (10) days after the determination is
served upon the owner.
      2.   The officer shall serve the notice of determination on the owner by
United States mail, postage prepaid, by hand delivery to the owner or by
depositing same in a United States postal mailbox in Abingdon, Illinois, to the
last known address of the owner. The notice shall be deemed served on the third
day from the date of mailing.
   B.   Appeals: The owner may appeal any determination that the owner's dog is
a vicious dog. An appeal must be directed to the mayor and filed in the office
of the city clerk within ten (10) days after service of the notice of
determination which identifies the dog as a vicious dog. Should the owner fail
to appeal the determination within ten (10) days, the determination of the
investigating officer that the dog is a vicious dog shall become final. Upon
filling of an appeal, the mayor, or his designee, shall convene a hearing
before the city council for the purpose of determining whether the dog in
question is a vicious dog.
   C.   Hearing: The hearing of an owner's appeal shall be held within twenty
one (21) days of the date on which the appeal is filed. The mayor or his
designee shall serve a notice of the time, date and location of the hearing
upon the owner of the allegedly vicious dog at least five (5) business days
before the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted informally and shall remain
open to the public. At the hearing, the owner shall have the opportunity to
present evidence to explain why the dog should not be declared a vicious dog.
The owner shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel at the
owner's expense. The officer who made the initial determination that the dog is
vicious, and any other persons having knowledge of the facts and circumstances,
may be heard by the mayor or his designee and shall be subject to cross
examination by the owner or the owner's attorney. The city council shall decide
all issues for or against the owner of the dog regardless of whether the owner
appears at the hearing.
   D.   Decision: Within five (5) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the
city council shall determine whether or not the dog is a vicious dog within the
meaning of this article. The mayor or his designee shall notify the owner in
writing of the city council's determination. The decision of the city council
shall be final. (Ord. 2015-17, 11-16-2015)
5-2A-2-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: No person shall possess any vicious dog for a period
of more than fifteen (15) days after the dog's designation as vicious is final
without having first obtained an annual vicious dog license therefor from the
city.
   B.   Application For License: An application for a license to possess a
vicious dog shall be filed with the city clerk on a form prescribed and
provided by the city and shall be accompanied by all of the following:
      1.   Verification of the identity of the owner and current mailing and
residential address and by providing a photostatic copy of the owner's driver's
license.
      2.   Proof of ownership of the vicious dog.
      3.   A copy of the current immunization and health record of the vicious
dog prepared by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state of Illinois.
      4.   A certificate of insurance evidencing coverage in an amount not less
than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), insuring said person against
any claim, loss, damage or injury to persons, domestic animals, or property
resulting from the acts, whether intentional or unintentional, of the vicious
dog.
      5.   A photograph of the vicious dog to be licensed taken not less than
one month before the date of the application, together with proof that the
vicious dog has been affixed with a microchip implant sufficient for the city
to identify the vicious dog.
      6.   A license fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      7.   Such other information as may be required by the city clerk.
   C.   Inspection Of Premises: Upon receipt of an application, the city clerk
shall forward such application to the police department and the animal control
officer, who shall cause an inspection of the premises on which the vicious dog
shall be kept to determine that there has been compliance by the applicant with
all provisions of this section
5-2A-2 relating to confinement and posting of signs. Upon completion of the
inspection, the code enforcement inspector shall notify the city clerk of the
results of its inspection.
   D.   Approval Or Denial Of License: Upon receipt of the results of the
inspection, the city clerk shall notify the applicant of the approval or denial
of the license. In the event that the license is denied, the notification shall
be provided in writing and the reasons for such denial shall be stated. Upon
denial, the owner or keeper of the vicious dog shall remedy the reasons for
denial, if possible, and immediately reapply within forty eight (48) hours, or
remove the vicious dog from the city within forty eight (48) hours. Upon
approval, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant.
   E.   Term Of License: A vicious dog license expires annually. No one shall
own, possess, keep or maintain a vicious dog without applying annually for a
new vicious dog license as provided in this section to avoid owning,
possessing, or maintaining a vicious dog for which the license has expired.
(Ord. 2015-17, 11-16-2015)
5-2A-2-3: CONFINEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Compliance With Provisions: No person shall possess any vicious dog
unless the vicious dog is confined in accordance with this section. Any owner
who has appealed a determination that a dog is vicious shall temporarily
confine such dog in accordance with this section until a final determination
regarding such appeal is issued. In the event of the failure of the owner to
comply with the terms of this subsection, then the officer shall, within a
reasonable time, notify the owner of the facts and circumstances relating to
failure of the owner to comply and immediately impound the vicious dog until
the determination of the impoundment. Upon a determination that the dog is a
vicious dog, the owner shall be responsible for all costs of impoundment.
   B.   Manner Of Confinement:
      1.   Confinement Indoors: No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio or
in any part of a house or structure that would allow the vicious dog to exit
the structure on its own volition. No vicious dog shall be kept in a house or
structure when the windows are open or when screened windows or screened doors
are the only obstacle preventing the vicious dog from exiting the structure.
      2.   Confinement In Exterior Yard: No person shall confine a vicious dog
in an exterior area unless such vicious dog is confined in a confinement
structure constructed and maintained in accordance with this section; except,
that a vicious dog may be confined outside of a confinement structure in a
manner set forth in subsection B3 of this section. Such a confinement structure
must be located in an area enclosed and screened by an opaque privacy fence of
six feet (6') in height and composed of wood, metal, vinyl, or some other
material designed to completely block the view from both within and without the
fenced area to the other side of the fenced area.
      3.   Confinement On Leash And Run Line: No person shall permit a vicious
dog to go outside a confinement structure, house or other structure unless the
vicious dog is securely restrained with a leash no longer than three feet (3')
in length and fitted with a muzzle or securely restrained on a run line no
longer than ten feet (10') in length and fitted with a muzzle. No person shall
permit a vicious dog to be kept on a leash unless a person is in actual
physical control of the leash. Any such leash or run line must be enclosed and
screened by an opaque privacy fence of six feet (6') in height and composed of
wood, metal, vinyl, or some other material designed to completely block the
view from both within and without the fenced area to the other side of the
fenced area.
   C.   Exceptions:
      1.   The only time that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the enclosure
or off the run line is when the dog is in a carrier, crate or other enclosure
designed to and capable of safely confining the dog for transportation: a) if
it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care for the
vicious dog; or b) to sell or give away the vicious dog; or c) to comply with
the order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
      2.   The owner or keeper may also allow the dog out of the enclosure or
off the run line to walk the vicious dog; provided, that said vicious dog is
securely muzzled and restrained with a leash having a minimum tensile strength
of at least three hundred (300) pounds and not exceeding three feet (3') in
length, and shall be at all times under the direct physical control and
supervision of the owner or keeper of the vicious dog. (Ord. 2015-17, 11-16-
2015)
5-2A-2-4: IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION; DISPOSITION:
   A.   Impoundment:
      1.   Any vicious dog which is not properly confined shall be impounded by
the law enforcement authority having jurisdiction in such area. Any vicious dog
found to be running at large by any member of the city police department shall
be presumed to be in violation of this section
5-2A-2 and shall be subject to impoundment. (Ord. 2015-17, 11-16-2015)
      2.   If the incident giving rise to the impoundment has resulted in an
injury to a person, upon impoundment by the police department, the chief of
police or his designee shall notify the rabies control administrator of the
county pursuant to 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12, as amended, and shall
transfer control of the vicious dog to the administrator in accordance with 510
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/13, as amended. (Ord. 2015-17, 11-16-2015; amd.
2016 Code)
      3.   Any vicious dog which attacks a human being or other domestic animal
may be ordered destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner when, in the
court's judgment: a) it is a vicious dog which has previously been impounded
for not properly being confined or for running at large in violation of
subsection 5-2A-2-3B1, B2 or B3 of this article; or b) it is a vicious dog
which has previously bitten or attacked a human being or other domestic animal
without provocation, and such dog represents a continuing threat of serious
harm to human beings or other domestic animals.
   B.   Redemption: An owner of a vicious dog holding a valid license issued
pursuant to this section
5-2A-2 may redeem an impounded vicious dog if: 1) the vicious dog has been
impounded pursuant to subsection A of this section; and 2) the vicious dog has
not caused severe injury to a person, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Proof of a valid license issued by the city hereunder; and
      2.   Payment of the cost of keeping the vicious dog during the period of
impoundment; and
      3.   Approval by the police and the code enforcement inspector of the
city of the enclosure in which the vicious dog will be kept. (Ord. 2015-17, 11-
16-2015)
5-2A-2-5: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS OF LICENSEE:
   A.   Any person holding a license pursuant to section
5-2A-2-2 of this article shall report the incidence of any of the following
events:
      1.   The escape from confinement of any vicious dog shall be reported
upon discovery of the escape.
      2.   The biting or nipping of any person or animal by a vicious dog shall
be reported immediately upon occurrence.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in this section
5-2A-2, the report of any incident required to be reported under this section
shall be made to the city police department.
   C.   Further, all dog owners, whether or not their dog is licensed as a
vicious dog, receiving notice or having knowledge that their dog has bitten or
attacked a human being or domestic animal without provocation shall immediately
notify the city police department of said incident. (Ord. 2015-17, 11-16-2015)
5-2A-2-6: SIGNS POSTED:
All persons possessing a vicious dog shall display in a prominent place on the
premises where a vicious dog is to be kept a sign which is readable by the
public from a distance of not less than one hundred feet (100') using the words
"Beware Of Dog". A similar sign shall be posted on any confinement structure.
(Ord. 2015-17, 11-16-2015)
5-2A-2-7: SPAYING OR NEUTERING REQUIRED:
Within ten (10) days of the determination that a dog is vicious becomes final,
the owner of the vicious dog shall have it spayed or neutered. (Ord. 2015-17,
11-16-2015)
5-2A-2-8: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or harborer of a vicious dog
registered with the city to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions
set forth in this section
5-2A-2. Any vicious dog found to be the subject of a violation of this section
5-2A-2 shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment. In addition,
failure to comply may result in the revocation of the license of such animal
resulting in the immediate removal of the animal from the city. (Ord. 2015-17,
11-16-2015)
5-2A-2-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A license granted pursuant to this section
5-2A-2 shall be automatically revoked upon the second violation by the licensee
of any provision of this section
5-2A-2. In the event of a revocation of the license, the license fee shall be
retained by the city and the vicious dog must be removed from the city within
forty eight (48) hours. (Ord. 2015-17, 11-16-2015)
5-2A-2-10: EXEMPTIONS:
This section
5-2A-2 shall not apply to any "K-9 patrol dog or police dog" as defined in
section
5-2A-1 of this article. (Ord. 2015-17, 11-16-2015)
5-2A-2-11: PENALTIES:
Upon conviction of an offense of this section
5-2A-2, the court shall assess a fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day
a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Additionally, upon
conviction of an offense of this section
5-2A-2, the court shall assess and require, in addition to any fine and/or
court costs, the payment of all expenses, including shelter, food, veterinary
expenses, and other expenses necessitated by the seizure of the dog for the
protection of the public, and such other expenses as may be required, if
applicable, for the destruction of any such dog. (Ord. 2015-17, 11-16-2015)
CHAPTER 3
MUNICIPAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Short Title
5-3-2: City Jurisdiction
5-3-3: Penalty; Civil Remedies Preserved
5-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MUNICIPAL OFFENSE CODE OF
THE CITY OF ABINGDON. (2006 Code § 6-2-1-1)
5-3-2: CITY JURISDICTION:
   A.   A person is subject to prosecution by the city for an offense which
that person commits, while either within or outside the city, by such person's
own conduct or that of another for which that person is legally accountable, if
the offense is committed either wholly or partly within the city.
   B.   An offense is committed partly within the city if either the conduct,
which is an element of the offense, or the result, which is an element of the
offense, occurs within the city.
   C.   An offense which is based on an omission to perform a duty imposed by
an ordinance of the city is committed within the city regardless of the
location of the offender at the time of the omission. (2006 Code § 6-2-1-2)
5-3-3: PENALTY; CIVIL REMEDIES PRESERVED:
Unless otherwise provided by a specific provision in this chapter or in any
other provision in this code, a violation of any provision in this chapter
shall be subject to the penalty provisions of section
1-4-1 of this code. This chapter does not bar any right to, or liability for,
damages or any other remedy authorized by law to be recovered or enforced in a
civil action for any conduct which this chapter makes punishable as a municipal
offense, and the civil injury is not merged in the municipal offense. (2006
Code §§ 6-2-1-3, 6-2-1-4)
ARTICLE A.  OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY
SECTION:
5-3A-1: Trespass
5-3A-2: Damage To Property
5-3A-3: Tampering With Utilities Appurtenances
5-3A-4: Littering
5-3A-5: Removal, Damaging City Records
5-3A-1: TRESPASS:
   A.   Private Property: No person shall wilfully trespass upon any property
belonging to another person or other entity. A trespass shall be deemed to
occur when such person enters upon the premises of another person or other
entity in violation of notice, whether in writing or oral, by any owner or
other legal occupant thereof, and then failing or refusing to depart from said
premises.
   B.   Public Property: No person, after receiving notice that entry is
forbidden, shall trespass upon any public property. A trespass shall be deemed
to occur when such person enters upon the public property and fails or refuses
to depart therefrom in violation of any notice given in writing or orally by an
authorized occupant thereof, or by any police officer of the city or any other
law enforcement officer. (2006 Code § 6-2-4-1)
5-3A-2: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
   A.   Private Property: No person or other entity shall wilfully damage,
deface, destroy, remove, or injure in any way any property belonging to another
person or other entity without the consent of the owner.
   B.   Public Property: No person shall wilfully damage, deface, destroy,
remove, or injure in any way any public property without the consent of the
public owner. (2006 Code § 6-2-4-2)
5-3A-3: TAMPERING WITH UTILITIES APPURTENANCES:
   A.   No person, except in the course of such person's lawful employment,
shall tamper or interfere in any manner with any wire or cable conducting
electric current, or with any pole or other structure used to support such wire
or cable. (2006 Code § 6-2-4-3)
   B.   No person, except in the course of such person's lawful employment,
shall tamper or interfere in any manner with any device used to light streets
or alleys or other public ways, or with any pole or any other structure used to
support such light. (2006 Code § 6-2-4-4)
   C.   No person shall post any notice of advertisement on any utility pole.
(2006 Code § 6-2-4-5)
5-3A-4: LITTERING:
   A.   No person shall distribute handbills or other advertising matter on
private property in such a manner as to cause the littering of any private
property which is not such person's own.
   B.   No person shall distribute, throw, drop, or scatter in any street,
alley, or other public place any posters, handbills, or matter used for the
purpose of advertising in such a manner as to result in the littering of any
street, alley, or other public place. (2006 Code § 6-2-4-7)
   C.   No person shall dispose of any debris, garbage, trash, or other
unwanted property including, but not by way of limitation, the placing of any
such property in any trash container or related receptacle, on any public
property or on any private property which is not such person's own property.
(Ord. 2012-7, 9-17-2012)
5-3A-5: REMOVAL, DAMAGING CITY RECORDS:
No person shall remove, alter, damage, or destroy any record kept or maintained
by or in the custody of any city official or employee unless so authorized by
the city council. (2006 Code § 6-2-4-6)
ARTICLE B.  OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER
SECTION:
5-3B-1: Assault
5-3B-2: Battery
5-3B-3: Reckless Conduct
5-3B-4: Disorderly Conduct
5-3B-5: Fighting Or Threatening
5-3B-6: Public Intoxication; Possession Of Alcoholic Liquor
5-3B-7: Allowing Disturbances
5-3B-8: Disturbing Lawful Assemblies
5-3B-9: Noise
5-3B-10: Refusal To Leave
5-3B-11: Hindering Public Passage
5-3B-12: Jostling Or Crowding
5-3B-13: Begging Or Soliciting
5-3B-14: Outdoor Burning
5-3B-15: Resisting Arrest
5-3B-16: Disobeying, Interfering With Police
5-3B-17: Impersonating An Officer
5-3B-1: ASSAULT:
No person shall commit an assault on another person by engaging in conduct
which places the other person in reasonable apprehension of physical harm, when
such conduct is committed without lawful authority. (2006 Code § 6-2-2-12)
5-3B-2: BATTERY:
No person shall knowingly, without legal justification by any means, cause any
bodily harm to an individual or physical contact of an insulting or provoking
nature on an individual. (2006 Code § 6-2-2-13; amd. 2016 Code)
5-3B-3: RECKLESS CONDUCT:
No person shall cause physical harm to, or endanger the bodily safety of,
another person by means of reckless performance of any act which causes harm or
endangers the safety of such other person, whether such conduct is lawful or
unlawful. (2006 Code § 6-2-2-14)
5-3B-4: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
No person shall conduct himself or herself in such a manner as is likely to
lead to a breach of peace; and no person shall behave in a rude, offensive, or
indecent manner while in a public place. (2006 Code § 6-2-2-1)
5-3B-5: FIGHTING OR THREATENING:
No person shall engage in fighting or make insulting or threatening remarks or
gestures calculated to result in a fight or other breach of the peace. (2006
Code § 6-2-2-9)
5-3B-6: PUBLIC INTOXICATION; POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR:
   A.   No person shall appear in a public place while intoxicated or under the
influence of any drug or other substance so that such person constitutes a
nuisance or a threat to the health or safety of any person, including himself
or herself.
   B.   No person shall appear in a public place with possession of any
alcoholic liquor except in the original container and with the seal unbroken,
unless such person is on the premises of a licensee duly licensed under the
liquor control provisions of the city, or in a public place designated and
authorized by the city during a special event. For the purposes of this
subsection, the term "alcoholic liquor" shall be that as defined in the liquor
control provisions in title 3, chapter 1 of this code. (2006 Code § 6-2-2-2)
5-3B-7: ALLOWING DISTURBANCES:
No person in charge of a place of amusement or recreation shall permit or allow
any unnecessary disturbance therein, or any conduct which is likely to result
in a breach of the peace. (2006 Code § 6-2-2-10)
5-3B-8: DISTURBING LAWFUL ASSEMBLIES:
No person shall wilfully disturb any lawful assembly or create a disturbance in
a public place. (2006 Code § 6-2-2-7)
5-3B-9: NOISE:
   A.   No person shall create, maintain, assist, or participate in the
creation or maintenance of a loud or raucous noise likely to disturb the public
peace.
   B.   No driver of any motor vehicle within the city shall operate or permit
the operation of any sound amplification system which can be heard outside the
vehicle from seventy five (75) or more feet when the vehicle is being operated
on a street, highway or alley, unless such sound system is being operated to
request assistance or to warn of a hazardous situation. This subsection does
not apply to authorized emergency vehicles.
   C.   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be subject to
the penalty provisions of section
1-4-1 of this code; except, that the minimum fine upon conviction of a second
offense of subsection B of this section within a twelve (12) month period shall
be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (2006 Code § 6-2-2-4)
5-3B-10: REFUSAL TO LEAVE:
No person shall remain in or at any public or private place after being
requested to leave by the person in charge thereof or by a police officer.
(2006 Code § 6-2-2-3)
5-3B-11: HINDERING PUBLIC PASSAGE:
No person shall obstruct or hinder any member of the public from freely passing
wherever such member of the public has a legal right to go. (2006 Code § 6-2-2-
5)
5-3B-12: JOSTLING OR CROWDING:
No person shall jostle or wilfully crowd any other person in any public or
private place, or otherwise interfere intentionally with the peaceful pursuit
of such other person's affairs. (2006 Code § 6-2-2-6)
5-3B-13: BEGGING OR SOLICITING:
No person shall beg or solicit donations from the public for that person's
personal use, and no person shall solicit any donation or contribution for any
cause or purpose whatsoever on any public property without having first
obtained a proper permit from the office of the city clerk. (2006 Code § 6-2-2-
8)
5-3B-14: OUTDOOR BURNING:
No person shall cause serious inconvenience or discomfort to any other person
by the burning of refuse, rubbish, or other matter in an outdoor fire. (2006
Code § 6-2-2-11)
5-3B-15: RESISTING ARREST:
No person shall knowingly or wilfully resist an arrest which such person knows
is being made by a police officer or other law enforcement official, even if
such person believes that the arrest is unlawful and the arrest is actually
unlawful. (2006 Code § 6-2-2-15)
5-3B-16: DISOBEYING, INTERFERING WITH POLICE:
   A.   No person shall knowingly or wilfully refuse or neglect to obey any
lawful order or direction from any police officer or other law enforcement
official.
   B.   No person shall obstruct or endanger any police officer or other law
enforcement official who is in the performance of his or her official duties.
(2006 Code § 6-2-2-16)
5-3B-17: IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER:
No person shall impersonate a police officer or other law enforcement official,
or any other official or employee of the city. (2006 Code § 6-2-2-17)
ARTICLE C.  OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY
SECTION:
5-3C-1: Weapons
5-3C-2: Dangerous Fires
5-3C-3: Poison
5-3C-4: Throwing Dangerous Objects
5-3C-5: Sniffing Or Inhaling Intoxicants
5-3C-6: False Alarms
5-3C-7: Intimidation
5-3C-1: WEAPONS:
   A.   Prohibitions:
      1.   No person shall carry a concealed weapon upon or about his or her
person.
      2.   No person shall display or flourish any weapon in a threatening
manner or in a manner calculated or likely to intimidate another person, except
for those persons specifically authorized to do so.
      3.   No person shall simulate the presence of a weapon so to intimidate
therewith, even though no such weapon in fact exists.
      4.   No person shall fire or discharge any firearm, air gun, slingshot,
or other device designed to fire or project any hard substance within the city;
except, that this subsection A4 shall not apply to any police officer or other
law enforcement official in the performance of such officer's or official's
duty.
   B.   Exemptions: This section shall not apply to any firearm or air gun that
is dismantled to render it incapable of being fired or is unloaded and enclosed
in a case. (2006 Code § 6-2-3-1)
5-3C-2: DANGEROUS FIRES:
No person shall start by any means any fire which endangers the health, person
or property of another. (2006 Code § 6-2-3-2)
5-3C-3: POISON:
No person shall keep, sell, or deliver any poison or poisonous matter except in
a container having the name thereof marked legibly thereon, together with the
word "Poison" placed and marked in such a manner as to attract immediate
attention thereto, and the antidote therefor, if any; or, if applicable, the
fact that there is no antidote. (2006 Code § 6-2-3-3)
5-3C-4: THROWING DANGEROUS OBJECTS:
No person shall purposefully or recklessly throw or cast any hard object or
substance onto any street, alley, or other public way or at any person,
residence or other building, motor vehicle, or other property. (2006 Code § 6-
2-3-4)
5-3C-5: SNIFFING OR INHALING INTOXICANTS:
   A.   No person shall sniff, inhale, or breathe the vapors of any glue,
kerosene, gasoline, cleaning fluid, or other substance not manufactured or
produced for such human consumption for the purpose of becoming intoxicated.
   B.   No person shall command, encourage, request, aid, or abet any person to
violate the provisions of this section. (2006 Code § 6-2-3-5)
5-3C-6: FALSE ALARMS:
No person shall intentionally cause any false alarm of need of police or
ambulance assistance or false alarm of fire. (2006 Code § 6-2-5-5)
5-3C-7: INTIMIDATION:
No person shall commit intimidation, with intent to cause another person to
perform or to omit the performance of any act by communicating to such other
person without lawful authority a threat to perform any of the following:
   A.   Infliction of physical harm on the other person or on any other person
or property; or
   B.   Subjection of the other person to physical confinement or restraint; or
   C.   Commission of any criminal offense; or
   D.   Accuse the other person of a criminal offense; or
   E.   Exposure of the other person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule; or
   F.   Commencement of action as a public official against the other person or
any other person; or the withholding of official action; or to cause such
action or withholding. (2006 Code § 6-2-5-6)
ARTICLE D.  OFFENSES INVOLVING DECENCY AND MORALITY
SECTION:
5-3D-1: Obscenity
5-3D-2: Window Peeping
5-3D-3: Abuse Of Telephone Service
5-3D-1: OBSCENITY:
   A.   Public Obscenity: No person shall commit any lewd, obscene, or indecent
act in a public place, or a place frequented by the public, or appear in public
in an indecent state of dress. (2006 Code § 6-2-5-1)
   B.   Obscene Materials Or Performances: No person shall sell, offer for
sale, or exhibit any lewd or obscene book, picture, or article to another, nor
shall any person present, exhibit, or engage in any lewd or lascivious act or
performance. (2006 Code § 6-2-5-2)
5-3D-2: WINDOW PEEPING:
No person shall look into or be found loitering about within the view of any
window within a building occupied as a residence of another so to watch or
observe the activities of a person therein. (2006 Code § 6-2-5-3)
5-3D-3: ABUSE OF TELEPHONE SERVICE:
No person shall make any obscene or anonymous telephone call or a falsely
represented telephone call to another person for the purpose of nuisance or
harassment. (2006 Code § 6-2-5-4)
ARTICLE E.  OFFENSES INVOLVING TOBACCO PRODUCTS
SECTION:
5-3E-1: Definitions
5-3E-2: Possession Of Tobacco Products By Minors
5-3E-3: Purchase By Minors Prohibited
5-3E-4: Prohibited Sales And Delivery To Minors
5-3E-5: Proximity To Certain Institutions
5-3E-6: Certain Free Distributions Prohibited
5-3E-7: Exemptions
5-3E-8: Responsibility For Agents And Employees
5-3E-9: Penalties
5-3E-10: Alternative Enforcement Programs
5-3E-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
MINOR: A person under eighteen (18) years of age.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, or
dipping tobacco. (2006 Code § 6-2-6-1)
5-3E-2: POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY MINORS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a minor to possess or consume any tobacco
product in any of its forms. This subsection shall not apply to a minor who
possesses or consumes a tobacco product in or upon private premises in the
presence of his or her parent or legal guardian when such tobacco product was
delivered to the minor by his or her parent or legal guardian. (2006 Code § 6-
2-6-2)
   B.   The observation of a violation of subsection A of this section shall
not constitute the sole reason for any law enforcement authority to stop a
motor vehicle in which an alleged offender is a driver or passenger. (2006 Code
§ 6-2-6-5)
5-3E-3: PURCHASE BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
purchase any tobacco product, or to misrepresent his or her identity or age, or
to use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing
tobacco products. (2006 Code § 6-2-6-3)
5-3E-4: PROHIBITED SALES AND DELIVERY TO MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, give away, or
deliver any tobacco product to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall be
posted on, at or near every display of tobacco products and on every vending
machine which offers any tobacco product for sale. Each such sign shall be
plainly visible and shall state:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW.
(2006 Code § 6-2-6-6)
5-3E-5: PROXIMITY TO CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away, or
deliver any tobacco product within one hundred feet (100') of any school,
childcare facility, or other building used for education or recreation programs
for persons under the age of eighteen (18) years. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to any commercial business establishment engaged in the
sales of tobacco products which are not in violation of section
5-3E-4 of this article. (2006 Code § 6-2-6-7)
5-3E-6: CERTAIN FREE DISTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the business of selling or otherwise
distributing, promoting, or advertising tobacco products, or any employee or
agent of any such person, in the course of such person's business, to
distribute, give away, or deliver tobacco products free of charge to any person
on any right of way, park, playground, or other property owned by the city or
by any other governmental unit, which property is located within the city.
(2006 Code § 6-2-6-8)
5-3E-7: EXEMPTIONS:
It shall not be considered a violation of this article for any person under the
age of eighteen (18) to purchase or possess any tobacco product when
participating in a program for monitoring compliance with this article
conducted by a law enforcement agency, so long as the person is supervised by
the personnel of the law enforcement agency, and the consent of a parent or
guardian of the person is obtained. (2006 Code § 6-2-6-4)
5-3E-8: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this article by any officer, director, manager, or other
agent or employee of any person shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
person, and such person shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act
or omission was done or omitted by such person. (2006 Code § 6-2-6-9)
5-3E-9: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who is convicted of a violation of this article shall be
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) pursuant to the general penalty
provisions contained in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
   B.   In addition to or in lieu of a fine, such person convicted of a
violation may be required to perform community service of not more than one
hundred (100) hours.
   C.   Any person who is a first time violator may, at the discretion of the
circuit clerk, be ordered to complete a program of education regarding the
dangers of tobacco use. (2006 Code § 6-2-6-10)
5-3E-10: ALTERNATIVE ENFORCEMENT PROGRAMS:
Any law enforcement agency, acting in conjunction with the city attorney, may
establish and implement one or more alternative programs for enforcing this
article. The programs shall be voluntary and may include, but are not limited
to, the use of teen courts and the prescription of educational or community
service activities. (2006 Code § 6-2-6-11)
ARTICLE F.  OFFENSES INVOLVING DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
SECTION:
5-3F-1: Cannabis
5-3F-2: Synthetic Alternative Drugs
5-3F-1: CANNABIS:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section:
    CANNABIS: Includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa, whether growing
or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and
any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such
plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction
and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant,
fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant,
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of
such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake,
or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which
are peculiar to and marketed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing
into the human body cannabis. The term includes, but is not limited to:
      1.   Kits peculiar to and marketed for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis.
      2.   Isomerization devices peculiar to and marketed for use in increasing
the potency of cannabis.
      3.   Testing equipment peculiar to and marketed for private home use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis.
      4.   Diluents and adulterants peculiar to and marketed for cutting
cannabis by private persons.
      5.   Objects peculiar to and marketed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cannabis into the human body including, where applicable,
the following items:
  a. Water pipes.
  b. Carburetion tubes and devices.
  c. Smoking and carburetion masks.
  d. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
  e. Carburetor pipes.
  f. Electric pipes.
  g. Air driven pipes.
  h. Chillums.
  i. Bongs.
  j. Ice pipes or chillers.
      6.   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is
for use in violation of this section. (2006 Code § 6-2-7-1)
   B.   Possession Of Cannabis Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person
knowingly to possess within the city cannabis of an amount less than 2.5 grams.
(2006 Code § 6-2-7-2)
   C.   Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia Prohibited: It is unlawful for any
person knowingly to possess within the city an item of drug paraphernalia with
the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis
into the human body, or in preparing cannabis for that use. In determining
intent, the trier of fact may take into consideration the proximity of the
cannabis to the item of drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis on the
item of drug paraphernalia. (2006 Code § 6-2-7-3)
   D.   Penalty: Any person found to have violated any provision of this
section shall be fined in a sum not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and shall also be
subject to the general penalty provisions contained in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2006 Code § 6-2-7-4)
5-3F-2: SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUGS:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
    A PRODUCT CONTAINING A SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUG: Any product containing a
"synthetic cannabinoid", "synthetic stimulant" or "synthetic psychedelic/
hallucinogen", as those terms are defined herein such as, but not limited to,
the following examples of brand names or identifiers shown in the schedule
attached to the ordinance codified herein and by this reference incorporated
herein as fully as if set forth verbatim.
   SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID: Any laboratory created compound that functions
similar to the active ingredient in marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material,
compound, mixture, preparation, and substance and its analog (including
isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid
receptor agonist, such as:
JWH-007 (1-pentyl-2-methyl-3-(1- naphthoyl)indole)
JWH-015 ((2-Methyl-1-propyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1- naphthalenylmethanone)
JWH-018 (1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole)
JWH-019 (1-hexyl-3-(naphthalen-1-oyl)indole)
JWH-073 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3- yl)methanone)
JWH-081 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1- pentylindol-3-yl)methanone)
JWH-098 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentyl-2- methylindol-3-yl)methanone)
JWH-122 (1-Pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1- naphthoyl)indole)
JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1- pentylindol-3-yl)methanone
JWH-200 (1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)- naphthalen-1-ylmethanone)
JWH-203 (2-(2-chlorophenyl)-1-(1-pentylindol- 3-yl)ethanone
JWH-210 (4-ethylnaphthalen-1-0-(1-pentylindol- 3-yl)methanone
JWH-250 (1-pentyl-3-(2- methoxyphenylacetyl)indole)
JWH-251 (1-pentyl-3-(2- methylphenylacetyl)indole)
JWH-398 (1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1- naphthoyl)indole)
HU-210 ((6aR,10aR)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6- dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a,7,10,10a- tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol)
HU-211 ((6aS,10aS)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6- dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a,7,10,10a- tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol)
HU-308 ([(1R,2R,5R)-2-[2,6-dimethoxy-4-(2- methyloctan-2-yl)phenyl]-7,7-
dimethyl-4- bicyclo[3,1.1]hept-3-enyl]methanol)
HU-331 ((3-hydroxy-2-[(1R,6R)-3-methyl-6-(1- methylethenyl)-2-cyclohexen-1-yl]-
5-pentyl- 2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione)
CP 55,940 (2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3- hydroxypropyl) cyclohexyl]- 5-(2-
methyloctan-2-yl)phenol)
CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5- (2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) and
its homologues
WIN 55,212-2 ((R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3- (4-morpholinylmethyl)pyrrolo
[1,2,3-de)-1,4- benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-nepthalenylmethanone)
RCS-4 ((4-methoxyphenyl)(1-pentyl-1H-indol-3- yl)methanone)
RCS-8 (1-(1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-1H-indol-3- yl)-2-(2-methoxyphenyl)methanone)
   SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELIC/HALLUCINOGEN: Any compound that mimics the effects of
any federally controlled schedule I substance including, but not limited to,
any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture,
preparation, substance and its analog (including salts, isomers, esters, ethers
and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a psychedelic/
hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system and/or brain, such as:
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-ethylphenyl)ethanamine (2C- E)
2-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-D)
2-(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-C)
2-(4-Iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C- I)
2-(4-(Ethylthio)-2,5- dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-2)
2-(4-(Isopropylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl) ethanamine (2C-T-4)
2-(2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-H)
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro-phenyl)ethanamine (2C-N)
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-P)
   SYNTHETIC STIMULANT: Any compound that mimics the effects of any federally
controlled schedule I substance such as cathinone, methcathinone, MDMA and MDEA
including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material,
compound, mixture, preparation, substance and its analog (including salts,
isomers, and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a stimulant
effect on the central nervous system, such as:
3-Fluoromethcathinone
4-Fluoromethcathinone (other name: flephedrone)
3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name: methylone, MDMC)
3,4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (other name: MDPV)
4-Methylmethcathinon (other names: mephedrone, 4-MMC)
4-Methoxymethcathinone (other names: methedrone, bk-PMMA, PMMC)
4-Ethylmethcathinone (other name: 4-EMC)
Ethcathinone
Beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxyolylpropylamine (other names: butylone, bk-MBDB)
Napthylpyrovalerone (other names: naphyrone, NRG-1)
N,N-dimethylcathinone (other name: metamfepramone)
Alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: alpha-PPP)
4-methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MOPPP)
3,4-methylenedioxy-alpha- pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MDPPP)
Alpha-pyrrolidinovalerophenone (other name: alpha-PVP)
6,7-kihydro-5H-indeno(5,6-d)-1,3-dioxal-6- amine) (other name: MDAI)
Any compound that is structurally derived from 2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone by
modification or substitution in any of the following ways:
      1.   In the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy,
haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not further substituted in the
phenyl ring by one or more other univalent substituents.
      2.   At the 3-position with an alkyl substituent.
      3.   At the nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl, benzyl, or methoxybenzyl
groups.
      4.   By inclusion of the nitrogen atom in a cyclic structure. (Ord. 2012-
2, 2-6-2012; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Prohibitions:
      1.   Sale Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any person, including,
without limitation, business entity, corporation or limited liability company,
to sell, offer for sale or deliver any product containing a synthetic
cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen.
      2.   Possession: It shall be unlawful for any person, including, without
limitation, business entity, corporation or limited liability company, to
knowingly possess a product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or
psychedelic/hallucinogen.
      3.   Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence
of a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen.
   C.   Penalties: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall
be fined in a sum not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and shall also be subject to
the general penalty provisions contained in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-2, 2-6-2012)
CHAPTER 4
MINORS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Curfew Regulations
5-4-2: Truancy
5-4-1: CURFEW REGULATIONS:
   A.   Age And Hour Restrictions: It is unlawful for a person under eighteen
(18) years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building,
place, street, or highway at the following times unless accompanied and
supervised by a parent, legal guardian, or other responsible companion at least
twenty one (21) years of age approved by a parent or legal guardian, or unless
engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this state authorize a
person under eighteen (18) years of age to perform:
      1.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Saturday;
      2.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Sunday; and
      3.   Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday,
inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day. (2006 Code §
6-8-1)
   B.   Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian: It is unlawful for a parent,
legal guardian, or other person to knowingly permit a person in his or her
custody or control to violate subsection A of this section. (2006 Code §
6-8-2)
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating a provision of this section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (2006 Code §
6-8-3)
5-4-2: TRUANCY:
   A.   Definitions: When used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    TRUANT: A child subject to compulsory school attendance and who is absent
without valid cause from such attendance for a school day or portion thereof.
   VALID CAUSE FOR ABSENCE: Illness, observance of a religious holiday, death
in the immediate family, family emergency, and shall include such other
situations beyond the control of the student as determined by the board of
education in the district, or such other circumstances which cause reasonable
concern to the parent for the safety or health of the student. (2006 Code §
6-3-1)
   B.   Truancy Prohibited; Exceptions:
      1.   Prohibitions And Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for any child
subject to compulsory school attendance, enrolled in a public, private or
parochial school who resides within the city to absent himself or herself from
attendance without valid cause. Any person who shall so absent himself or
herself shall be guilty of the offense of truancy and subject to the penalties
set forth in subsection B2 of this section. Emergency or unforeseen absences
due to illness or other causes beyond the control of the person so absenting
himself or herself from school shall not constitute truancy if permission for
such absence has substantially been obtained from the parent and such
permission is submitted in writing to the proper school authorities within
twenty four (24) hours after such an absence. (2006 Code §
6-3-2)
      2.   Penalties:
         a.   Any person over the age of thirteen (13) or the parent or legal
guardian of a person under the age of thirteen (13), who violates this section,
as a first offense, shall be subject to a citation. The citation shall be paid
at the city hall or public safety building in the amount of twenty five dollars
($25.00), or if paid within forty eight (48) hours, fifteen dollars ($15.00).
Any person who fails to make payment as outlined herein within ten (10) days,
or any person violating this section after the first offense must appear in
court and shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day during which any person
violates this section shall be deemed a separate offense. (2006 Code §
6-3-2; amd. 2016 Code)
         b.   When appropriate community service is available, a person who is
truant may perform supervised community service work in lieu of a fine. (2006
Code §
6-3-2)
   C.   Liability Of Parent Or Guardian: It shall be unlawful for any person
having custody or control of a child subject to the provisions of this section,
to whom notice has been given of the child's truancy, to knowingly and wilfully
permit such a child to persist in his or her truancy within that school year.
Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor
and shall be subject to not more than thirty (30) days' imprisonment and/or a
fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). (2006 Code §
6-3-3)
   D.   Inducement Of Truancy Prohibited: Any person who induces or attempts to
induce any child subject to the provisions of this section to be absent from
school unlawfully, or who knowingly employs or harbors, while school is in
session, any child absent unlawfully from school for three (3) consecutive
school days is guilty of a class C misdemeanor. (2006 Code §
6-3-4)
   E.   Enforcement:
      1.   Authority To Charge Violations: Any duly appointed school
administrator or authorized truant officer of a public, private or parochial
school within the corporate limits of the city, or any peace officer, shall
have the authority to sign all complaints and charge any violations of this
section.
      2.   Authority To Detain And Deliver: Any duly appointed school
administrator or authorized truant officer of a public, private or parochial
school within the corporate limits of the city, or any peace officer engaged in
the enforcement of this section, is hereby authorized to detain any suspected
truant and deliver the minor to the school where the minor is enrolled.
      3.   Authority To Prosecute: The city hereby authorizes and grants full
power and authority to the office of the Knox County state's attorney to
prosecute violations and enforce the provisions of this section. (2006 Code §
6-3-5)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Definitions
6-1-2: Application Of Provisions; Exemptions
6-1-3: Animals And Animal Drawn Vehicles
6-1-4: Accidents
6-1-5: Transporting Alcoholic Beverages
6-1-6: Placing Objects Or Materials In Roadways
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this title, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE: Any motorized off highway device fifty inches (50") or
less in width, having a manufacturer's dry weight of six hundred (600) pounds
or less, traveling on three (3) or more low pressure tires, designed with a
seat or saddle for operator use, and handlebars or steering wheel for steering
control.
ALLEY: A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of lots
or buildings and not used for general traffic circulation.
AMBULANCE: Any publicly or privately owned vehicle which is specifically
designed, constructed or modified and equipped, and is intended to be used for,
and is maintained or operated for, the emergency transportation of persons who
are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Any emergency vehicle of a municipality or public
service corporation as designated or authorized by proper local authorities;
police vehicle; vehicle of any fire protection district or fire department
authorized by proper local authorities; and any ambulance.
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two (2) tandem wheels, except scooters and similar devices.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a street when,
within six hundred feet (600') along such street, there are buildings in use
for business or industrial purposes which occupy at least three hundred feet
(300') collectively on both sides of the street.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or
property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for
hire or not for hire.
CROSSWALK: A. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of the
highway, that part of the highway included within the extension of the lateral
line of the existing sidewalk to the side of the highway without the sidewalk,
with such extension forming a right angle to the centerline of the highway.
   B.   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface
placed in accordance with the provisions in the manual adopted by the state
department of transportation.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EXPLOSIVES: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used
or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains any
oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by
percussion, or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or
of destroying life or limb.
FARM TRACTOR: Every motorized device designed and used primarily as a farm
implement, for drawing wagons, plows, mowing machines and other implements of
husbandry, and every implement of husbandry which is self-propelled.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID: Any liquid which has a flashpoint of seventy degrees
Fahrenheit (70°F) or less, as determined by a Tagliabue or equivalent closed
cup test device.
GOLF CART: See definition of golf cart in section
6-10-2 of this title.
GROSS WEIGHT: The weight of a vehicle, whether operated singly or in
combination without load, plus the weight of the load thereon.
HOUSE TRAILER: A. A trailer or semitrailer equipped and used for living
quarters or for human habitation (temporarily or permanently) rather than for
the transportation of freight, goods, wares and merchandise; or
   B.   A house trailer or a semitrailer which is used commercially
(temporarily or permanently), that is for the advertising, sales, display or
promotion of merchandise or services, or for any other commercial purpose
except the transportation of property for hire or the transportation of
property for distribution by a private carrier.
IMPROVED HIGHWAY: Any roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam, and crushed
stone or gravel.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roadways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a highway includes two
(2) roadways forty feet (40') or more apart, then every crossing of each
roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as
a separate intersection. The junction of an alley with a street or highway does
not constitute an intersection.
JUNK VEHICLE: A vehicle which has been or is being disassembled, crushed,
compressed, flattened, destroyed or otherwise reduced to a state in which it no
longer can be returned to an operable state.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or material.
MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE: Every motorcycle and every motor scooter with less than one
hundred fifty (150) cubic centimeter piston displacement including motorized
pedalcycles.
MOTOR HOME, MINI-MOTOR HOME OR VAN CAMPER: A self-contained motor vehicle, not
used commercially, designed or permanently converted to provide living quarters
for recreational, camping or travel use, with direct walk through access to the
living quarters from the driver's seat. Such vehicles must include at least
four (4) of the following:
   A.   A cooking facility with an onboard fuel source;
   B.   A gas or electric refrigerator;
   C.   A toilet with exterior evacuation;
   D.   A heating or air conditioning system with an onboard power or fuel
source separate from the vehicle engine;
   E.   A potable water supply system that includes at least a sink, a faucet,
and a water tank with an exterior service supply connection; and
   F.   A 110-125 volt electric power supply.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is
propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails, except for vehicles moved solely by human power and
motorized wheelchairs. Motor vehicles are divided into two (2) divisions:
   A.   First division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for the
carrying of not more than ten (10) persons.
   B.   Second division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for carrying
more than ten (10) persons; those motor vehicles designed or used for living
quarters; those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying
freight, cargo or implements of husbandry; and those motor vehicles of the
first division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of the second
division.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designated to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLE: A motor driven cycle whose speed attainable in one mile
is thirty (30) miles per hour or less, which is equipped with a motor that
produces two (2) brake horsepower or less. If an internal combustion engine is
used, the displacement shall not exceed fifty (50) cubic centimeter
displacement and the power drive system shall not require the operator to shift
gears.
MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR: Any self-propelled vehicle designed for and used by a
person with disabilities, that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight (8)
miles per hour on level ground.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, markings, and devices
which conform with the state manual and not inconsistent with law placed or
erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the
purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
OPERATE: To ride in or on, other than as a passenger, use or control in any
manner the operation of any device or vehicle, whether motorized or propelled
by human power.
OPERATOR: Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of any
device or vehicle, whether motorized or propelled by human power.
OWNER: A person who holds legal title of a vehicle, or in the event a vehicle
is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with
the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the
agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional
vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such vehicle is entitled to
possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed
the owner.
PARADE: Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of
any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, highway or sidewalk.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise
or passengers.
PARKING SPACE: Any area in a parking lot or street which has been marked for
parking by lines painted on the pavement and/or by the placement of signs.
PARKING SPACE FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES: That parking space, on public or
private property, designated by the city and marked with appropriate signs and/
or markings restricting the space to vehicles operated or transporting persons
with disabilities.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES: Every natural person who is unable to walk two
hundred feet (200') or more unassisted by another person or without the aid of
a walker, crutches, braces, prosthetic device or a wheelchair or without great
difficulty or discomfort due to the following impairments: neurologic,
orthopedic, respiratory, cardiac, arthritic disorder, blindness or the loss of
function or absence of a limb.
PNEUMATIC TIRE: Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the
load.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to
make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership and used for
vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission
from the owner, but not by other persons.
RAILROAD: A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars,
operated upon stationary rails.
RAILROAD-HIGHWAY GRADE CROSSING: The intersection of stationary rails owned or
used in the operation of a railroad corporation across a highway.
RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL: Any sign, signal or device, other than an official
traffic control signal or device, erected in accordance with the laws governing
same and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the
approach of a railroad train.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance
of three hundred feet (300') or more is the main improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
RIGHT OF WAY: The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such
circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
ROAD TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles
and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any
part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by signs as to be plainly visible at all times, which part is set
apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle owned or operated by or for any of the
following entities for the transportation of persons regularly enrolled as
students in grade 12 or below in connection with any activity of such entity:
   A.   Any public or private primary or secondary school;
   B.   Any primary or secondary school operated by a religious institution; or
   C.   Any public, private or religious nursery school.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load
rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SHOPPING CENTER: Premises having one or more stores with which there is
provided, on privately owned property used by the public, a means to enter and
depart from those stores and for the parking of motor vehicles of customers or
patrons.
SHOULDER: That portion of the highway adjacent to the roadway for accommodating
stopped vehicles or for emergency use.
SIDE-BY-SIDE VEHICLE: See definition of side-by-side vehicle in section
6-10-2 of this title.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between curb lines, or the lateral lines of
a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians.
STAND OR STANDING: The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than when temporarily and actually engaged in receiving or discharging
passengers.
STOP: Complete cessation from movement.
STOP OR STOPPING: Any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or
signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
TERRACE: That portion of a public street which lies between the curb and the
nearest boundary line of such public street.
THROUGH STREET: Every street or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is
given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way
to vehicles on such through street in obedience to either a stop sign or yield
sign, when such signs are erected.
TOW TRUCK: Every truck designed or altered and equipped for and used to push,
tow or draw vehicles by means of a crane, hoist, towbar, towline, or auxiliary
axle, or to render assistance to disabled vehicles.
TOWER: A person who owns or operates a tow truck or a wrecker.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any highway for purposes of
travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL: Any official traffic control device other than a
railroad sign or signal, whether manually, electrically or mechanically
operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to
proceed.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A trailer, not used commercially, designed to provide living
quarters for recreational camping or travel use, and of a size or weight not
requiring an overdimension permit when towed on a highway.
TRUCK: Every motor vehicle, except a road tractor or a truck- tractor,
designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
TRUCK CAMPER: A truck, not used commercially, when equipped with a portable
unit designed to be loaded onto the bed which is construed to provide temporary
living quarters for recreational, travel or camping use.
TRUCK-TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
VEHICLE: A. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power,
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and snowmobiles as
defined by Illinois law.
   B.   For the purposes of this title, unless otherwise prescribed, a device
shall be considered to be a vehicle until such time it either becomes within
the definition of a "junk vehicle" or a junking certificate is issued for it.
   C.   Vehicles are divided into two (2) divisions:
      1.   First Division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for the
carrying of not more than ten (10) persons.
      2.   Second Division: Those vehicles which are designed for carrying more
than ten (10) persons; those designed or used for living quarters; and those
vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying property, freight, or
cargo; those motor vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as
motor vehicles of the second division; and those motor vehicles of the first
division used and registered as school buses.
YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY: The act of granting the privilege of the immediate use of
the intersecting roadway to traffic within the intersection and to vehicles
approaching from the right or left but, when the roadway is clear, may proceed
into the intersection, when required by an official sign. (2006 Code § 9-1-1-1;
amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 2018-6, 11-5-2018)
6-1-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: The provisions of this title applicable to
the drivers of vehicles shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or
operated by the United States of America, this State, or any county,
municipality, township, district, or any other political subdivision, except as
provided in this section.
   B.   Exemptions For Authorized Emergency Vehicles:
      1.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call (but not upon returning) or when in the pursuit of an actual or
suspected violator of the law, may exercise the privileges set forth in this
section, but subject to the conditions stated.
      2.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
         a.   Park or stand, regardless of the provisions of this title.
         b.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be required and necessary for safe operation.
         c.   Exceed the maximum speed limits, so long as no life or property
is endangered.
         d.   Disregard provisions governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions.
      3.   The exceptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle,
other than a police vehicle, shall apply only when the vehicle is making use of
either an audible signal when in motion or visual signals meeting the
requirements of law.
      4.   The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the safety of
all persons, nor do such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (2006 Code § 9-1-2-1)
6-1-3: ANIMALS AND ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLES:
Every person riding an animal or driving any animal drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those
provisions of this title which by their very nature can have no application.
(2006 Code § 9-1-2-2)
6-1-4: ACCIDENTS:
   A.   Accident Involving Death Or Personal Injuries:
      1.   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident
resulting in personal injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop
such vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto as possible,
and shall then forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene
of the accident until the requirements of subsection C of this section have
been fulfilled. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more
than is necessary.
      2.   In this section, "personal injury" means any injury requiring
immediate professional treatment in a medical facility or doctor's office.
(2006 Code § 9-2-3-1)
   B.   Accident Involving Damage To Vehicle: The driver of any vehicle
involved in a motor vehicle accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle
which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop the driver's
vehicle at the scene of such motor vehicle accident or as close thereto as
possible, and shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the
scene of such motor vehicle accident until the requirements of subsection C of
this section have been fulfilled. Every such stop shall be made without
obstructing traffic more than is necessary. (2006 Code § 9-2-3-2)
   C.   Duty To Give Information And Render Aid:
      1.   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident
resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is
driven or attended by any person shall give the driver's name, address,
registration number, and owner of the vehicle the driver is operating, and
shall, upon request and if available, exhibit such driver's license to the
person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle
collided with, and shall render to any person injured in such accident
reasonable assistance, including the carrying, or the making of arrangements
for the carrying, of such person to a physician, surgeon, or hospital for
medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent that such treatment is
necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured party.
      2.   If none of the persons entitled to information pursuant to this
subsection C is in condition to receive and understand such information and no
police officer is present, such driver, after rendering reasonable assistance,
shall forthwith report such motor vehicle accident at the police department,
disclosing the information required by this subsection C. (2006 Code § 9-2-3-3)
   D.   Accident Involving Unattended Vehicle Or Other Property: The driver of
any vehicle which collides with or is involved in a motor vehicle accident with
any vehicle which is unattended, or other property, resulting in any damage to
such other vehicle or property, shall immediately stop and shall then and there
either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle or other
property of the driver's name, address, registration number, and owner of the
vehicle the driver was operating, or shall attach securely in a conspicuous
place on or in the vehicle or other property struck a written notice giving the
driver's name, address, registration number, and owner of the vehicle the
driver was driving, and shall, without unnecessary delay, notify the nearest
office of a duly authorized police authority and shall make a written report of
such accident when and as required in subsection E1a of this section. Every
such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
(2006 Code § 9-2-3-4)
   E.   Accident Reports:
      1.   Certain Accidents Reported To State:
         a.   (1) The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an
accident within this city resulting in injury to or death of any person, or in
which the property of any person, including himself, in excess of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) is sustained, shall, as soon as possible, but not later than
ten (10) days after such accident, forward a written report of such accident to
the Illinois department of transportation.
            (2)   Whenever a school bus is involved in an accident in the city
caused by a collision, a sudden stop or otherwise, resulting in any property
damage, personal injury, or death, and whenever an accident occurs within fifty
feet (50') of a school bus in the city resulting in personal injury to or the
death of any person while awaiting or preparing to board the bus or immediately
after exiting the bus, the driver shall, as soon as possible, but not later
than ten (10) days after the accident, forward a written report to the Illinois
department of transportation. If a report is also required under subsection E1a
(1) of this section, that report and the report required by this subsection E1a
(2) shall be submitted on a single form. (2006 Code § 9-2-3-5)
         b.   (1) The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an
accident described in subsection E1a of this section shall, if no police
officer is present, give notice of the accident by the fastest available means
of communication to the police department.
            (2)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of
giving immediate notice of an accident as required in subsection E1a of this
section and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the
accident capable of doing so, that occupant must give notice as required in
subsection E1a of this section.
            (3)   If neither the driver nor other occupant provides notice as
required in subsection E1a of this section, the owner of the vehicle involved
in the accident shall, as soon as practicable, make the report. (2006 Code § 9-
2-3-6)
      2.   Reports To City: The driver or owner of a vehicle involved in a
traffic accident shall file with the police department a written report of such
accident. Such report shall be for the confidential use of the police
department and remain subject to the provisions of Illinois state laws. (2006
Code § 9-2-3-8)
      3.   Report Form: Every accident report required to be made in writing
must be made on an appropriate form approved or provided by the state of
Illinois and the police department and must contain all the information
required unless that information is not available. (2006 Code § 9-2-3-9)
      4.   False Reports Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to provide
information in an oral or written report required by this section with
knowledge or reason to believe that such information is false. (2006 Code § 9-
2-3-7)
6-1-5: TRANSPORTING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
   A.   No driver may transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor
within the passenger area of any motor vehicle upon a highway in the city
except in the original container and with the seal unbroken.
   B.   No passenger may carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor within any
passenger area of any motor vehicle upon a highway in the city except in the
original container and with the seal unbroken. (2006 Code § 9-3-2-2)
6-1-6: PLACING OBJECTS OR MATERIALS IN ROADWAYS:
   A.   Objects: It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any
object on any roadway maintained and operated by the city without specific
permission from the superintendent of public works. If permission is granted,
the owner or operator shall ensure that the object is so lighted and protected
by warning signs and/or barricades so as to allow the effective movement of
traffic on the roadway. (2006 Code §
9-8-5)
   B.   Materials:
      1.   No person shall throw, spill, or deposit upon any highway any
bottle, glass, nail, tack, wire, can, or litter, as defined in 415 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 105/3. It shall be unlawful for any person who commits an act
described in this subsection B1 to fail or to refuse to remove such material or
cause it to be removed immediately.
      2.   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway
shall remove any glass or other debris dropped on the highway from the vehicle.
(2006 Code § 9-8-13)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
6-2-1: Authority To Direct Traffic
6-2-2: Obedience To Police And Other Authorized Persons
6-2-3: Fleeing Or Eluding Police Prohibited
6-2-4: Violations Procedure
6-2-5: Penalties
6-2-1: AUTHORITY TO DIRECT TRAFFIC:
   A.   Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with the provisions of this
title; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite
traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, authorized persons may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this title. Such
directions given by a police officer shall take precedence over all signs,
traffic control devices, or any other provisions of this title.
   B.   School crossing guards are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand, or signal while on duty during school hours at designated school
crossing areas.
   C.   Authorized personnel of any fire protection district or other fire
department engaged in operations within the city, when at the scene of a fire,
may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at the scene and in the
immediate vicinity. (2006 Code § 9-2-1-1)
6-2-2: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND OTHER AUTHORIZED PERSONS:
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer, firefighter of any fire protection district or
other firefighting unit engaged in activities within the city, or adult school
crossing guard authorized by law to direct, control, or regulate traffic. (2006
Code § 9-1-2-3)
6-2-3: FLEEING OR ELUDING POLICE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any driver or operator of a motor vehicle, having been given
a visual or audible signal by a police officer directing such driver or
operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, to wilfully fail or refuse to obey
such direction, increase his speed, extinguish his lights, or otherwise flee or
attempt to elude the officer. (2006 Code § 9-1-2-4)
6-2-4: VIOLATIONS PROCEDURE:
Whenever any person is charged with a violation of any provision of this title,
the procedure concerning arrest, bail or personal recognizance, and issuance of
a combination traffic citation and complaint or issuance of a notice to appear,
shall be in accordance with the statutes of the state of Illinois and the
Illinois supreme court rules governing traffic, ordinance, and petty offenses;
subject, however, to the procedure governing those minor traffic violations to
which the administrative ticket program of the city applies. (2006 Code § 9-10-
1)
6-2-5: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided by a specific penalty provision in this title, any
person convicted of a violation of any provision of this title shall be subject
to the penalty provisions in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2006 Code § 9-10-2; amd. 2016 Code)
ARTICLE A.  VEHICLE TAX OR LICENSE FEE
SECTION:
6-2A-1: Definition
6-2A-2: License Fees Or Taxes Established
6-2A-3: Application For License; Issuance
6-2A-4: Payment Of Fee; Proration
6-2A-5: License Plate Or Sticker
6-2A-6: Lost Or Destroyed Licenses
6-2A-7: Exemption From Provisions (Rep. by Ord. 1995-7, 7-17-1995, eff. 7-17-
1995)
6-2A-8: Use Of Revenues
6-2A-9: Violation; Penalties
6-2A-1: DEFINITION:
Whenever the term "motor vehicle" is used in this article, such term shall be
construed to include automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, motorbikes, golf
carts or side-by-side vehicles, and all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, except traction engines, road rollers, and vehicles running
only on rails or tracks, but nothing in this article shall be construed to
affect bicycles, tricycles, or vehicles propelled exclusively by muscular
power. (2006 Code §
5-2-1; amd. Ord. 2018-6, 11-5-2018)
6-2A-2: LICENSE FEES OR TAXES ESTABLISHED:
Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle who resides within the City shall
pay each year to the City Clerk a tax or license fee for the use of each motor
vehicle used on any public street or alley in the City. The annual license fee
to be paid for each motor vehicle shall be as follows:
 
Golf cart or side-by-side vehicle $50.00
Motorbikes                        6.00
Motorcycles                       6.00
Motorscooters                     6.00
Passenger vehicles                10.00
Trucks                            10.00
 
(2006 Code §§
5-2-2,
5-2-3; amd. Ord. 2018-6, 11-5-2018)
6-2A-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE:
   A.   Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle affected by this article
shall file an application with the City Clerk prior to September 1 of each year
setting forth the name and address of the applicant and a description of the
vehicle for which a license is desired. Upon payment of the fee provided in
section
6-2A-2 of this article, the Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued a license,
which shall be attested by him, authorizing the use of such vehicle within the
City until the expiration of such license.
   B.   During the license year, a licensee may obtain a reissuance of a
license by paying the Clerk the sum of one dollar ($1.00) and surrendering the
license plate or sticker as taken from the licensed motor vehicle. The license
originally granted to such licensee shall thereupon be void. This reissuance
provision includes, but is not limited to, situations where the licensed
vehicle is sold, traded, or the windshield thereof replaced. (2006 Code §
5-2-5)
6-2A-4: PAYMENT OF FEE; PRORATION:
   A.   The license fee prescribed in section
6-2A-2 of this article shall be due and payable annually in advance of
September 1 of each year, and the license shall be for one year; provided, that
if the acquisition of the motor vehicle occurs six (6) months after September
1, then, upon due application being made to the City Clerk, a license shall be
issued for the remainder of the year upon payment of one-half (1/2) the fee
which would otherwise be required.
   B.   An owner or operator of a motor vehicle who becomes a resident of the
City during the license year shall have thirty (30) days from the time
residence is established to comply with the provisions of this article. If the
date residence is established is six (6) months after the start of the license
year, then the City Clerk shall issue a license for the remainder of the
license year upon payment of one- half (1/2) the annual fee. (2006 Code §
5-2-6)
6-2A-5: LICENSE PLATE OR STICKER:
   A.   Issuance Of Plate Or Sticker: Each applicant, upon payment of the fee,
shall be given a license plate or windshield sticker, without charge, of such
design and material as may be approved by the City Council. The license sticker
shall be fastened in a prominent and visible place on the windshield of the
motor vehicle. The license plate shall be fastened in a prominent and visible
place at or near the front license bracket of the motor vehicle. (2006 Code §
5-2-7)
   B.   Dealer Plates: The license plates issued to dealers in motor vehicles
held for sale and used for demonstration may be transferred to any other
vehicle so held and used by the same dealer; provided, that such dealer shall
procure one license for each set of dealer's license plates issued to him by
the State of Illinois during the year. (2006 Code §
5-2-4)
6-2A-6: LOST OR DESTROYED LICENSES:
In the event a license plate or sticker is lost or destroyed without fault of
the licensee, the City Clerk shall reissue the license upon receipt of an
affidavit setting out facts relative to such loss. The Clerk shall collect a
reissuance fee of one dollar ($1.00) and shall void the license originally
granted. (2006 Code §
5-2-9)
6-2A-7: EXEMPTION FROM PROVISIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1995-7, 7-17-1995, eff. 7-17-1995)
6-2A-8: USE OF REVENUES:
All revenues derived from the license fees, except for the cost of issuing the
plates or stickers and collecting the fees, shall be used only for the cost of
street and alley improvements and repairs and not to exceed the amount provided
by Illinois Statutes for the payment of salaries and wages of police officers
engaged in the duty of regulating traffic. (2006 Code §
5-2-8)
6-2A-9: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person failing to apply for a Wheel Tax sticker for any motor vehicle after
September 1 of each year shall be deemed in violation of this article and, upon
being convicted of such violation, shall be fined in an amount not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
for each violation in addition to any court costs assessed by the Circuit
Court. (2006 Code §
5-2-10)
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Location Generally
6-3-2: Authority Of Superintendent Of Public Works
6-3-3: Obedience Required; Avoidance Prohibited
6-3-4: Traffic Control Signal Legend
6-3-5: Location At Other Than Intersection
6-3-6: Unauthorized Signs, Signals And Markings
6-3-7: Interference With Devices Prohibited
6-3-1: LOCATION GENERALLY:
All traffic control signs, signals, devices, and markings erected or in place
on the effective date hereof are ratified and confirmed. This section does not
deprive any city officer or employee of any authority heretofore delegated, nor
shall it restrict the city council from further determination of the location
of traffic control signs, signals, devices, and markings. (2006 Code §§
9-2-2-1,
9-2-2-2)
6-3-2: AUTHORITY OF SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
   A.   The superintendent of public works, when authorized by the city
council, shall or may establish, install, and maintain all traffic control
devices; signs and signals; crosswalks, safety zones, traffic lanes and parking
lines; signs restricting or prohibiting traffic; zones of quiet; play streets;
loading zones; slow signs and warnings; one-way streets and alleys; through
streets and stop intersections; and the detour of traffic from one street to
another when necessary, and place proper signs required to control traffic
entering and leaving such detour.
   B.   The superintendent of public works, with the consent of the city
council, is authorized to prohibit or restrict stopping, standing, or parking
of vehicles and to designate, erect, and maintain signs regarding same.
   C.   The superintendent of public works, with the consent of the city
council, is authorized to prohibit the use of certain streets and bridges by
vehicles of weights considered to be excessive, in the event that such
temporary conditions exist as would, in his estimation, make it likely that
damage to such streets and bridges would otherwise result. (2006 Code § 9-2-2-
3)
6-3-3: OBEDIENCE REQUIRED; AVOIDANCE PROHIBITED:
   A.   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in view by authority of the city council or in
accordance with the laws of the state of Illinois.
   B.   It is unlawful for any driver of any vehicle to leave the roadway and
travel across private property to avoid an official traffic control device.
   C.   Whenever any official traffic control device is placed or held in
position approximately conforming to the requirements of this title and
purports to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such device, the
device shall be presumed to have been so placed or held by the official act or
direction of lawful authority and to comply with the requirements of this
title, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. (2006
Code § 9-2-2-4)
6-3-4: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic at an intersection is regulated by the type of electric light
signal commonly known as a stop and go signal:
   A.   Red Light:
      1.   When a red lens is illuminated, it is required that traffic facing
the signal shall stop at a clearly marked line, but if there is no such stop
line, then before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection,
or if there is no such crosswalk, then before entering the intersection, and
shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown. Except when a
sign is in place prohibiting a turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red
signal may cautiously enter the intersection to turn right. After stopping, the
driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection. The
driver shall yield the right of way to pedestrians within the intersection or
an adjacent crosswalk.
      2.   Rapid intermittent red flashes require that vehicular traffic facing
the signal stop as set forth in subsection A1 of this section, but shall be
permitted, after stopping as set forth in subsection A1 of this section, to
proceed, subject to the rules applicable in subsection A1 of this section.
   B.   Yellow Light:
      1.   Rapid intermittent yellow flashes require that vehicular traffic
facing the signal may proceed into the intersection only with extra caution.
      2.   When a yellow lens is illuminated, it is required that vehicular
traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is
being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately
thereafter.
   C.   Green Light: When a green lens is illuminated, it is required that
vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right
or left, unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. Vehicular
traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right of way
to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an
adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. (2006 Code § 9-2-2-5)
6-3-5: LOCATION AT OTHER THAN INTERSECTION:
In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a
place other than an intersection, the provisions of section
6-3-4 of this chapter shall be applicable, except as to provisions which by
their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be at a traffic
sign or a marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, or
in the absence of such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. (2006 Code § 9-2-2-6)
6-3-6: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS:
No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be, or is an
imitation of, or resembles an official traffic control device, or which
attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or
interferes with the movement of traffic or the effectiveness of an official
traffic control device. Any such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and the superintendent of public works or any
police officer is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed
without notice. (2006 Code § 9-2-2-7)
6-3-7: INTERFERENCE WITH DEVICES PROHIBITED:
No person shall, without lawful authority, alter, deface, injure, remove, or
interfere with any official traffic control device. (2006 Code § 9-2-2-8)
CHAPTER 4
DRIVING RULES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Right-Of-Way
6-4-1-1:    Vehicles Approaching Or Entering Intersection Generally
6-4-1-2:    Vehicle Approaching Or Entering T-Intersection
6-4-1-3:    Vehicle Turning Left
6-4-1-4:    Vehicle Entering Intersection Or Crosswalk
6-4-1-5:    Vehicle Entering Stop Or Yield Intersection
6-4-1-6:    Driving From Alleys, Driveways Or Private Roads
6-4-1-7:    Operation Of Vehicle On Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicle
6-4-2: Speed Restrictions
6-4-3: Drive On Right
6-4-4: Divided Roadways
6-4-5: Driving On Roadways Laned For Traffic
6-4-6: Overtaking, Passing Vehicles
6-4-7: Turning Movements
6-4-8: Driver's Signals
6-4-9: Following Too Closely
6-4-10: Railroad Crossings
6-4-11: School Buses
6-4-12: Restrictions On Driving
6-4-13: Funeral Processions And Parades
6-4-14: Motorcycles
6-4-15: Operation Of All-Terrain Vehicles, Snowmobiles, Off Road Motorcycles
And Minibikes
6-4-16: Miscellaneous Prohibitions
6-4-17: Reckless Driving
6-4-18: Drag Racing
6-4-19: Excessive Acceleration; Noise
6-4-20: Driving Under The Influence
6-4-21: Excessive Engine Braking Noise
6-4-1: RIGHT-OF-WAY:
6-4-1-1: VEHICLES APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION GENERALLY:
When two (2) vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different roadways
at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left must
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. The right-of-way rule
declared in this section is modified at through highways and otherwise as
stated in this title. (2006 Code § 9-3-5-1)
6-4-1-2: VEHICLE APPROACHING OR ENTERING T-INTERSECTION:
The driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a highway from a
highway which terminates at the intersection, not otherwise regulated by this
title or controlled by traffic control signs or signals, shall stop, yield, and
grant the privilege of immediate use of the intersection to another vehicle
which has entered the intersection from the nonterminating highway or is
approaching the intersection on the nonterminating highway in such proximity as
to constitute a hazard and, after stopping or yielding, may proceed when the
driver may safely enter the intersection without interference or collision with
the traffic using the nonterminating highway. (2006 Code § 9-3-5-2)
6-4-1-3: VEHICLE TURNING LEFT:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or
into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard and, after having so yielded, may proceed at
such time as a safe interval occurs. (2006 Code § 9-3-5-3)
6-4-1-4: VEHICLE ENTERING INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK:
Where stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection or
flashing red signals are in place at a plainly marked crosswalk between
intersections, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk, and pedestrians within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of
the roadway shall have the right-of-way over vehicles so stopped. Drivers of
vehicles having so yielded the right- of-way to pedestrians entering or within
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection shall also yield the right-of- way to
pedestrians within any other crosswalk at the intersection. (2006 Code § 9-3-5-
4)
6-4-1-5: VEHICLE ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTION:
Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop or yield
signs.
   A.   Stop Intersection: Except when directed to proceed by a police officer
or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop
intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line,
but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield
the right of way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another
roadway or which is approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time when the driver is moving across or within the
intersection, but the driver having so yielded may proceed at such time as a
safe interval occurs.
   B.   Yield Intersection:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience
to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and,
if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but
if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or
if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or
stopping, the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the
intersection.
      2.   If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or
interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield right
of way sign, such collision or interference shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right of way. (2006 Code §§ 9-3-
5-5, 9-3-5-9)
6-4-1-6: DRIVING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS OR PRIVATE ROADS:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an
alley, building, private road, or driveway shall yield the right of way to all
vehicles approaching on the highway to be entered. (2006 Code § 9-3-5-6)
   B.   The driver of a vehicle entering from an alley, building, driveway, or
private road within an area in which any business is located shall stop the
vehicle immediately prior to driving into the sidewalk area extending across
the alley, building entrance, driveway, or private road, or in the event there
is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to be entered
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon, and shall yield the
right of way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision and, upon
entering the roadway, shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching
on such roadway. (2006 Code § 9-3-5-10)
6-4-1-7: OPERATION OF VEHICLE ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE:
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of
audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of law, or a police vehicle
properly and lawfully making use of an audible or visual signal, the driver of
every other vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to
a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or
curb of the highway clear of any intersection and shall, if necessary to permit
the safe passage of the emergency vehicle, stop and remain in such position
until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed. This section shall not
operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty
to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. (2006
Code § 9-3-5-7)
6-4-2: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Basic Rule:
      1.   No vehicle may be driven upon any highway at a speed which is
greater than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic conditions and the
use of the highway, or endangers the safety of any person or property. The fact
that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit
does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching
and crossing an intersection, approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway, or when special hazard exists with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic, or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
Speed must be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person
or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and
the duty of all persons to use due care.
      2.   No person may drive a vehicle upon any highway at a speed which is
greater than the applicable maximum speed limit established by state law or
city ordinance, as may be applicable. (2006 Code § 9-3-3-1)
   B.   Specific Speed Limits:
      1.   Established: Unless some other speed restriction is established as
set forth in subsection B3 of this section, the maximum speed limit for all
vehicles is:
         a.   Twenty (20) miles per hour through the central business district.
         b.   Thirty (30) miles per hour on streets throughout the remainder of
the city, except those under the jurisdiction of the Illinois department of
transportation.
         c.   Fifteen (15) miles per hour in an alley.
      2.   Signs Posted: Appropriate signs in compliance with 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-604 shall be erected to provide notice of the speed
limit through the central business district as provided in subsection B1a of
this section.
      3.   Other Increases Or Decreases: Any other increase or decrease of a
specific speed limit, if established, shall be in compliance with 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-604, as amended from time to time.
      4.   Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of this subsection B is
subject to the penalty provided in section
6-2-5 of this title. (2006 Code § 9-3-3-2)
   C.   School Zones:
      1.   On a school day when schoolchildren are present and so close thereto
that a potential hazard exists because of the close proximity of the motorized
traffic, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty
(20) miles per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any
public thoroughfare where children pass going to and from school. For the
purpose of this subsection C, a school day shall begin at seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and shall conclude at four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
      2.   This subsection C shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs
are posted upon streets and highways. The signs shall give proper warning that
a school zone is being approached and shall indicate the school zone and the
maximum speed limit in effect during school days when schoolchildren are
present.
      3.   Nothing in this title shall prohibit the use of electronic speed
detecting devices within five hundred feet (500') of signs within a special
school speed zone indicating such zone, as defined in this subsection C, nor
shall evidence obtained thereby be inadmissible in any prosecution for
speeding, provided the use of such device shall apply only to the enforcement
of the speed limit in such special school speed zone. (2006 Code § 9-3-3-3)
   D.   Bridges: No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge constituting a
part of a highway at a speed which is greater than the maximum speed which can
be maintained with safety to such bridge, when the bridge is signposted. (2006
Code § 9-3-3-4)
6-4-3: DRIVE ON RIGHT:
   A.   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      1.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movements.
      2.   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the roadway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
      3.   Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon.
      4.   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic.
      5.   Whenever there is a single track paved road on one side of the
public highway and two (2) vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is
the wider shoulder shall give the right of way on such pavement to the other
vehicle.
   B.   Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed
of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall
be driven in the right hand lane available for traffic, or as close as
practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
   C.   Upon any roadway having four (4) or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the
center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such
lanes, or except as permitted under subsection A2 of this section. However,
this subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the
centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or
driveway. (2006 Code § 9-3-1-1)
6-4-4: DIVIDED ROADWAYS:
   A.   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) roadways by leaving
an intervening space or by a physical barrier or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle must be
driven only upon the right hand roadway.
   B.   No vehicle may be driven over, across, or within any such driving
space, barrier, or section, except through an opening in the space, barrier, or
section, or at a crossover or intersection as established by public authority.
(2006 Code § 9-3-1-8)
6-4-5: DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC:
   A.   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
   B.   Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes and provides for
two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same
direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or
in preparation for making a left turn, or where such center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle
is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official traffic control
devices. (2006 Code § 9-3-1-9)
6-4-6: OVERTAKING, PASSING VEHICLES:
   A.   Meeting And Passing Vehicles: Drivers of vehicles proceeding in
opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon roadways
having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each
driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2) of the main traveled
portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. (2006 Code § 9-3-1-2)
   B.   Overtaking Vehicles On Left:
      1.   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions, and
special rules otherwise stated in this title:
         a.   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall
not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the
pavement or the main traveled portion of the roadway.
         b.   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
         c.   The driver of a two (2) wheeled vehicle may not, in passing upon
the left of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction, pass upon the right
of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless there is an unobstructed
lane of traffic available to permit such passing maneuver safely. (2006 Code §
9-3-1-3)
      2.   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless authorized by the provisions of this title and unless such
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event, the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for
vehicles approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within two
hundred feet (200') of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.
(2006 Code § 9-3-1-5)
      3.   a. No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway under
the following conditions:
            (1)   When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in
the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to
create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite
direction.
            (2)   When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of or
traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing.
            (3)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one
hundred feet (100') of any bridge.
         b.   The limitations in subsection B3a of this section do not apply
upon a one-way roadway, nor upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction,
nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private
road, or driveway when such movements can be made with safety. (2006 Code § 9-
3-1-6)
   C.   Overtaking Vehicles On Right:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle with three (3) or more wheels may overtake
and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions:
         a.   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left
turn.
         b.   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two (2) or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being
traveled by the overtaking vehicle.
         c.   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving
vehicles.
      2.   The driver of a two (2) wheeled vehicle may not pass upon the right
of any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless the unobstructed
pavement to the right of the vehicle being passed is a width of not less than
eight feet (8').
      3.   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon
the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. Such
movement shall not be made by driving off the roadway. (2006 Code § 9-3-1-4)
   D.   No Passing Zones:
      1.   When signs or markings designating a no passing zone are in place
and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person, every driver of a
vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
      2.   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no passing zone, no
driver may at any time drive on the left side of the roadway within the no
passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark such
no passing zone throughout its length.
      3.   This subsection D does not apply under the conditions described in
subsection 6-4-3A2 of this chapter, nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left
into or from an alley, private road, or driveway. The pavement striping
designed to mark the no passing zone may be crossed from the left hand lane for
the purpose of completing a pass that was begun prior to the beginning of the
zone in the driver's direction of travel. (2006 Code § 9-3-1-7)
6-4-7: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
   A.   Required Position And Method Of Turning:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall
do so as follows:
         a.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made
as close as practical to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway.
         b.   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such
vehicle, and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as
to leave the intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in
such direction upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left
turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the
center of the intersection.
      2.   Where a special lane for making left turns by drivers proceeding in
opposite directions has been indicated by official traffic control devices:
         a.   A left turn shall not be made from any other lane.
         b.   A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when preparing
for or making a left turn from or into the roadway. (2006 Code § 9-3-4-1)
   B.   U-Turns:
      1.   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to
proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety
and without interfering with other traffic.
      2.   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to
proceed in the opposite direction in any street within the central business
district or at any intersection where an authorized sign prohibiting such turn
as been erected.
      3.   The driver of any vehicle may turn such vehicle so as to proceed in
the opposite direction when permitted in residential districts; provided, that
such turns shall be made only at intersections and when they can be made in
safety without interfering with other traffic and after proper signal. (2006
Code § 9-3-4-2)
6-4-8: DRIVER'S SIGNALS:
   A.   No person may turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is
in proper position upon the roadway as required in subsection 6-4-7A of this
chapter, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise
turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person may so
turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter
provided.
   B.   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required must be given
continuously during not less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by
the vehicle before turning within a business district, and such signal must be
given continuously during not less than the last two hundred feet (200')
traveled by the vehicle before turning outside a business or residence
district.
   C.   No person may stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without
first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this section to
the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to
give such a signal.
   D.   The electric turn signal device required by the Illinois vehicle code
must be used to indicate an intention to turn, change lanes, or start from a
parallel parked position, but must not be flashed on one side only on a parked
or disabled vehicle, or flashed as a courtesy or "do pass" signal to operators
of other vehicles approaching from the rear. However, such signal devices may
be flashed simultaneously on both sides of a motor vehicle to indicate the
presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching,
overtaking, and passing. (2006 Code § 9-3-4-4)
   E.   Any stop or turn signal, when required herein, shall be given either by
means of the hand and arm or by an electric turn signal device conforming to
the requirements provided in the Illinois vehicle code. (2006 Code § 9-3-4-5)
   F.   All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from
the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
      1.   Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally.
      2.   Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward.
      3.   Stop or decrease of speed: Hand and arm extended downward. (2006
Code § 9-3-4-6)
6-4-9: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
   A.   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
   B.   The driver of any truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle, when
traveling upon a roadway outside of a business or residence district and which
is following another truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle, shall,
whenever conditions permit, leave sufficient space so that an overtaking
vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger; except, that this
subsection shall not prevent a truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle
from overtaking and passing any vehicle or combination of vehicles.
   C.   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or
residence district in a caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other
vehicles, shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each such
vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter
and occupy such space without danger. This subsection shall not apply to
funeral processions. (2006 Code § 9-3-1-11)
6-4-10: RAILROAD CROSSINGS:
   A.   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing, such person must exercise due care and caution as the existence of a
railroad track across a highway is a warning of danger, and under any of the
circumstances stated in this section, the driver shall stop within fifty feet
(50'), but not less than fifteen feet (15'), from the nearest rail of the
railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing
requirements shall apply when:
      1.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning
of the immediate approach of a railroad train.
      2.   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman gives or continues to
give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train.
      3.   A railroad train approaching a highway crossing emits a warning
signal and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such
crossing, is an immediate hazard.
      4.   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to such crossing.
      5.   A railroad train is approaching so closely that an immediate hazard
is created.
   B.   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or
is being opened or closed.
   C.   When a stop sign is erected at a particularly dangerous highway grade
crossing of a railroad, the driver of any vehicle shall stop within fifty feet
(50'), but not less than fifteen feet (15'), from the nearest rail of such
railroad and shall proceed only upon exercising due care. (2006 Code § 9-3-5-8)
6-4-11: SCHOOL BUSES:
   A.   Approaching, Overtaking And Passing School Bus: The driver of a vehicle
shall stop the vehicle before meeting or overtaking, from either direction, any
school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging pupils on a
highway or on a private road within an area that is covered by a contract or
agreement executed pursuant to the Illinois vehicle code. The stop is required
before reaching the school bus when there is in operation on the school bus the
visual signals as specified in the Illinois vehicle code. The driver of the
vehicle shall not proceed until the school bus resumes motion or the driver of
the vehicle is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the visual
signals are no longer actuated. (2006 Code § 9-8-14)
   B.   Boarding Or Exiting School Bus:
      1.   At each pick up point where it is necessary for a school bus
passenger to cross the roadway to board the bus, the school bus driver shall
signal the awaiting passenger when it is safe to cross the roadway ahead of the
bus.
      2.   At each discharge point where it is necessary for a school bus
passenger to cross the roadway, the school bus driver shall direct the
passenger to a point approximately ten feet (10') in front of the bus on the
shoulder and shall then signal the passenger when it is safe to cross the
roadway. (2006 Code § 9-8-15)
6-4-12: RESTRICTIONS ON DRIVING:
   A.   Stop When Traffic Obstructed: No driver shall enter an intersection or
a marked crosswalk or drive onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection, crosswalk, or railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing
the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding
any traffic control signal indication. (2006 Code § 9-8-16)
   B.   Driving On Shoulder: Vehicles shall be driven on a roadway and shall
only be driven on the shoulder for the purpose of stopping or accelerating from
a stop while merging into traffic. It shall be a violation of this subsection
if, while merging into traffic and while on the shoulder, the vehicle passes
any other vehicle on the roadway adjacent to it. This subsection shall not
apply to any authorized emergency vehicle or to any service vehicle while
engaged in maintenance of the roadway or related work. (2006 Code § 9-3-1-10)
   C.   Driving Through Safety Zone: No vehicle shall at any time be driven
through or within a safety zone. (2006 Code § 9-3-1-12)
   D.   Driving On Sidewalks: No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk
or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
This subsection does not apply to any vehicle moved exclusively by human power
or to any motorized wheelchair. (2006 Code § 9-8-12)
   E.   Limitations On Backing:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless the
movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic.
      2.   The driver of a vehicle shall not operate the vehicle in reverse on
any alley, parking lot, or other public place, except when the movement can be
made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. (2006 Code §
9-8-7)
   F.   Crossing Fire Hose: No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected
hose of a fire protection district or a fire department when laid down on any
street, private road, or driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire
without the consent of the fire department official in charge. (2006 Code §
9-8-11)
   G.   One Way Traffic: On Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday of
each week from 7:30 A.M. until 8:30 A.M. and from 3:00 P.M. until 4:00 P.M.,
when Abingdon-Avon Schools are in session for student attendance, all vehicular
traffic shall be restricted to one way headed North in the 400 Block of
Pennsylvania. (Ord. 2021-6, 7-7-2021)
6-4-13: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS AND PARADES:
   A.   Funeral Processions:
      1.   Right Of Way: A funeral procession shall have the right of way at
intersections when vehicles comprising the procession have their headlights
lighted, subject to the following conditions and exceptions:
         a.   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the
right of way upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle giving an
audible or visible signal.
         b.   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the
right of way when directed to do so by a police officer.
         c.   The operator of the leading vehicle in a funeral procession shall
comply with the stop signs and traffic control signals, but when the leading
vehicle has proceeded across an intersection in accordance with the signal or
after stopping as required by the stop sign, all vehicles in the procession may
proceed without stopping, regardless of the sign or signal, and the leading
vehicle and the vehicles in procession shall proceed with due caution.
      2.   Drivers Not In The Procession:
         a.   The operator of a vehicle not a part of the funeral procession
shall not drive his vehicle in the funeral procession, except when authorized
to do so by a police officer or when such vehicle is an authorized emergency
vehicle giving an audible or visible signal.
         b.   Operators of vehicles not a part of a funeral procession may not
form a procession or convoy and have their headlights lighted for the purpose
of securing the right of way granted by this subsection A to the funeral
procession.
         c.   The operator of a vehicle not a part of a funeral procession may
overtake and pass the vehicles in the procession if such overtaking and passing
can be accomplished without causing a traffic hazard or interfering with the
procession.
      3.   Identification Of Procession: The lead vehicle in a funeral
procession may be equipped with a flashing amber light which may be used only
when the vehicle is used as a lead vehicle in the procession. Vehicles
comprising a funeral procession may utilize funeral pennants or flags or
windshield stickers to identify the individual vehicles in the procession.
(2006 Code §
9-7-1)
   B.   Parades:
      1.   Permit Required: No person shall form, start, or participate in any
parade unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the city. (2006
Code §
9-7-2)
      2.   Conditions: The city may place conditions on the parade prior to the
issuance of a permit when the city or its police department determines that
such conditions or restrictions are necessary in order to allow the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic, to allow normal police protection in the
city and to avoid the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the
city to prevent normal police protection, and to avoid injury to persons or
property, disorderly conduct, or the creation of a disturbance. (2006 Code §
9-7-3)
      3.   Compliance With Requirements: A parade permittee shall comply with
all permit directions and conditions placed thereon and with all applicable
laws and ordinances. (2006 Code §
9-7-4)
      4.   Revocation Of Permit: The police department may revoke a parade
permit previously issued when further information is obtained subsequent to the
issuance of the permit which causes the city to believe with good cause that
the public safety within the city may be jeopardized. (2006 Code § 9-7- 5)
   C.   Driving Through Procession Or Parade: No operator of a vehicle shall
drive between the vehicles, persons, animals, or other units comprising an
authorized procession or parade, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer. This subsection shall not apply to an "authorized emergency vehicle"
as defined in this title. (2006 Code § 9-7-6)
6-4-14: MOTORCYCLES:
   A.   Riding Restrictions:
      1.   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only on the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and the operator shall not carry any other
person, nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless the motorcycle
is designed to carry more than one person, in which event, a passenger may ride
on the permanent and regular seat if designed for two (2) persons, or upon
another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the
operator.
      2.   A person shall ride on a motorcycle only while sitting astride the
seat, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle.
   B.   Height Of Handlebars: No person shall operate any motorcycle with
handlebars higher than the height of the shoulders of the operator when the
operator is seated in the normal driving position astride that portion of the
seat occupied by the operator. (2006 Code §
9-8-8)
6-4-15: OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES, SNOWMOBILES, OFF ROAD MOTORCYCLES
AND MINIBIKES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any all- terrain
vehicle, snowmobile, off road motorcycle, or minibike on any highway, street,
alley, or sidewalk, or in any public park or on any other public property
within the city.
   B.   All-terrain vehicles may be operated within the city parks or on public
property for maintenance purposes by authorized personnel with the permission
of the superintendent of public works. (2006 Code § 9-8-17)
   C.   The prohibition provided in subsection A of this section shall not
apply to all-terrain vehicles only from October 1 through March 31 of each
year; provided, that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The all-terrain vehicle has mounted on its frame a snow blade of a
type normally used for the moving or removal of snow;
      2.   The operator of the all-terrain vehicle is wearing at all times a
safety green vest or jacket;
      3.   The all-terrain vehicle has mounted on the rear of its frame a slow
moving emblem as required by the state of Illinois in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/12-709;
      4.   The all-terrain vehicle is in compliance with all requirements of
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1426.1(e) and (g); (Ord. 2010-4, 4-5-2010)
      5.   The all-terrain vehicle is not operated on any highway, street,
alley, or sidewalk within the city having a posted speed limit of more than
twenty five (25) miles per hour. Use in city parks or on public property for
maintenance purposes shall be by authorized personnel with the permission of
the superintendent of public works; and
      6.   The all-terrain vehicle is not operated on any highway, street,
alley, or sidewalk within the city except for the purpose of traveling to, from
or between sites for use of the all-terrain vehicle in the moving or removal of
snow. (Ord. 2010-4, 4-5-2010; amd. 2016 Code)
6-4-16: MISCELLANEOUS PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Clinging To Vehicles:
      1.   No person on a bicycle, roller skates, in-line roller skates or
rollerblades, ice skates, skateboard, sled, coaster, or any other device shall
cling to or attach himself or herself or such device to any motor vehicle
traveling on a street or alley in the city.
      2.   No driver of any motor vehicle within the city shall knowingly
permit any person who is on a bicycle, roller skates, in-line roller skates or
rollerblades, ice skates, skateboard, sled, coaster, or any other device to
cling to or attach himself or herself or such device to the vehicle which the
driver is operating. (2006 Code §
9-8-1)
   B.   Toy Vehicles: No person upon roller skates, in-line roller skates or
rollerblades, ice skates, a skateboard, a sled, a coaster, or any other device
shall:
      1.   Ride on any roadway except while crossing a street at a crosswalk;
or
      2.   Ride on any sidewalk where a sign is in place prohibiting the riding
thereon; or
      3.   Ride in any area in the city in which such riding is prohibited by
ordinance. (2006 Code §
9-8-2)
   C.   Boarding Or Alighting From Vehicles:
      1.   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while the vehicle
is in motion. (2006 Code §
9-8-3)
      2.   No person shall climb upon or otherwise affix himself or herself to
any moving vehicle or any vehicle which is about to move.
   D.   Unlawful Riding:
      1.   No person shall ride in or upon any portion of a vehicle not
designed or intended for the use of passengers, nor shall any driver of a
vehicle allow any person to ride in or upon the vehicle being driven by the
driver in any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of
passengers.
      2.   This subsection D shall not apply to an employee engaged in the
necessary discharge of a duty of his employment or to a person riding within a
truck body in a space intended for merchandise. (2006 Code §
9-8-4)
   E.   Opening And Closing Vehicle Door: No person shall open the door of a
vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is
reasonably safe to do so and can be done without interfering with the movement
of other traffic; nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a
vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary
to load or unload passengers. (2006 Code §
9-8-10)
6-4-17: RECKLESS DRIVING:
Any person who drives any vehicle with a wilful or wanton disregard for the
safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving. (2006 Code § 9-3-
2-3)
6-4-18: DRAG RACING:
   A.   Definition: "Drag racing", when used in this section, means the act of
two (2) or more individuals competing or racing on any street or highway in the
city in a situation in which one of the motor vehicles is beside or to the rear
of a motor vehicle operated by a competing driver and the one driver attempts
to prevent the competing driver from passing or overtaking, either by
acceleration or maneuver; or one or more individuals competing in a race
against time on any street or highway in the city.
   B.   Prohibited: Any person who, as an operator of a motor vehicle,
participates in an act defined in subsection A of this section is guilty of
drag racing. (2006 Code § 9-3-2-4)
6-4-19: EXCESSIVE ACCELERATION; NOISE:
   A.   No person shall operate any motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause
or allow to be emitted squealing, screeching, or other such noise from the
vehicle's tires due to rapid acceleration or excessive speed around corners or
other such reason.
   B.   No person shall operate any motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause
undue noise which is not customarily caused by the ordinary motor vehicle in
proper condition. (2006 Code § 9-3-2-5)
6-4-20: DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE:
   A.   A person shall not drive or be in actual physical control of any
vehicle within the City while:
      1.   The alcohol concentration in such person's blood or breath is 0.08
or more based on the definition of blood and breath units in the Illinois
Vehicle Code;
      2.   Under the influence of alcohol;
      3.   Under the influence of alcohol and any other drug or drugs to a
degree which renders such person incapable of safely driving; or
      4.   There is any amount of a drug, substance, or compound in such
person's blood or urine resulting from the unlawful use or consumption of
cannabis listed in the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, or a controlled substance
listed in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act.
   B.   The fact that any person charged with violating this section is or has
been legally entitled to use alcohol or other drugs, or any combination of
both, shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this
section. (2006 Code § 9-3-2-1)
6-4-21: EXCESSIVE ENGINE BRAKING NOISE:
   A.   No person shall operate or cause to be used or operated an engine
braking system that emits excessive noise on any commercial vehicle. For the
purposes of this paragraph an engine braking system shall be deemed to be any
device which uses the force of the engine in any commercial vehicle to slow or
alter the speed of the vehicle by the application of force to the drive train
thereof, including but not limited to engine brakes, exhaust brakes, or other
similar systems. A commercial vehicle shall be deemed to be emitting excessive
noise if the vehicle is operating an engine braking system, and if the vehicle
is not equipped with an adequate sound muffling system on the exhaust thereof.
It is a defense to this paragraph that the driver used an engine braking system
that emits excessive noise in an emergency to avoid a collision with a person
or another vehicle on the roadway.
   B.   Excessive engine braking noise signs, in accordance with section 12-
602.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, shall be erected and maintained that
prohibit the driver of a commercial vehicle, as defined in section
6-1-1 of this title, from operating or actuating any engine braking system that
emits excessive noise. The signs shall read, "EXCESSIVE ENGINE BRAKING NOISE
PROHIBITED". (Ord. 2019-3, 5-6-2019)
CHAPTER 5
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Manner Of Parking
6-5-2: Starting Parked Vehicle
6-5-3: Unattended Vehicle
6-5-4: Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
6-5-5: General Parking Restrictions
6-5-6: Parking During Snow Season
6-5-7: Parking For Persons With Disabilities
6-5-8: Parking Commercial Vehicles, Trailers And Tractors
6-5-9: Resident Only Parking
6-5-10: Loading Zones
6-5-11: Tampering With Parked Vehicle Prohibited
6-5-12: Enforcement
6-5-13: Penalties
6-5-1: MANNER OF PARKING:
   A.   Parallel Parking:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped
or parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right
hand wheels parallel to and within twelve inches (12") of the right hand curb
or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right hand shoulder.
      2.   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so
stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction
of authorized traffic movement, with its right hand wheels within twelve inches
(12") of the right hand curb or as close as practicable to the right hand edge
of the right hand shoulder; except, that on one-way streets or any alley where
signs have been erected indicating that parking is permitted upon the left hand
side of such street or alley, a vehicle may park on such left hand side,
provided the left hand wheels of the vehicle are within twelve inches (12") of
the left hand curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left hand
shoulder.
      3.   This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid
stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle. (2006 Code §
9-4-1)
   B.   Parking In Marked Spaces:
      1.   Vehicles parked within marked spaces shall be parked within the
individual parking space lines.
      2.   On Main Street in the central business district, vehicles shall be
parked as indicated by the markings on the street. (2006 Code § 9-4-2)
   C.   Parking Outside Of Business Or Residence District: Outside a business
or residence district, no person shall stop, park, or leave standing any
vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the roadway when it is
practicable to stop, park, or so leave such vehicle off the roadway, but in
every event, an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing vehicle
shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such
stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of two hundred feet (200')
in each direction upon such highway. This subsection shall not apply to the
driver of any vehicle which is disabled in such manner and to such extent that
it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle in such
position. (2006 Code § 9-4-18)
6-5-2: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (2006 Code § 9-3-4-
3)
6-5-3: UNATTENDED VEHICLE:
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing
the key from the ignition, effectively setting the brake, and, when standing on
any perceptible grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the
highway. (2006 Code §
9-8-6)
6-5-4: PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic
control device, no person shall:
      1.   Stop, stand, or park a vehicle:
         a.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street.
         b.   On a sidewalk.
         c.   Within an intersection.
         d.   On a crosswalk.
         e.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings.
         f.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
         g.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway.
         h.   On any railroad tracks.
         i.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
         j.   In the area between roadways of a divided street or highway,
including crossovers.
         k.   In or upon any private parking lot upon which has been posted a
sign or signs which prohibit parking in the private parking lot. Such signs
shall be of a standard size and authorized by the city, and shall specify the
hours during which parking is prohibited.
      2.   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily
to pick up or discharge passengers:
         a.   In front of a public or private driveway, or within five feet
(5') of such driveway when such restriction is properly marked with an
authorized sign or with yellow zones on the curb lines.
         b.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
         c.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk.
         d.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of
a roadway.
         e.   Within such distance of the driveway entrance to any fire station
when the restriction is properly signposted.
         f.   At any place where an official sign prohibits standing or
parking.
      3.   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers:
         a.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing.
         b.   At any place where an official sign prohibits parking.
   B.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under that person's control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
   C.   This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid
stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle. (2006 Code § 9-4-3)
6-5-5: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Temporary No Parking Area: No person shall park a vehicle in an area
designated by "no parking" signs temporarily erected or placed by personnel
employed by the city who are duly authorized to do so by the superintendent of
public works, for the purposes of repairing, maintaining, or cleaning the
streets; removing snow or other substance therefrom; repairing, extending, or
replacing a utility; or for any authorized purpose related to the movement of
traffic on a public roadway or parking lot. (2006 Code § 9-4-4)
   B.   Alleys:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the
same in any alley within a business area; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall be construed to prohibit the parking of delivery trucks while
actually engaged in the delivery or picking up of merchandise or material.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to park so as to obstruct the free passage
through any alley in the city. (2006 Code § 9-4-11)
   C.   Motorcycles:
      1.   No motorcycle shall be parked so that it extends more than eight
feet (8') into the roadway from the curb. Where there is no curb, measurement
shall be made from the edge of the roadway.
      2.   No motorcycle shall be parked so that it extends outside the marked
parking space. (2006 Code § 9-4-10)
   D.   Merchandise For Sale: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any
street in a business district from which any merchandise is being sold without
specific permission from the city. (2006 Code § 9-4-12)
   E.   Terraces: No person shall park a vehicle upon, over, or across a
terrace, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic and when in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device.
(2006 Code § 9-4-13)
6-5-6: PARKING DURING SNOW SEASON:
   A.   Snow Removal System Established: A snow removal priority system is
hereby established, as shown by a chart maintained from time to time by the
city department of streets and alleys, which chart shall remain on file in the
office of the city clerk for public inspection. (2006 Code §
8-5-1)
   B.   Parking Restrictions During Winter Months: No person shall park any
vehicle along either the east curb or the west curb of that part of Main Street
lying between Jackson Street and South Street between the hours of eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. during the months of
November, December, January, February, and March. In addition, no person shall
park any vehicle on the south curb of East Martin Street from the 100 through
200 blocks of East Martin Street during the same time and months as indicated
in this subsection. (Ord. 2008-4, 6-2-2008; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Snow Alert:
      1.   Authority To Declare; Signs Posted: The mayor, the alderman who is
the chair of the department of streets and alleys, the superintendent of public
works, the chief of police, and any other member of the city council or any
official of the city that may be designated by the mayor are authorized to
declare a snow alert, and the superintendent of public works is authorized to
place proper signs and to detour traffic when necessary in order to carry out
the purposes of this section. (2006 Code § 8-5-6)
      2.   Notice Of Alert: A snow alert is commenced by notification of radio
stations WAAG, WGIL, WLSR, and WAIK in Galesburg; and by notification of
Abingdon and Galesburg newspapers, if feasible. An alert is terminated in the
same manner. (2006 Code §
8-5-3)
      3.   Parking Prohibited On Specific Streets: Upon the declaration of a
snow alert and until said alert is terminated, it shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle on any of the following public streets within the city:
Bernard Street.
East Street.
Ellison Street.
Fearing Avenue.
Illinois State Highway 41 (Monroe Street, Western Avenue and Commercial Drive).
Jackson Street.
Latimer Street.
Main Street.
Martin Street.
Meek Street (between Main and Jefferson Streets).
Monmouth Street (between the west city limits and Front Street).
Pennsylvania Avenue (between Martin Street and Sanitary Road).
Sanitary Road.
Snapp Street (between Latimer and Martin Streets).
(2006 Code §
8-5-2)
   D.   Parking After Snowfall: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any
public street in the city at any time within twelve (12) hours after a snowfall
of three inches (3") or more has occurred. (2006 Code §
8-5-4)
   E.   Enforcement: Any police officer or other authorized personnel who shall
observe any vehicle parked in violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall attach to such vehicle a notice setting forth such violation. The
operator or owner of such vehicle may pay at the office of the city clerk in
person or by mail as penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation the
sum of ten dollars ($10.00), if such payment is made and received by the city
clerk within seventy two (72) hours of such violation. The failure of any such
operator or owner to make such payment within such seventy two (72) hour period
shall render such operator or owner, or both, liable to the general penalty
provisions of this code. (2006 Code § 8-5-7)
   F.   Removal, Storage And Redemption Of Illegally Parked Vehicles: The
police department, and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty, are hereby
authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by commercial
towing service, any automobile or other vehicle illegally parked in any place
where it obstructs or may obstruct snow removal operations. Vehicles so towed
away shall be stored in a safe place and shall be surrendered to the owner or
operator on payment of a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) within twenty four (24)
hours after the time such vehicle was removed, plus thirty dollars ($30.00) for
each additional twenty four (24) hours or fraction thereof. (2006 Code § 8-5-8)
6-5-7: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
   A.   Permit Required:
      1.   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or when
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control
device, no person shall park a vehicle within a parking area for persons with
disabilities without a proper permit.
      2.   If a person with a disability has not obtained registration plates
for persons with disabilities or a decal or device as provided herein, the city
clerk, upon presentation of a certified statement by a licensed physician that
the person is unable to walk two hundred feet (200') or more unassisted by
another person without the aid of a walker, crutches, braces, prosthetic
device, or a wheelchair, or without great difficulty or discomfort due to the
following impairments: neurologic, orthopedic, respiratory, cardiac, or
arthritic disorder; blindness; or the loss of function or absence of a limb or
limbs, may issue a temporary permit to such person with disabilities for a
period not to exceed three (3) years, which shall allow parking in spaces
reserved for parking for persons with disabilities in the city.
   B.   Authority To Designate Spaces: The superintendent of public works shall
have the authority to designate parking spaces for the use of authorized
vehicles transporting persons with disabilities, and to place signs and/or
other markings restricting the parking in spaces to authorized vehicles so
transporting persons with disabilities.
   C.   Interpretation:
      1.   A vehicle which has been issued registration plates provided by law
for persons with disabilities, or which is equipped with a decal or device as
provided by law, shall be considered an authorized vehicle.
      2.   Parking privileges granted by this section are strictly limited to
the person to whom special registration plates, special decals, or devices have
been issued by the city or the state and to qualified operators acting under
his express direction while the person with disabilities is present.
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be fined the sum of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (2006 Code § 9-4-5; amd. 2016
Code)
6-5-8: PARKING COMMERCIAL VEHICLES, TRAILERS AND TRACTORS:
   A.   Commercial Vehicles In Residential Areas: It shall be unlawful for any
person to park any commercial vehicle in any block on any street in which more
than one-half (1/2) of the buildings in such block are used exclusively for
residential purposes for a longer period than is necessary for the reasonably
expeditious unloading and loading of such vehicles. (2006 Code § 9-4-7)
   B.   Trailers And Tractors On Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person
to park any trailer, house trailer, pole trailer, travel trailer, boat trailer,
semitrailer, and/or tractor connected to either a trailer or semitrailer on any
street for more than eight (8) continuous hours, or to park any semitrailer or
trailer more than twenty four feet (24') in length, not connected to a tractor,
on any street except during the period necessary to expeditiously unload and
load the same. (2006 Code § 9-4-8)
6-5-9: RESIDENT ONLY PARKING:
   A.   Resident only parking, providing for parking of motor vehicles only by
residents of the premises, may be authorized at a single-family residence;
provided, that the applicant shows a specific reason of necessity, which is
approved by the city council. A specified reason of necessity may include, but
is not limited to, any of the following:
      1.   Physical impairment of a resident of the premises.
      2.   When the premises of a resident is in the immediate proximity to an
area deemed congested by vehicular traffic or other factors.
      3.   Off street parking is not available to the resident of the premises.
      4.   Any other factor of hardship or unusual circumstance as found by the
city council.
   B.   The space provided by resident only parking shall be defined and
limited as follows:
      1.   One curbside parking space.
      2.   The space shall be not more than twenty five (25) linear feet. (2006
Code § 9-4-9)
6-5-10: LOADING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand, or park a
vehicle in any place established and marked by authority of the city as a
loading zone, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers; provided, however, that the operator of any vehicle engaged in the
actual loading or unloading of material or merchandise in a loading zone may
occupy such loading zone for a period not to exceed thirty (30) minutes while
engaged in the actual delivery or pick up of merchandise or materials. (2006
Code § 9-4-14)
6-5-11: TAMPERING WITH PARKED VEHICLE PROHIBITED:
No person, other than a police officer, shall move a vehicle into any
prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful; or start or
cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle; or shift, change, or move
the levers, brake, starting device, gears, or other mechanism of a parked motor
vehicle to a position other than in which it was left by the owner or driver
thereof, or attempt to do so. (2006 Code § 9-4-20)
6-5-12: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Citations; Exemptions; Responsibility For Violations:
      1.   The police department shall cause a parking citation for nonmoving
violation to be issued to a violator by attaching to the vehicle a notice
setting forth such violation.
      2.   The chief of the police department may authorize voiding of a
parking ticket for the following reasons:
         a.   Disabled vehicle.
         b.   Official city vehicle.
         c.   Ticket issued while the owner/operator was actually engaged in
loading or unloading.
         d.   Ticket issued in error.
         e.   Ticket in the process of being issued when the owner/operator
returned to the vehicle.
      3.   Except as otherwise provided, whenever any vehicle shall have been
stopped, standing, or parking in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, the person in whose name the vehicle is registered and licensed in the
office of the Illinois secretary of state shall be subject to the penalty for
such violation. (2006 Code § 9-4-15)
   B.   Lessors Of Vehicles In Violation:
      1.   Duty Upon Notice Of Violation: A person in whose name a vehicle is
registered pursuant to law and who leases the vehicle to another, after
receiving written notice of a violation of this title involving the vehicle,
shall, upon request, provide such police officers as have authority of the
offense, and the court having jurisdiction thereof, with a written statement of
the name and address of the lessee at the time of such offense and the
identifying number upon the registration plates and registration sticker of the
vehicle. (2006 Code § 9-4-16)
      2.   Parking Liability: No person who is the lessor of a vehicle pursuant
to a written lease agreement shall be liable for the violation of any parking
or standing regulation of this chapter involving the vehicle during the period
of the lease; provided, that upon the request of the appropriate authority
received within one hundred twenty (120) days after the violation occurred, the
lessor provides, within sixty (60) days after such receipt, the name and
address of the lessee. (2006 Code § 9-4-17)
   C.   Authority To Remove Vehicles:
      1.   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle in violation of any of
the provisions of subsection 6-5-1C of this chapter, such officer is hereby
authorized to move the vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge
of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the roadway.
      2.   Any police officer is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be
removed to a place of safety any unattended vehicle illegally left standing
upon any highway or bridge in such a position or under such circumstances as to
obstruct the normal movement of traffic.
      3.   Any police officer is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be
removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle found upon a
highway when:
         a.   Report has been made that the vehicle has been stolen or taken
without the consent of its owner; or
         b.   The person in charge of the vehicle is unable to provide for its
custody or removal; or
         c.   When the person driving or in control of the vehicle is arrested
for an alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to take the
person arrested before a proper judge without unnecessary delay.
      4.   Any police officer is hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or
have removed and towed away by commercial towing service, any vehicle illegally
parked in any place where the parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic
hazard, or in any way blocks the use of a fire hydrant, or otherwise obstructs
or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle. (2006 Code § 9-4-19)
6-5-13: PENALTIES:
Unless specifically provided otherwise elsewhere in this chapter, the operator
or owner of any unlawfully parked vehicle may pay at the office of the city
clerk in person or by mail as penalty for and in full satisfaction of the
violation the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00), if such payment is made and
received by the city clerk within seventy two (72) hours of the violation. The
failure of the operator or owner to make such payment within such seventy two
(72) hour period shall render the operator or owner, or both, liable to the
general penalty provision in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2006 Code § 9-4-21; amd. Ord. 2008-6, 7-21-2008; 2016
Code)
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL OFFENSES
ARTICLE A.  OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
SECTION:
6-5A-1: Resisting An Officer; Escaping; Rescuing Prisoner
6-5A-2: Duty Of Citizens To Aid Police Officers
6-5A-3: Impersonating Officials
6-5A-4: False Alarms
6-5A-1: RESISTING AN OFFICER; ESCAPING; RESCUING PRISONER:
   A.   Resisting An Officer: It is unlawful for any person to resist any
police officer, any member of the police department, or any person duly
empowered with police authority, while in the discharge or apparent discharge
of his duty, or in any way to interfere with or hinder him in the discharge of
his duty.
   B.   Assisting In Escape: It is unlawful for any person to offer or endeavor
to assist any person in the custody of a police officer, a member of the police
department or a person duly empowered with police authority to escape or to
attempt to escape from such custody.
   C.   Rescuing Prisoner: It is unlawful for any person to rescue or to
attempt to rescue any person in the custody of a police officer, a member of
the police department or a person duly empowered with police authority. (1997
Code § 9.04.010)
6-5A-2: DUTY OF CITIZENS TO AID POLICE OFFICERS:
It shall be the duty of all persons, when called upon by any police officer or
any other member of the police department, to promptly aid and assist such
officer or member in the discharge of his duties. (1997 Code § 9.04.020)
6-5A-3: IMPERSONATING OFFICIALS:
   A.   Police Officers:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person other than an official police officer
of the town to wear the uniform, apparel, or any other insignia of office like
or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn by the
official police officers.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person to counterfeit, imitate or cause to be
counterfeited, imitated or colorably imitated, the uniform, apparel, or
insignia of officer used by the police department of the town. (1997 Code §
9.04.030)
   B.   Town Officers And Employees: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully,
unlawfully, or fraudulently represent himself to be a town officer or an
employee of the city and purporting to perform the duties of any such officer
or employee when he is not an authorized officer or employee of the town. (1997
Code § 9.04.040)
6-5A-4: FALSE ALARMS:
Any person who shall, in the town, intentionally make or give a false alarm of
fire shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1997 Code § 9.04.050)
ARTICLE B.  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
SECTION:
6-5B-1: Assault
6-5B-2: Throwing Of Stones And Missiles
6-5B-3: Disorderly Conduct
6-5B-4: Assembling To Commit Unlawful Act
6-5B-5: Disturbing Religious Worship
6-5B-6: Disturbing The Peace; Using Offensive Language
6-5B-7: Drunk And Disorderly
6-5B-8: Harassment
6-5B-9: Abandoned Containers, Wells Or Cisterns
6-5B-10: Explosives
6-5B-11: Weapons
6-5B-12: Drugs And Drug Paraphernalia
6-5B-1: ASSAULT:
No person shall knowingly or recklessly use physical force against another in a
violent or angry manner. (Ord. 534, 10-5-2015)
6-5B-2: THROWING OF STONES AND MISSILES:
No person shall throw or shoot any stone or other missile at or upon any
person, animal, public or private property, building, structure, tree or shrub.
(1997 Code § 9.08.020)
6-5B-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   A person commits disorderly conduct if he intentionally, knowingly or
recklessly:
      1.   Makes a coarse and obviously offensive utterance, gesture or display
in a public place and the utterance, gesture or display tends to incite an
immediate breach of the peace; or
      2.   Abuses or threatens a person in a public place in an obviously
offensive manner; or
      3.   Makes unreasonable noise in a public place or near a private
residence that he has no right to occupy; or
      4.   Fights with another in a public place except in an amateur or
professional contest of athletic skill; or
      5.   Not being a peace officer, discharges a firearm in a public place
except when engaged in lawful target practice or hunting; or
      6.   Not being a peace officer, displays a deadly weapon in a public
place in a manner calculated to alarm.
   B.   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection A2 of this
section that the actor had significant provocation for the abusive or
threatening conduct. (1997 Code § 9.08.030)
6-5B-4: ASSEMBLING TO COMMIT UNLAWFUL ACT:
It is unlawful for any three (3) or more persons to assemble together in the
town with an intent to do any unlawful act; or, being assembled, mutually to
agree or act in concert, to do an unlawful act with force or violence against
the property of the town or the person or property of another or against the
peace and to the terror of others; or to make any more or preparation therefor;
or, being present at such meeting or assembly, to fail to endeavor to prevent
the commission of or perpetration of such unlawful act. (1997 Code § 9.08.040)
6-5B-5: DISTURBING RELIGIOUS WORSHIP:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to disquiet or disturb any
congregation or assembly for religious worship by making a noise or by rude or
indecent behavior, or profane discourse within their place of worship, or so
near the same as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting. (1997 Code §
9.08.050)
6-5B-6: DISTURBING THE PEACE; USING OFFENSIVE LANGUAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or intend to disturb the peace
of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, or by loud
or unusual noises, or by unseemly, profane, obscene, or offensive language,
calculated to provoke a breach of the peace; or by assaulting, striking or
fighting another, or for any person to permit any such conduct in any house or
upon any premises owned or possessed by him under his management or control,
when within his power to prevent, so that others in the vicinity are or may be
disturbed thereby. (1997 Code § 9.08.060)
6-5B-7: DRUNK AND DISORDERLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be drunk or disorderly in any highways,
streets, thoroughfares or other public places, or in any private house or
place, within the town to such an extent as to be obnoxious to public morals or
to jeopardize or to be injurious to person or property. (1997 Code § 9.08.070)
6-5B-8: HARASSMENT:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following terms have the following meanings:
CONDUCT: In connection with a credible threat, acts which further, advance,
promote, or have a continuity of purpose, and may occur before, during, or
after the credible threat.
CREDIBLE THREAT: A threat, physical action, or repeated conduct that would
cause a reasonable person to be in fear for their safety or the safety of their
immediate family or of someone with whom the person has or has had a continuing
relationship. Such threat need not be directly expressed if the totality of the
conduct would cause a reasonable person to fear.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY: Includes the person's spouse and the person's parent,
grandparent, sibling, or child.
OBSCENE: Any patently offensive language including, but not limited to, any
description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual
acts, whether or not the ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual
or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus, or
excretory functions.
PROTECTED PERSON: The person or persons identified in the restraining order as
the person or persons for whose benefit the restraining order was issued.
REPEATED OR REPEATEDLY: On more than one occasion.
RESTRAINING ORDER: Any civil or criminal restraining or protection order that
prohibits the restrained person from contacting, harassing, injuring,
intimidating, molesting, threatening, or touching any protected person; or from
entering or remaining on premises; or from coming within a specified distance
of a protected person or premises or any other provision to protect the
protected person from imminent danger to life or health, that is issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction. The term "restraining order" also includes any
order that amends, modifies, supplements, or supersedes the initial restraining
order.
   B.   Actions Considered As Harassment: It shall be unlawful for any person
to harass another. A person commits harassment if, with intent to harass,
annoy, or alarm another person, such person:
      1.   Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise touches another person or
subjects another person to physical contact; or
      2.   In a public place directs obscene language or makes an obscene
gesture to or at another person; or
      3.   Follows another person in or about a public or private place; or
(Ord. 487, 8-4-2008)
      4.   Initiates communication with another person, anonymously or
otherwise, by telephone, telephone network, data network, text message, instant
message, computer, computer network, or computer system in a manner intended to
harass, annoy, alarm another person or intended to threaten bodily injury or
property damage; or (Ord. 532, 10-5-2015)
      5.   Makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to another
person by telephone, computer, computer network, or computer system that is
obscene; or
      6.   Makes a telephone call or causes a telephone to ring repeatedly,
whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate
conversation; or
      7.   Makes repeated communications at inconvenient hours that invade the
privacy of another and interfere in the use and enjoyment of another's home or
private residence or other private property; or
      8.   Repeatedly insults, taunts, challenges, or makes communications in
offensively coarse language to another in a manner likely to provoke a violent
or disorderly response.
   C.   Place Where Act Committed: Any act prohibited by subsection B of this
section may be deemed to have occurred or to have been committed at the place
at which the telephone call, electronic mail, or other electronic communication
was either made or received.
   D.   Stalking: A person commits stalking if, directly or indirectly through
another person, such person knowingly:
      1.   Makes a credible threat to another person and, in connection with
that threat, repeatedly follows, approaches, contacts, or places under
surveillance another person, a member of that person's immediate family, or
someone with whom that person has or has had a continuing relationship; or
      2.   Makes a credible threat to another person and, in connection with
that threat, repeatedly makes any form of communication with another person, a
member of that person's immediate family, or someone with whom that person has
or has had a continuing relationship, regardless of whether a conversation
ensues; or
      3.   Repeatedly follows, approaches, contacts, places under surveillance,
or makes any form of communication with another person, a member of that
person's immediate family, or someone with whom that person has or has had a
continuing relationship in a manner that would cause a reasonable person to
suffer serious emotional distress and does cause that person, a member of that
person's immediate family, or someone with whom that person has or has had a
continuing relationship to suffer serious emotional distress. For purposes of
this section, a victim need not show that the victim received professional
treatment or counseling to show that the victim suffered serious emotional
distress.
   E.   Violation Of Restraining Order: It shall be unlawful for any person to
commit the offense of violating a restraining order. A person commits the
offense of violating a restraining order if such person contacts, harasses,
injures, intimidates, molests, threatens, or touches any protected person;
enters or remains on premises; comes within a specified distance of a protected
person or premises; or violates any other provision of a restraining order to
protect the protected person from imminent danger to life or health, and such
conduct is prohibited by a restraining order, after such person has been
personally served with any such order or otherwise has acquired from the court
actual knowledge of the contents of any such order. (Ord. 487, 8-4-2008)
   F.   Penalty: Violations of this section shall be punishable as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 487, 8-4-2008; amd. 2016 Code)
6-5B-9: ABANDONED CONTAINERS, WELLS OR CISTERNS:
It is unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any
dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned
building, structure or dwelling under his control, in a place accessible to
children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or other
container which has a door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may
not be released from the inside without first removing the door or lid, snap
lock or other locking device. (1997 Code § 9.16.020)
6-5B-10: EXPLOSIVES:
It is unlawful for any person to store within the town limits or within one
mile thereof any amount of gunpowder, blasting powder, nitroglycerin, dynamite
or other high explosives in excess of one 50-pound box or in excess of five
hundred (500) caps or other devices used for the detonation of such high
explosives. (1997 Code § 9.16.010)
6-5B-11: WEAPONS:
   A.   Carrying Concealed Weapons:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to wear under his clothes, or
concealed about his person, or to display in a threatening manner, any
dangerous or deadly weapon including, but not by way of limitation, any pistol,
revolver, slingshot, cross knuckles or knuckles of lead, brass or other metal,
or any bowie knife, dirk, dagger or any knife resembling a bowie knife, or any
other dangerous or deadly weapon.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, company or association to sell,
offer to sell, display, use, possess or carry any knife or knives having the
appearance of a pocketknife, the blade or blades of which can be opened by a
flick of a button, pressure on the handle, or other mechanical contrivance. Any
such knife is declared to be a dangerous or deadly weapon within the meaning of
subsection A1 of this section, and shall be subject to forfeiture to the town
as provided in subsection A3 of this section.
      3.   Every person convicted of any violation of this subsection A shall
forfeit to the town such dangerous or deadly weapon so concealed or displayed.
      4.   Nothing in this subsection A shall be construed to forbid United
States marshals, sheriffs, constables and their deputies, and any regular,
special or ex officio police officer, or any other law enforcement officer from
carrying or wearing, while on duty, such weapons as shall be necessary in the
proper discharge of their duties. (1997 Code § 9.32.010)
   B.   Disposition Of Confiscated Concealed Weapons: It shall be the duty of
every police officer, upon making any arrest and taking such a concealed weapon
from the person of the offender, to deliver the same to the municipal judge to
be held by him until the final determination of the prosecution for the
offense; and upon the finding of guilt, it shall then be the duty of the
municipal judge to deliver the weapon forthwith to the chief of police who
shall make disposition of the weapon. (1997 Code § 9.32.020)
   C.   Selling Weapons To Intoxicated Persons:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to purchase,
sell, loan or furnish any gun, pistol, or other firearm in which any explosive
substance can be used, to any person under the influence of alcohol or any
narcotic drug, stimulant or depressant, or to any person in a condition of
agitation and excitability, or to any minor under the age of eighteen (18)
years.
      2.   Further, such unlawful purchase, sale, loan or furnishing shall be
grounds for revocation of any license issued by the town to such person, firm
or corporation. (1997 Code § 9.32.030)
   D.   Possession, Carrying Or Using Dangerous Or Deadly Weapons: It shall be
unlawful for any person to have in his possession except within his own
domicile, or to carry or use, a revolver or pistol of any description, shotgun,
or rifle, which may be used for the explosion of cartridges, or any air gun,
gas operated gun or spring gun, or any instrument, toy or weapon commonly known
as a "peashooter", "slingshot", or "beanie" or any bow made for the purpose of
throwing or projecting missiles of any kind by any means whatsoever, whether
such instrument is called by any name set forth above or by any other name;
provided, that nothing in this subsection contained shall prevent the use of
any such instruments in shooting galleries or in any private grounds or
residence under circumstances when such instrument can be fired, discharged, or
operated in such a manner as not to endanger persons or property and also in
such manner as to prevent the projectile from traversing any grounds or space
outside the limits of such gallery, grounds or residence; and further provided,
that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the concealed
carrying of any type of gun whatsoever when unloaded and properly cased, to or
from any range or gallery. (1997 Code § 9.32.040)
   E.   Exception, Permit To Carry Concealed Weapon: The provisions of this
section shall not apply to a person who, at the time of carrying the concealed
weapon, held a valid written permit to carry a concealed weapon issued pursuant
to Colorado Revised Statutes section 18-12-105.1, as it existed prior to its
repeal; or, if the weapon involved was a handgun, held a valid permit to carry
a concealed handgun or a temporary emergency permit issued pursuant to Colorado
Revised Statutes title 18, article 12, part 2, except that it shall be an
offense under this section if the person was carrying a concealed handgun in
violation of Colorado Revised Statutes section 18-12-214. (Ord. 533, 10-5-2015)
6-5B-12: DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: A drug or other substance or an immediate precursor which
is declared to be a controlled substance, and also includes marijuana and
marijuana concentrate.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are
used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the laws
of the town.
MARIJUANA: Shall have the same meaning as in section
6-4-3 of this title.
MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES: Shall have the same meaning as in section
6-4-3 of this title.
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS: Shall have the same meaning as in section
6-4-3 of this title.
OPENLY AND PUBLICLY: In a manner perceptible by or in a place accessible to the
members of the community.
PUBLIC AREA OR BUILDING: A place open to the general public which includes a
place to which the public or a substantial number of the public has access
without restriction, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, public
sidewalks, transportation facilities including rest areas, places of amusement,
parks, playgrounds, town owned open spaces, common open spaces owned by owners'
associations, common areas of public buildings and facilities that are
generally open or accessible to members of the public without restriction,
parking lots and areas and shopping centers or shopping areas.
   B.   Possession Of Marijuana, Marijuana Products And Marijuana Accessories:
      1.   It is unlawful for a person under the age of twenty one (21) years
to consume, possess, transfer, transport or purchase marijuana products,
marijuana accessories or less than one ounce of marijuana.
      2.   It is unlawful for a person twenty one (21) years of age or older to
possess, transfer, transport or purchase less than one ounce of marijuana,
marijuana products or marijuana accessories for any reason other than personal
use unless the person has obtained a current valid license to operate a
marijuana product manufacturing facility, testing facility, cultivation agent
of a licensed manufacturing, testing, cultivation or retail marijuana facility.
      3.   It is unlawful for a person of any age to consume marijuana openly
and publicly or in a manner that endangers others.
      4.   It is unlawful to make marijuana grown for personal use available
for sale in any manner.
      5.   It is unlawful to possess, use, display, transfer, sell, transport,
grow or purchase marijuana products, marijuana accessories or less than one
ounce of marijuana in any public area or building, except that marijuana or
marijuana products may be transported on public streets, roads and highways if
the person has obtained a current, valid license to operate a marijuana product
manufacturing facility, testing facility, cultivation facility or retail
marijuana store or is acting in his or her capacity as an owner, employee or
agent of a licensed manufacturing, testing, cultivation or retail marijuana
facility.
   C.   Possession, Sale Or Promotion Of Paraphernalia:
      1.   It shall be a violation of this section for any person who knowingly
commits the following:
         a.   Possess drug paraphernalia and knows or reasonably should know
that the drug paraphernalia could be used under circumstances in violation of
the laws of this town.
         b.   Sell or deliver, possess with intent to sell or deliver or
manufacture with intent to sell or reasonably should know, that such equipment,
products or materials could be used as drug paraphernalia.
         c.   Place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or
other publication and intends thereby to promote the sale in the town of
equipment, products or materials designed and intended for use as drug
paraphernalia.
      2.   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the
municipal court, in its discretion, may consider, in addition to all other
relevant factors, the following:
         a.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
         b.   The proximity of the object to a controlled substance;
         c.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
         d.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the knowledge of an owner or
of anyone in control of the object, or evidence that such person reasonably
should know, that it will be delivered to persons who he or she knows, or
reasonably should know, could use the object to facilitate a violation of this
section;
         e.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object which
explain or depict its use;
         f.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
         g.   National or local advertising concerning its use;
         h.   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
         i.   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
supplier of like or related items to the community for legal purposes, such as
an authorized distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
         j.   The existence and scope of legal uses for the object in the
community; and
         k.   Expert testimony concerning its use. (Ord. 544, 10-3-2016)
ARTICLE C.  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
SECTION:
6-5C-1: Gambling
6-5C-2: Public Indecency
6-5C-3: Indecent Exposure
6-5C-4: Window Peeping
6-5C-5: Dissemination Of Obscene Materials
6-5C-1: GAMBLING:
   A.   Gambling Unlawful; Definitions:
      1.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    GAIN: The direct realization of winnings; "profit" means any other realized
or unrealized benefit, direct or indirect, including, without limitation,
benefits from proprietorship, management, or unequal advantage in a series of
transactions.
   GAMBLING: Risking any money, credit, deposit or other thing of value for
gain contingent in whole or in part upon lot, chance, the operation of a
gambling device, or the happening or outcome of an event including a sporting
event, over which the person taking a risk has no control, but does not
include:
         a.   Bona fide contests of skill, speed, strength, or endurance in
which awards are made only to entrants or the owners of entries;
         b.   Bona fide business transactions which are valid under the law of
contracts;
         c.   Other acts or transactions now or hereafter expressly authorized
by law;
         d.   Any game, wager, or transaction which is incidental to a bona
fide social relationship, is participated in by natural persons only, and in
which no person is participating, directly or indirectly, in professional
gambling; or
         e.   Any use of or transaction involving a crane game, as defined in
Colorado Revised Statutes section 12-47.1-103(5.5).
   GAMBLING DEVICE: Any device, machine, paraphernalia, or equipment that is
used or usable in the playing phase of any professional gambling activity,
whether that activity consists of gambling between persons or gambling by a
person involving the playing of a machine; except that, the term does not
include a crane game, as defined in Colorado Revised Statutes section 12-47.1-
103(5.5).
   PROFESSIONAL GAMBLING: a. Aiding or inducing another to engage in gambling,
with the intent to derive a profit therefrom; or
         b.   Participating in gambling and having, other than by virtue of
skill or luck, a lesser chance of losing or a greater chance of winning than
one or more of the other participants.
      2.   Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful for any person to engage in gambling
activities or in professional gambling for gain within the town. (1997 Code §
9.12.010; amd. Ord. 535, 10-5-2015)
   B.   Possession Of Gambling Device Or Record:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection B2 of this section, a person who
owns, manufactures, sells, transports, possesses or engages in any transaction
designed to affect the ownership, custody or use of a gambling device or
gambling record, knowing that it is to be used in professional gambling shall
be guilty of possession of a gambling device or records.
      2.   The sale, transportation, manufacture and remanufacture of gambling
devices, including the acquisition of essential parts therefor and the assembly
of such parts, is permitted if such devices are sold, transported, manufactured
and remanufactured only for transportation in interstate or foreign commerce
when such transportation is not prohibited by any applicable foreign, state or
federal law. Storage of gambling devices is also permitted but only for
purposes of manufacturing, remanufacturing and transporting such devices in
interstate or foreign commerce when their transportation is not prohibited.
Such activities may be conducted only by persons who have registered with the
United States government pursuant to the provisions of chapter 24 of title XV
of the United States Code, as amended. Such gambling devices shall not be
openly displayed, except to legal buyers, or sold for use in Colorado
regardless of where purchased nor manufactured, remanufactured or stored for
purposes of manufacture, remanufacture and transportation in violation of any
applicable state or federal law. For the purposes of this subsection, "legal
buyer" means a buyer who resides in another state or country which does not
restrict the possession of the specific gambling device in question. (1997 Code
§ 9.12.020)
   C.   Transmission And Receipt Of Gambling Information: It is unlawful for
any person to knowingly transmit or receive gambling information by telephone,
telegraph, radio, semaphore or other means, or knowingly to install or maintain
equipment for the transmission or receipt of gambling information. (1997 Code §
9.12.030)
6-5C-2: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
   A.   Any person who performs any of the following in a public place or where
the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public
commits public indecency:
      1.   An act of sexual intercourse; or
      2.   A lewd exposure of an intimate part of the body, not including the
genitals, done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of any
person; or
      3.   A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person.
   B.   "Intimate part" means the external genitalia or the perineum or the
anus or the buttocks or the pubes or the breast of any person. (Ord. 537, 10-5-
2015)
6-5C-3: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
A person commits indecent exposure if he or she exposes his or her genitals to
the view of any person under circumstances in which such conduct is likely to
cause affront or alarm to the other person. (Ord. 537, 10-5-2015)
6-5C-4: WINDOW PEEPING:
It is unlawful for any person to trespass upon the property owned or occupied
by another in the town for the purpose of looking or peeping into any window,
door, skylight or other opening in a house, room, building, or to loiter in a
public street, alley, parking lot or other public place for the purpose of
wrongfully observing the action of the occupants of such house, room or
building. (1997 Code § 9.12.060)
6-5C-5: DISSEMINATION OF OBSCENE MATERIALS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    MATERIAL: Anything tangible that is capable of being used or adapted to
arouse interest, whether through the medium of reading, observation, sound or
in any other manner, but does not include an actual three-dimensional obscene
device.
   OBSCENE: Material or a performance that:
      1.   The average person, applying contemporary community standards, would
find that taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in sex;
      2.   Depicts or describes:
  a. Patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sex acts,
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including sexual intercourse, sodomy
and sexual bestiality; or
  b. Patently offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation,
excretory functions, sadism, masochism, lewd exhibition of the genitals, the
male or female genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, or covered
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; and
      3.   Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
OBSCENE DEVICE: A device including a dildo or artificial vagina, designed or
marketed as useful primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs.
PATENTLY OFFENSIVE: So offensive on its face as to affront current community
standards of tolerance.
PERFORMANCE: A play, motion picture, dance or other exhibition performed before
an audience.
PROMOTE: To manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver,
transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present,
exhibit or advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same.
PRURIENT INTEREST: A shameful or morbid interest.
SIMULATED: The explicit depiction or description of any of the types of conduct
set forth under the definition of "obscene" set out in this subsection, which
creates the appearance of such conduct.
WHOLESALE PROMOTE: To manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver,
transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, or to offer or
agree to do the same for purpose of resale.
   B.   Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful to disseminate obscene material within
the town limits, either wholesale or retail.
   C.   Severability: If any of the depictions or descriptions of sexual
conduct described in subsection A of this section are declared by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unlawfully included herein, this declaration shall
not invalidate this section as to other patently offensive sexual conduct
included herein. (1997 Code § 9.12.070)
ARTICLE D.  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
SECTION:
6-5D-1: Theft Related Offenses; Concealment Of Goods
6-5D-2: Trespassing
6-5D-3: Injuring, Destroying Or Removing Property
6-5D-4: Deposits In Streets, Streams And Water Supply
6-5D-5: Littering On Public Property
6-5D-6: Truck Loads Causing Litter
6-5D-7: Lug Wheels Prohibited
6-5D-8: Throwing Advertisements On Public Ways, Grounds
6-5D-9: Obstructing Traffic
6-5D-10: Interfering With Use Of Streets Or Sidewalks
6-5D-11: Broken Glass, Dangerous Substances On Streets And Sidewalks
6-5D-1: THEFT RELATED OFFENSES; CONCEALMENT OF GOODS:
   A.   Theft:
      1.   It is unlawful for a person to commit theft within the town. A
person commits theft when he or she knowingly obtains or exercises control over
anything of value of another without authorization or by threat or deception
when the value of the thing is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and:
         a.   Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or
benefit of the thing of value;
         b.   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value in such
manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit;
         c.   Uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value, intending that
such use, concealment or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently
of its use and benefit; or
         d.   Demands any consideration to which he or she is not legally
entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person.
      2.   For the purposes of this subsection A, a "thing of value" is that
"of another" if anyone other than the defendant has a possessory or proprietary
interest therein.
   B.   Theft Of Rental Property:
      1.   It is unlawful for a person to commit theft of rental property
within the town. A person commits theft of rental property if he or she:
         a.   Having lawfully obtained possession for temporary use of the
personal property of another, which is available only for hire, fails to return
the same within ten (10) days after actual written notice has been given by or
on behalf of the lessor and actually received by the lessee. Such notice shall
not be given until after the expiration of the term of the original lease; and
         b.   The value of the property involved is less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
      2.   The provisions of this subsection B shall not apply to unlawful
occupancy of land or of a building.
      3.   For the purposes of this subsection B, "thing of value" is that "of
another" if anyone other than the defendant has a possessory or proprietary
interest therein.
   C.   Theft By Receiving: It is unlawful to commit theft by receiving within
the town. A person commits theft by receiving when he or she receives, retains,
loans money by pawn or pledge on, or disposes of anything of value of another,
knowing or believing that the thing of value has been stolen, and when he or
she intends to deprive the lawful owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the thing of value, where the value of such thing is less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
   D.   Concealment Of Goods:
      1.   If any person wilfully conceals unpurchased goods, wares, or
merchandise owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or
other mercantile establishment, whether the concealment be on his or her own
person or otherwise and whether on or off the premises of said store or
mercantile establishment, such concealment constitutes prima facie evidence
that the person intended to commit the crime of theft.
      2.   If any person conceals upon his or her person or otherwise carries
away any unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise held or owned by any store or
mercantile establishment, the merchant or any employee thereof or any peace
officer, acting in good faith and upon probable cause based upon reasonable
grounds therefor, may detain and question such person in a reasonable manner
for the purpose of ascertaining whether the person is guilty of theft. Such
questioning of a person by a merchant, merchant's employee or peace officer
does not render the merchant, merchant's employee or peace officer civilly or
criminally liable of slander, false arrest, false imprisonment, malicious
prosecution or unlawful detention. (Ord. 538, 10-5-2015)
6-5D-2: TRESPASSING:
   A.   Taking Down Fences Or Gates: It is unlawful for any person to take down
any fence or let down any bars or to open any gate in or on the property of
another without the consent of the owner, occupant or person in charge thereof.
   B.   Entering Upon Premises Of Another Without Permission: It is unlawful
for any person without legal privilege to enter or remain upon the premises of
another or to fail or refuse to remove himself from the premises when requested
to leave by the owner, occupant or person having lawful control thereof. (1997
Code § 9.20.030)
6-5D-3: INJURING, DESTROYING OR REMOVING PROPERTY:
   A.   Public Property: It is unlawful for any person to either wilfully,
maliciously, wantonly, negligently or in any other manner injure or destroy
real property or improvements thereto, or movable or personal property, within
the town. (1997 Code § 9.20.010)
   B.   Private Property: It is unlawful for any person to either wilfully,
maliciously or wantonly injure or destroy real property or improvements
thereto, or movable or personal property, belonging to any person, corporation,
partnership or association. (1997 Code § 9.20.020)
   C.   Street Signs: It is unlawful for any person without proper
authorization to remove, deface, injure or destroy any street sign, or sign
erected or placed in or adjacent to any street indicating the name of such
street. (1997 Code § 9.20.040)
   D.   Posters: It is unlawful for any person to either wilfully, maliciously,
wantonly, negligently, or in any other manner tear down, deface or cover up any
posted advertisement or bill of any person, firm or corporation when the same
is posted or put in harmony with the provisions of this chapter and other
ordinances of the town. (1997 Code § 9.20.050)
6-5D-4: DEPOSITS IN STREETS, STREAMS AND WATER SUPPLY:
It is unlawful to throw or deposit or cause or permit to be thrown or
deposited, any offal composed of animal or vegetable substance, or both, any
dead animal, excrement, garbage or other offensive matter whatever, upon any
street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or public grounds. No person shall, in the
town, throw or deposit or cause or permit to be thrown or deposited, anything
specified in any foregoing part of this section, or any other substance that
would tend to have a polluting effect, into the water of any stream, ditch,
pond, well, cistern, slough or other body of water, whether artificially or
naturally created, or so near any such place as to be liable to pollute the
water. (1997 Code § 9.20.060)
6-5D-5: LITTERING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   Throwing Trash: It is unlawful to throw or deposit in any street,
alley, sidewalk or public ground, in the town, any paper, old clothes, cloth of
any kind, boots, shoes, hats, leather, hair, grass, junk cars, straw or hay,
trash or any other thing, on public streets or alleys, except in public
receptacles and authorized private receptacles.
   B.   Throwing Litter From Vehicle: It is unlawful for any person, while a
driver or passenger in a vehicle, to throw or deposit litter upon any street or
other public place within the town, or upon private property. (1997 Code §
9.20.070)
6-5D-6: TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER:
   A.   Litter Blowing From Vehicle: No person shall drive or move any truck or
other vehicle within the town unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded as
to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any
street, alley or other public place.
   B.   Garbage Transport Vehicles: Every cart or vehicle used to transport
manure, garbage, swill or offal on any highway in the town shall be fitted with
a substantial tight box thereon, so that no portion of such filth will be
scattered or thrown onto such highway. (Ord. 539, 10-5-2015)
6-5D-7: LUG WHEELS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any vehicles injurious to pavement to be permitted upon
public thoroughfares unless the operator of such vehicles shall first plank and
protect such streets from damage. (1997 Code § 9.20.090)
6-5D-8: THROWING ADVERTISEMENTS ON PUBLIC WAYS, GROUNDS:
It is unlawful for any person to throw any posters, dodgers, circulars, bills,
letters, envelopes, samples or devices upon any of the streets, alleys, parks
or other public grounds of the town. (1997 Code § 9.20.100)
6-5D-9: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC:
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner any sidewalk, public
highway, street or alley in the town, or for the purpose of annoyance or
mischief, to place in any doorway or driveway, or on any sidewalk, public
highway, street or alley in the town any box, barrel, cask or other thing.
(1997 Code § 9.20.110)
6-5D-10: INTERFERING WITH USE OF STREETS OR SIDEWALKS:
It is unlawful for any person, alone or in a group or assemblage of persons,
whose standing, remaining or congregation on any public highway, street, alley
or sidewalk in the town to obstruct, interfere with or prevent the free and
unobstructed and reasonable use of that public highway, street, alley or
sidewalk by any other person, to fail or refuse to yield to the reasonable use
or passage of any other person on that public highway, street, alley or
sidewalk, or to fail or refuse to move on, disperse or cease such obstruction
or interference immediately upon being so ordered by any police officer of the
town or other authorized peace officer. (1997 Code § 9.20.120)
6-5D-11: BROKEN GLASS, DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or
deposited on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, any broken glass,
broken crockery, nails or any other dangerous substance. (1997 Code § 9.20.130)
CHAPTER 6
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Obedience To Traffic Control Devices
6-6-2: Drivers To Exercise Due Care
6-6-3: Right Of Way
6-6-4: Use Right Half Of Crosswalk
6-6-5: Crossing At Other Than Crosswalks
6-6-6: Walking On Roadways
6-6-7: Soliciting Restricted
6-6-8: Railroad Crossings
6-6-9: Yield To Authorized Emergency Vehicles
6-6-10: Pedestrians Under The Influence Prohibited
6-6-11: Pedestrians With Disabilities
6-6-1: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device
specifically applicable to the pedestrian, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer. (2006 Code §
9-6-1)
6-6-2: DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE:
Notwithstanding other provisions of this title, every driver of a vehicle shall
exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian, or any person
operating a bicycle or other device propelled by human power, and shall give
warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper
precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused, incapacitated,
or intoxicated person. (2006 Code § 9-6-4)
6-6-3: RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Crosswalks:
      1.   When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation,
the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger.
      2.   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety
and walk or run into the path of a moving vehicle which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard. If a pedestrian causes the condition stated in
this subsection A2, subsection A1 of this section shall then not apply.
      3.   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
      4.   Whenever stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection or at a plainly marked crosswalk between intersections, drivers
shall yield the right of way to pedestrians as set forth in section
6-4-1-5 of this title. (2006 Code § 9-6-2)
   B.   Sidewalks: The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to any
pedestrian on a sidewalk. (2006 Code § 9-6-10)
6-6-4: USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK:
Each pedestrian shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of a
crosswalk. (2006 Code § 9-6-7)
6-6-5: CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS:
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. (2006 Code § 9-6-3)
6-6-6: WALKING ON ROADWAYS:
   A.   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   B.   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   C.   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way highway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   D.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any pedestrian upon a
roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. (2006
Code § 9-6-9)
6-6-7: SOLICITING RESTRICTED:
   A.   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride
from the driver of any vehicle.
   B.   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   C.   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle except when expressly permitted
by ordinance. Solicitation on highways within the city shall be allowed only at
intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full stop. (2006 Code
§ 9-6-8)
6-6-8: RAILROAD CROSSINGS:
   A.   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
   B.   No pedestrian shall enter, remain upon, or traverse over a railroad
grade crossing or pedestrian walkway crossing a railroad track when an audible
bell or clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device is operational
giving warning of the approach of a railroad train. (2006 Code § 9-6-13)
6-6-9: YIELD TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of an
audible signal and visual signals meeting the requirements of the Illinois
vehicle code 1 , or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an
audible signal only, every pedestrian shall yield the right of way to the
authorized emergency vehicle. (2006 Code § 9-6-11)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS.
6-6-10: PEDESTRIANS UNDER THE INFLUENCE PROHIBITED:
A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to a degree
which renders the pedestrian a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway
except on a sidewalk. (2006 Code § 9-6-12)
6-6-11: PEDESTRIANS WITH DISABILITIES:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian
with clearly visible disabilities. (2006 Code § 9-6-5)
   B.   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair upon a sidewalk or
roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties
applicable to a pedestrian. (2006 Code § 9-6-6)
CHAPTER 7
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
SECTION:
6-7-1: Compliance With State Regulations
6-7-2: Obstruction Of Driver's View Or Driving Mechanism
6-7-3: Vehicle Size, Weight And Load
6-7-1: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REGULATIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle that is not equipped
as provided by law.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle that is not in the
condition required by law.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner
to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any street in the City
any vehicle of a size and weight exceeding the limitations provided by State
law or otherwise in violation of State law, unless under the terms of a special
permit issued as provided in subsection 6-7-3E of this chapter. (2006 Code § 9-
3-1-13)
6-7-2: OBSTRUCTION OF DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM:
   A.   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there is
in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or as to interfere
with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   B.   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver's
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   C.   No passenger on a school bus may ride or stand in a position as to
interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to the rear, or to
interfere with the driver's control of the driving mechanism of the bus. (2006
Code §
9-8-9)
6-7-3: VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD:
   A.   Width: The total outside width of any vehicle or load thereon shall not
be in excess of that allowed by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-102 in
effect and as amended from time to time. (2006 Code §
9-9-1)
   B.   Height: The height of a vehicle shall not exceed the provisions of 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-103 in effect and as amended from time to time.
(2006 Code §
9-9-2)
   C.   Weight Limitations:
      1.   No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be operated, unladen or
with load, upon any street of the City in excess of the authorized gross weight
provided for that street.
      2.   The gross weight limit of eighty thousand (80,000) pounds shall
apply on the following streets, or parts thereof, within the City:
Bernard Street between Illinois State Highway 41 (Commercial Drive) on the east
and the corporate limits of the City on the west.
Cedar Township Road No. 1 between Martin Street on the south and the corporate
limits of the City on the north.
Fearing Avenue between Cline Road on the south and the corporate limits of the
City on the north.
First Street between Ellison Street on the west and the corporate limits of the
City on the east.
Hunter Street between Illinois State Highway 41 (Monroe Street) on the west and
Main Street on the east.
Illinois State Highway 41 (Monroe Street, Western Avenue, and Commercial
Drive).
Jefferson Street between Martin Street on the north and Mill Road on the south.
Latimer Street between Illinois State Highway 41 (Monroe Street) on the west
and Austin Street on the east.
Main Street between Hunter Street on the north and Martin Street on the south.
Martin Street.
Mill Road between Jefferson Street on the west and Front Street on the east.
Monmouth Street between Illinois State Highway 41 (Monroe Street) on the west
and Washington Street on the east.
Sanitary Road between Illinois State Highway 41 (Commercial Drive) on the west
and Indian Point Township Road No. 250 East on the east.
Washington Street between Hunter Street on the north and 707 North Washington
Street on the south.
Washington Street between Monmouth Street on the north and Latimer Street on
the south.
      3.   The gross weight limit of ten thousand (10,000) pounds shall apply
on all other road surfaces within the City, except when a different weight
limit is established and posted. (2006 Code §
9-9-3; amd. Ord. 2008-8, 9-2-2008; Ord. 2009-7, 5-18-2009; Ord. 2019-4, 6-17-
2019)
   D.   Exemptions: The provisions herein governing size and weight do not
apply to any of the following vehicles:
      1.   Firefighting apparatus;
      2.   Equipment for snow and ice removal operations owned and operated by
any governmental unit;
      3.   Construction equipment, vehicles delivering building materials for
construction, and vehicles hauling or mixing materials for concrete;
      4.   Moving vans;
      5.   School buses;
      6.   Garbage and recycling trucks;
      7.   Vehicles of utility companies, railroads, and the Illinois
Department of Transportation;
      8.   Vehicles of burial vault companies;
      9.   Recreational vehicles; and
      10.   Any vehicle operated under the terms of a special permit issued
hereunder. (2006 Code §
9-9-4; amd. Ord. 2008-8, 9-2-2008; Ord. 2009-7, 5-18-2009)
   E.   Permit For Excessive Size And Weight:
      1.   The Superintendent of Public Works, pursuant to authority of the
City Council, may, upon application in writing, issue a special permit in
writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination
of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified by State law, or otherwise not in conformity with the provisions of
State law, upon any street within the City.
      2.   Where a permit is sought for overweight, the application shall show
that the load to be moved by such vehicle or combination of vehicles cannot
reasonably be dismantled or disassembled.
      3.   The application for any such permit shall specifically describe the
vehicle and load to be operated or moved and the particular streets on which a
permit to operate is requested.
      4.   The Superintendent of Public Works, pursuant to authority of the
City Council, is authorized to issue or withhold such permit at his discretion;
or, if such permit is issued, to limit the number of trips or to establish
seasonal or other limitations within which the vehicles described may be
operated on the streets indicated, or otherwise to limit or prescribe
conditions of operation of such vehicle when necessary to assure against undue
damage to the road foundations, surfaces or structures, and may require such
undertaking or other security as may be deemed necessary to compensate for any
injury to any roadway or road structure.
      5.   Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of
vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police
officer or authorized agent of the superintendent of public works. No person
shall violate any of the terms or conditions of such special permit. (2006 Code
§§ 9-3-1-14,
9-9-5)
   F.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section concerning
width, height, or weight, or violating any terms or condition of a special
permit, shall be subject to a fine of not less than four hundred dollars
($400.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
violation. (2006 Code §
9-9-6)
CHAPTER 7
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE A.  DOGS
SECTION:
6-7A-1: Definitions
6-7A-2: Licensing Requirements; Fees
6-7A-3: License Tag Requirements
6-7A-4: Rabies Vaccination Required
6-7A-5: Dangerous Dogs And Potentially Dangerous Dogs
6-7A-6: Declaration As Dangerous Dog
6-7A-7: Running At Large; Confinement
6-7A-8: Impoundment, Redemption And Disposal
6-7A-9: Interference With Dogcatcher Or Police Officer
6-7A-10: Instigating Or Encouraging Dogfights
6-7A-11: Confinement Or Muzzling Of Dogs During Rabies Danger
6-7A-12: Barking, Howling And Noisemaking
6-7A-13: Female Dogs In Heat
6-7A-14: Notice Or Knowledge Of Violation; Prosecution
6-7A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
DANGEROUS DOG: A. Any dog with a propensity, tendency, or disposition to
attack, unprovoked, to cause injury to, or to otherwise threaten the safety of
human beings or domestic animals; any dog that, without provocation, attacks or
bites, or has attacked or bitten, a human being or domestic animal; any dog
owned or harbored primarily, or in part, for the purpose of dogfighting or any
dog trained for dogfighting; or any dog which has been found to be dangerous by
the municipal court or found by any other court of competent jurisdiction to be
dangerous.
   B.   "Dangerous dog" also means any dog which, because of its aggressive
nature, training, or characteristic behavior, is capable of inflicting serious
physical harm or death to humans, and which would constitute a danger to human
life or property if it were not properly kept; or any dog which, when
unprovoked, chases or approaches a human being or domestic animal in a menacing
fashion or apparent attitude of attack on public or private property.
DOG: Any dog, bitch or whelp over the age of three (3) months.
OWNER: Any person, firm, corporation, organization, or other entity possessing,
harboring, or having the care or custody, whether temporarily or permanently,
of a dog.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that, when unprovoked: a) inflicts bites on
a human or a domestic animal on either public or private property; b) chases or
approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds in a
menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or c) has any known
propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked or cause injury or
otherwise threaten the safety of humans or domestic animals.
UNCONFINED: A dangerous dog is "unconfined" if such dog is not securely
confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed or locked pen or structure
upon the premises of the owner of such dog. Such pen or structure must have
secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to
the sides, the sides must be embedded in the ground no less than one foot (1').
(1997 Code § 6.08.010; amd. Ord. 509, 5-6-2013)
6-7A-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   A.   License Required: The owner, possessor or keeper of any dog within the
town shall secure a license for such dog from the town clerk on or before March
1 of each year or within thirty (30) days after the dog reaches the age of
three (3) months. Dogs purchased, obtained or otherwise acquired subsequent to
March 1 in any calendar year shall be licensed within thirty (30) days after
such acquisition. New residents of the town shall have thirty (30) days after
becoming such residents to secure a license hereunder. (1997 Code § 6.08.020)
   B.   Fees: The annual license fee for dogs within the town shall be
determined from time to time by the board of trustees by resolution, payable
for the issuance of such license, which license shall be valid for the period
of January 1 to December 31. No household shall keep or maintain more than
three (3) dogs. (Ord. 540, 11-2-2015)
   C.   Application; Rabies Vaccination Required: Upon application for a dog
license, the applicant shall exhibit to the town clerk a certificate from a
licensed veterinarian that the dog has been inoculated against rabies as
required by this section. All applications for licenses shall be made on forms
provided by the town clerk. (1997 Code § 6.08.060)
6-7A-3: LICENSE TAG REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Issuance: It shall be the duty of the town clerk to deliver or cause to
be delivered to each person making application for a license, paying the
license fee provided for in this article and presenting the certificate of
inoculation required by this article a dog tag for each dog licensed and
inoculated. (1997 Code § 6.08.070)
   B.   Possession: Only those persons who own, possess or keep a dog duly
licensed and inoculated in accordance with the provisions of this article shall
be permitted to possess a dog tag as herein provided for. (1997 Code §
6.08.080)
   C.   Description: The dog tag provided for in this article shall be of such
size, shape, color and materials as may be deemed expedient and suitable by the
town clerk; provided, however, that the color thereof shall be changed each
year. Such tag shall contain a number stamped thereon in numerical order
beginning with number one and shall also indicate the year for which the same
is issued and the word "Akron". (1997 Code § 6.08.090)
   D.   Attachment To Collar Or Harness: Every owner, possessor or keeper of a
dog within the town shall place upon such dog a collar or harness made of
durable material to which the dog tag herein provided for shall be attached.
(1997 Code § 6.08.100)
   E.   Worn Only By Licensed Dog: No person shall affix to the collar or
harness of any dog or permit to remain so affixed a tag evidencing licensing
and rabies inoculation except the dog tag issued to that dog at the time of
issuance of its license. (1997 Code § 6.08.110)
   F.   Records, Duplicates And Transfers: The town clerk shall keep a record
of the date of issue of each dog tag provided for in this article and the
person to whom such tag is issued and the number thereof. If the dog tag herein
provided for is lost or destroyed, a duplicate tag may be obtained from the
town clerk upon the payment fee of fifty cents ($0.50). In the event that the
ownership or possession of a dog is changed, a new dog tag must be obtained and
such new dog tag shall be issued by the town clerk upon proof being presented
that the inoculation and licensing requirements of this section have been
complied with and upon the payment of the fee of fifty cents ($0.50). (1997
Code § 6.08.120)
6-7A-4: RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED:
   A.   Time For Inoculation: The owner, possessor or keeper of every dog
within the town shall have such dog inoculated against rabies between January 1
and March 1 of each year. Dogs purchased, obtained or otherwise acquired or
brought into the town subsequent to March 1 in any calendar year shall be
inoculated within thirty (30) days after such acquisition or being brought into
the town.
   B.   Inoculation By Veterinarian: The inoculation required by the preceding
subsection shall be made by any veterinarian licensed to practice veterinarian
medicine in this state. (1997 Code § 6.08.050)
6-7A-5: DANGEROUS DOGS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS:
   A.   Certificate Of Registration; Conditions; Insurance:
      1.   Required: It is declared unlawful for any owner to have a dangerous
dog or potentially dangerous dog within the town limits without having a
certificate of registration on the dog issued to its owner under subsection A2
of this section.
      2.   Issuance; Conditions: The town clerk, police officers of the town,
or other animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration on a
dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog to its owner only upon compliance
with the registration requirements for a dog and upon presentation to the town
clerk or other issuing authority by the owner of sufficient evidence of the
following:
         a.   A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially
dangerous dog and the posting of the premises with a clearly visible warning
sign that there is a dangerous dog on the premises, and the conspicuous
displaying on the premises of a sign with a warning symbol that informs
children of the presence of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog.
         b.   An insurance policy or certificate of insurance issued by an
insurer qualified under the laws of the state of Colorado in a form acceptable
to the town, which insurance policy or certificate of insurance shall also
provide that it cannot be canceled or terminated until ten (10) days' notice by
registered mail of such cancellation or termination shall have been received by
the town in the sum of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
payable to any person injured by a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog.
         c.   A policy of liability insurance, such as homeowner's insurance,
issued by an insurer qualified to do business in the state of Colorado, in the
amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) covering any
damage or injury which may be caused by his dangerous dog or potentially
dangerous dog, which policy shall contain a provision naming the town as an
additional insured.
   B.   Requirements For Restraint: It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous
dog or potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside its proper
enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or
leash and is under physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall
be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its
vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal.
   C.   Confiscation: The animal control officer or any police officer is
authorized to immediately confiscate a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous
dog: 1) which is not validly registered with the town; 2) whose owner does not
secure the liability insurance policy or certificate of insurance required
under this section; 3) which is not maintained in a proper enclosure for a
dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; or 4) which is outside the owner's
dwelling or a proper enclosure of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog
and not under the proper restraints as set forth in this article.
   D.   Not Declared Dangerous: Dogs shall not be declared dangerous or
potentially dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person
who, at the time, was committing a wilful trespass or other tort upon the
premises occupied by the owner of the dog or was tormenting, abusing or
assaulting the dog or has, during the past, been observed or reported to have
tormented, abused or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to
commit a crime. (1997 Code § 6.08.030)
6-7A-6: DECLARATION AS DANGEROUS DOG:
   A.   Definitions: See section
6-7A-1 of this article for definitions of "dangerous dog" and "owner".
   B.   Declaration; Impoundment; Legal Action:
      1.   Impounded; Euthanized: No person shall harbor, keep, or maintain
within the town limits any dangerous dog, except as provided in section
6-7A-5 of this article. Any dog alleged to be dangerous by virtue of an attack
upon a human being or domestic animal shall be impounded as directed by the
officers or agents of the town until disposition of the charge issued by
summons and citation. Moreover, any dog found to be dangerous after a trial on
a charge of harboring a dangerous dog, or by plea to such a charge, shall be
immediately euthanized. The costs of such euthanasia shall be borne by the
owner of the dangerous dog and shall be assessed by the municipal court as a
judgment against the owner. (Ord. 509, 5-6-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   Serving Summons And Complaint; Euthanization; Cost:
         a.   Any person having knowledge which he or she believes constitutes
probable cause to believe that another is harboring, keeping, or maintaining a
dangerous dog shall file with the town a sworn affidavit setting forth the
basis on which they believe the animal to be a dangerous dog, the name and
address of the owner of the dog, and a description of the dog.
         b.   Upon receipt of such an affidavit, the town clerk shall notify
the appropriate officer or agent of the town of this fact and the officer or
agent shall serve a summons and complaint upon the owner of the alleged
dangerous dog.
         c.   The summons and complaint shall include the requirement that the
owner shall deliver to the officer or agent the alleged dangerous dog. The
officer or agent shall present the alleged dangerous dog to a veterinarian for
inspection to determine whether this dog is a "dangerous dog" by definition as
set forth in this section.
         d.   Any dog found to be dangerous after a trial on a charge of
harboring a dangerous dog, or by plea to such a charge, shall be immediately
euthanized. The costs of such euthanasia shall be borne by the owner of the
dangerous dog and shall be assessed by the municipal court as a judgment
against the owner.
   C.   Exception: No dog shall be declared to be a dangerous dog if the injury
or damage from the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was teasing,
tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or which dog was protecting a human
from being attacked by another animal or by a human being.
   D.   Impoundment Of Dog Pending Litigation:
      1.   Whenever any person is charged with harboring a "dangerous dog", as
defined in subsection A of this section, the appropriate officer or agent of
the town shall impound the dog until the trial on the citation.
      2.   If the dog is determined by plea or trial to be a dangerous dog, it
shall not be returned to the owner but shall be immediately euthanized. The
costs of impoundment shall be assessed by the municipal court as a judgment
against the owner.
   E.   Violations; Payment Of Fines Or Fees: A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation of this section
occurs or continues. In addition to the foregoing penalties or any penalty,
fine, or fee properly assessed by the municipal court, any person who violates
this section shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, handling,
veterinary care, and expert testimony fees necessitated by enforcement of this
section. (Ord. 509, 5-6-2013)
   F.   Penalty: Any person convicted of violating this section may be subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 509, 5-6-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
6-7A-7: RUNNING AT LARGE; CONFINEMENT:
It is unlawful for any owner, possessor or keeper of any dog in the town to
permit the same to run at large within the town. A dog shall be deemed to be
running at large when off or away from the premises of the owner, possessor or
keeper thereof and not under the control of such owner, possessor or keeper or
his agent or servant or a member of his immediate family, either by leash, cord
or chain, not more than ten feet (10') in length. (1997 Code § 6.08.240)
6-7A-8: IMPOUNDMENT, REDEMPTION AND DISPOSAL:
   A.   Impoundment Generally:
      1.   It shall be lawful for the dogcatcher and all police officers to
impound any dog which is not wearing a dog tag as herein provided and any dog
which they reasonably feel to be in violation of any of the provisions of this
article, whether such dog is wearing a dog tag or not.
      2.   It shall be lawful for the dogcatcher or any police officer to go
upon private property for the purpose of catching any dog to be impounded.
(1997 Code § 6.08.130)
   B.   Establishment And Operation Of Pound: The town administrator shall have
the right to establish a dog pound for the town to be operated by town
personnel, or at his election, he may, subject to the approval of the board,
contract with a public or private person or organization for the operation of a
dog pound for and on behalf of the town. (1997 Code § 6.08.140)
   C.   Filing Of Complaint:
      1.   If a dog is impounded, it shall be the duty of the dogcatcher or any
police officer to immediately institute proceedings in the municipal court on
behalf of the town against the owner, possessor or keeper of such dog if known,
charging the owner, possessor or keeper with a violation of the appropriate
section of this article.
      2.   Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the
dogcatcher, any police officer or any citizen from instituting a proceeding in
the municipal court in the town for violation of this article where there is no
impoundment. (1997 Code § 6.08.150)
   D.   Impoundment Notice:
      1.   As soon as practicable after the date of impoundment, the dogcatcher
shall notify the owner of the dog, if he can be ascertained, in the most
expeditious manner, but shall also send by regular mail a written notice of
such impoundment to the owner, possessor or keeper of such dog if the address
of such person be known; if the owner, possessor or keeper of such dog is not
known or if his address cannot be determined, the dogcatcher shall cause to be
posted in a conspicuous place in the town for five (5) consecutive days a
notice of impoundment.
      2.   Whether the notice herein provided be mailed or posted, it shall
describe the dog, set forth the date of impoundment and set forth the location
from which the dog was taken up. (1997 Code § 6.08.160)
   E.   Procedure For Release; Order For Destruction:
      1.   If complaint has been filed in the municipal court of the town
against the owner, possessor or keeper of any impounded dog for a violation of
this article, then such dog shall not be released from impoundment except on
order from a municipal judge.
      2.   In addition to any penalties which may be provided for in this code
for a violation of this article, the municipal judge shall require such owner,
possessor or keeper to pay the fees provided for in subsection G of this
section and shall have the authority, upon making a finding that such dog
constitutes a nuisance or that such dog is a vicious dog or that such dog
constitutes a clear and present danger to the citizens of the community, to
order that such dog be destroyed in a humane manner by the dogcatcher or by
persons authorized to do so by the town administrator. (1997 Code § 6.08.170)
   F.   Disposal Of Dog Whose Owner Cannot Be Located: If a complaint has not
been filed in municipal court because the owner, possessor or keeper of an
impounded dog is not known or cannot be located and such dog has not been
claimed within five (5) days from the date of impoundment, not counting the
first day of impoundment, the dog may be disposed of in any humane manner
prescribed by the dogcatcher or by persons so authorized to do so by the town
administrator. (1997 Code § 6.08.180)
   G.   Redemption Fees: Any owner, possessor or keeper of a dog desiring to
redeem such dog from the pound shall pay the town an impoundment fee together
with a fee for each day of impoundment for room and board and any and all
license or rabies inoculation fees provided for in this article beginning with
the day of impoundment. Such fees shall be determined from time to time by the
board of trustees by resolution. (Ord. 540, 11-2-2015)
6-7A-9: INTERFERENCE WITH DOGCATCHER OR POLICE OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or obstruct the
dogcatcher or any police officer in the discharge of their official duties
under this article. (1997 Code § 6.08.200)
6-7A-10: INSTIGATING OR ENCOURAGING DOGFIGHTS:
No person shall cause, instigate or encourage any dogfight within the town.
(1997 Code § 6.08.210)
6-7A-11: CONFINEMENT OR MUZZLING OF DOGS DURING RABIES DANGER:
   A.   Proclamation Of Mayor: Whenever the mayor shall be of the opinion that
any danger exists from hydrophobia in the town or other danger exists from dogs
running at large within the town, he shall issue his proclamation requiring
every owner, possessor or keeper of any dog within the town to confine or
securely muzzle the same for such time as he may designate, during which time
it shall be unlawful for any dog to be within the town unless so securely
muzzled within a good and substantial wire or leather muzzle securely fastened
and put on so to prevent any such dog from biting.
   B.   Impoundment Of Dogs: It shall be the duty of the dogcatcher and all
police officers of the town to take up and impound any dog that may be found
during the time so designated by the mayor as aforesaid unless muzzled or
confined as herein provided. (1997 Code § 6.08.220)
6-7A-12: BARKING, HOWLING AND NOISEMAKING:
Any dog shall be deemed to be a public nuisance if such dog is permitted to
engage in excessive barking, howling or making a noise which tends to be
annoying to adjacent residents or inhabitants of property near the premises
where such animals are kept or harbored. Barking, howling or making a noise
shall be deemed to be annoying if it is repetitive or loud, and offensive to
nearby residents or inhabitants. (1997 Code § 6.08.270)
6-7A-13: FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT:
Any unspayed female dog, while in heat, shall be securely confined during such
period in the owner's yard, pen or other enclosure. Such yard, pen or enclosure
shall be so constructed or situated as to prevent other dogs from gaining
access to such yard, pen or other enclosure. (1997 Code § 6.08.230)
6-7A-14: NOTICE OR KNOWLEDGE OF VIOLATION; PROSECUTION:
For the purpose of prosecution for violations of this article, it shall not be
necessary in order to obtain a conviction to prove notice or knowledge on the
part of the owner, possessor or keeper of the dog in question that such dog was
violating any of the provisions of this article at the time and place charged,
it being the purpose and intent of this article to impose strict liability upon
the owner, possessor or keeper of any dog for the actions, conduct and
condition of such dog. (1997 Code § 6.08.260)
ARTICLE B.  CATS
SECTION:
6-7B-1: Identification And Control
6-7B-2: Disease Control
6-7B-3: Parent's Liability
6-7B-4: Licensing Requirements; Fees
6-7B-5: Impoundment, Redemption And Disposal
6-7B-6: Noise
6-7B-7: Violation; Penalty
6-7B-1: IDENTIFICATION AND CONTROL:
Every person residing in the town, and owning or having in his possession any
cat, shall have the cat bear identification, either by tag or ear tattoo. (1997
Code § 6.12.010)
6-7B-2: DISEASE CONTROL:
Every person residing in the town, and owning or having in his possession any
cat, shall be required to have the cat inoculated for rabies, distemper or
other dangerous disease. (1997 Code § 6.12.020)
6-7B-3: PARENT'S LIABILITY:
The parent or guardian of any minor claiming ownership of any cat shall be
deemed to be the owner of such animal, and shall be charged for all penalties
and pound fees imposed by this article. (1997 Code § 6.12.030)
6-7B-4: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   A.   Licensing And Fees: It is unlawful for any person to harbor or permit
to remain about the premises any cat more than five (5) months of age for which
no license exists. The annual license fee for cats within the town shall be
determined from time to time by the board of trustees by resolution for
licensing each cat. No household shall keep or maintain more than five (5)
cats. (Ord. 540, 11-2-2015)
   B.   Application For License:
      1.   Application for license shall be made to the town clerk and shall
include the name and address of the applicant, description of the animal, the
appropriate fee, information as to whether or not the animal is spayed or
neutered, and a rabies certificate or tag issued by a licensed veterinarian or
antirabies clinic.
      2.   Application for the required cat license shall be obtained by the
last day of February of each year except the year during which the cat attains
five (5) months of age, and then within thirty (30) days from the date such cat
becomes five (5) months of age. (1997 Code § 6.12.050)
6-7B-5: IMPOUNDMENT, REDEMPTION AND DISPOSAL:
   A.   Impoundment Generally:
      1.   If a cat is impounded, it shall be the duty of the police officer
doing the impounding to immediately institute proceedings in the municipal
court on behalf of the town against the owner, possessor or keeper of such cat,
if known, charging the owner, possessor or keeper with a violation of the
appropriate section of this article.
      2.   Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the police
officer, or any citizen, from instituting proceedings in municipal court in the
town for violation of this article where there is no impoundment. (1997 Code §
6.12.060)
   B.   Notice To Owner Or Keeper:
      1.   As soon as practicable after the date of impoundment, the town clerk
shall cause to be sent by regular mail a written notice of such impoundment to
the owner, possessor or keeper of such cat if the address of such person is
known.
      2.   If the owner, possessor or keeper of such cat is not known, or if
his address cannot be determined, the town clerk shall cause to be posted in a
conspicuous place in the town, for a term of five (5) consecutive days, a
notice of impoundment.
      3.   Whether the notice herein is provided by mail or posted, it shall
describe the cat, set forth the date of impoundment, and set forth the location
from which the cat was taken up. (1997 Code § 6.12.070)
   C.   Release Upon Payment: Any owner or person having custody of a cat
impounded may reclaim such cat by paying to the town an impoundment fee
together with a fee for each day of impoundment for room and board and any and
all license fees provided for in this section beginning with the day of
impoundment. Such fees shall be determined from time to time by the board of
trustees by resolution. (Ord. 540, 11-2-2015)
   D.   Disposal Of Cat Whose Owner Cannot Be Located: If a complaint has not
been filed in municipal court because the owner, possessor or keeper of an
impounded cat is not known or cannot be located, and such cat has not been
claimed within five (5) days from the date of impoundment, not counting the
first day of impoundment, the cat may be disposed of in any humane manner
prescribed by the town clerk or by some other person authorized by the town
clerk to make the decision. (1997 Code § 6.12.090)
6-7B-6: NOISE:
All persons owning, possessing or harboring a cat shall prevent such cat from
whining or making other sounds common to its species in excessive, continuous
or untimely fashion. (1997 Code § 6.12.100)
6-7B-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation, upon violation of any provision of this
article, shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (1997 Code § 6.12.110)
CHAPTER 8
BICYCLES
SECTION:
6-8-1: Scope
6-8-2: Traffic Laws Apply
6-8-3: Operation Of Bicycles
6-8-4: Parking Bicycles
6-8-5: Equipment Requirements
6-8-6: Bicycle Identification Number Required
6-8-7: Duty Of Parent Or Guardian
6-8-8: Penalties
6-8-1: SCOPE:
The regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever any bicycle is
operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles. (2006 Code §
9-5-1)
6-8-2: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY:
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions
of the traffic and vehicle ordinances of the city, except those provisions
changed by specific provisions contained in this chapter, and except those
provisions of the traffic and vehicle ordinances which, by their nature, can
have no application. (2006 Code § 9-5-2)
6-8-3: OPERATION OF BICYCLES:
   A.   Manner Of Riding:
      1.   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
      2.   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped; except, that an adult rider may
carry a child securely attached to his or her person in a backpack or sling.
(2006 Code § 9-5-3)
   B.   Riding Position On Roadways:
      1.   Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway at less than the
normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then
existing shall ride as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of
the roadway. (2006 Code § 9-5-4)
      2.   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
(2) abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for their exclusive
use. Persons riding two (2) abreast shall not impede the normal and reasonable
movement of traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within a single lane.
(2006 Code § 9-5-5)
   C.   Speed Restrictions: No person riding a bicycle shall ride faster than
is reasonable and proper in regard to the safety of the rider and others, and
shall abide by all posted speed limits. (2006 Code § 9-5-8)
   D.   Riding On Sidewalks:
      1.   A person propelling a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a
roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall yield the right of way to any
pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such
pedestrian.
      2.   A person shall not ride a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or
across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, where such use of bicycles is
prohibited by official traffic control devices.
      3.   A person propelling a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a
roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall have all the rights and duties
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances. (2006 Code § 9-5-7)
   E.   Carrying Articles: No person operating a bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle, or article which prevents the use of both hands in the control
and operation of the bicycle. A person operating a bicycle shall keep at least
one hand on the handlebars at all times. (2006 Code § 9-5-6)
   F.   Trick Riding Prohibited: No rider of a bicycle shall remove both hands
from the handlebars, or feet from the pedals, or practice any acrobatic or
fancy riding on any street. (2006 Code § 9-5-9)
6-8-4: PARKING BICYCLES:
   A.   A person may park a bicycle on a sidewalk, unless prohibited or
restricted by an official traffic control device.
   B.   A bicycle parked on a sidewalk shall not impede the normal and
reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic.
   C.   A bicycle may be parked on the roadway at any angle to the curb or edge
of the roadway at any location where parking is allowed.
   D.   A bicycle may be parked on the roadway abreast of another bicycle(s)
near the side of the roadway at any location where parking is allowed.
   E.   A person shall not park a bicycle on a roadway in such a manner as to
obstruct the movement of a legally parked motor vehicle.
   F.   In all other respects, bicycles parked anywhere on a highway shall
conform with the provisions of this title regulating the parking of vehicles.
(2006 Code § 9-5-10)
6-8-5: EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lamps And Reflectors:
      1.   Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a
lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at
least five hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the
rear of a type approved by the state of Illinois, which shall be visible from
all distances from one hundred feet (100') to six hundred feet (600') to the
rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred
feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
      2.   No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a bicycle
that is not equipped with a reflex reflector conforming to specifications
prescribed by the state of Illinois on each pedal, visible from the front and
rear of the bicycle during darkness from a distance of two hundred feet (200').
      3.   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with side reflectors. The reflectors shall be visible from each side
of the bicycle from a distance of five hundred feet (500') and shall be
essentially colorless or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and
essentially colorless or amber to the front of the center of the bicycle
provided. The requirements of this subsection may be met by reflective
materials which shall be at least three-sixteenths inch (3/16") wide on each
side of each tire or rim to indicate as clearly as possible the continuous
circular shape and size of the tires or rims of the bicycle and which
reflective materials may be of the same color on both the front and rear tire
or rim. The reflectors shall conform to specifications prescribed by the state
of Illinois.
      4.   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with an essentially colorless front facing reflector.
   B.   Brake: Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will
adequately control movement of and stop and hold the bicycle.
   C.   Sirens Prohibited: A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any
person use upon a bicycle, any siren. (2006 Code § 9-5-11)
6-8-6: BICYCLE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER REQUIRED:
A person engaged in the business of selling bicycles at retail shall not sell
any bicycle unless the bicycle has an identifying number permanently stamped or
cast on its frame. (2006 Code § 9-5-12)
6-8-7: DUTY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN:
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter. (2006 Code § 9-5-13)
6-8-8: PENALTIES:
   A.   Minors: Any police officer or other authorized personnel who shall
observe any minor in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
attach to the bicycle a notice setting forth such violation or shall give the
operator or owner of the bicycle a notice setting forth the violation. Any
owner or operator of the bicycle who is under the age of sixteen (16) years may
pay at the office of the city clerk in person or by mail, as penalty for and in
full satisfaction of the violation, the sum of one dollar ($1.00), if such
payment is made and received by the city clerk within seventy two (72) hours of
the violation. The failure of the operator or owner to make the payment within
the seventy two (72) hour period shall render the owner or operator liable to
the general penalty provisions of section
1-4-1 of this code. (2006 Code § 9-5-14; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Other Than Minors: Any police officer or other authorized personnel who
shall observe any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by other
than minors shall attach to the bicycle a notice setting forth the violation or
shall give the operator or owner of the bicycle a notice setting forth the
violation. Any owner or operator of the bicycle who is of the age of sixteen
(16) years or older may pay at the office of the city clerk in person or by
mail, as penalty for and in full satisfaction of the violation, the sum of ten
dollars ($10.00), if the payment is made and received by the city clerk within
seventy two (72) hours of the violation. The failure of the operator or owner
to make the payment within the seventy two (72) hour period shall render the
owner or operator liable to the general penalty provisions of section
1-4-1 of this code. (2006 Code § 9-5-15; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 9
IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-9-1: Definitions
6-9-2: Seizure And Impoundment Of Vehicles
6-9-3: Posting Of Bond
6-9-4: Preliminary Hearing
6-9-5: Final Hearing
6-9-6: Liened Vehicles
6-9-7: Unclaimed Vehicle(s)
6-9-8: Towing And Storage
6-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CANNABIS: Means any substance as defined in section 1 of the Cannabis Control
Act 1  as now in force and as may be amended from time to time.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Means any substance as defined and included in the
schedule contained in article II of the Illinois Controlled Substance Act 2 ,
as now in force and as may be amended from time to time.
DRIVING ON AN EXPIRED LICENSE: Means the operation or use of a motor vehicle in
violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code 3 , if the period of
expiration is greater than one year.
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE: Means any violation as defined in section 11-501
of the Illinois Vehicle Code 4  as now in force and as may be amended from time
to time.
DRIVING WHILE DRIVER'S LICENSE, PERMIT OR PRIVILEGE TO OPERATE A MOTOR VEHICLE
IS SUSPENDED OR REVOKED: Means any violation as defined in section 6-303 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code 5 , as now in force and as may be amended from time to
time.
DRIVING WITHOUT A LICENSE OR PERMIT: Operation or use of a motor vehicle
without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit in violation of
section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code 6 , or operating a motor vehicle
without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit due to a person's
age.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: Means any equipment, product, and/or materials as defined
in section 2 of the Drug Paraphernalia Act 7 , as now in force and as may be
amended from time to time.
FLEEING AND ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE A POLICE OFFICER: Means any offenses as defined
in sections 5/11-204 or 11-204.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code 8 , as now in
force and as may be amended from time to time.
HEARING OFFICER: Means a person selected by the City to conduct hearings. The
person shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois
for at least three (3) years, but shall not be an employee of the City.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section
6-1-1 of this title.
OWNER: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section
6-1-1 of this title.
UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS: Means a violation of section 24-1 of the Illinois
Criminal Code 9 .
All such other definitions for terms used herein which definitions are
contained in section
6-1-1 of this title where not inconsistent with the definitions set forth
above. (Ord. 2018-1, 2-20-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.
2 2. 720 ILCS 570/201 et seq.
3 3. 625 ILCS 5/11-601.
4 4. 625 ILCS 5/11-501.
5 5. 625 ILCS 5/6-303.
6 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-601.
7 2. 720 ILCS 600/2.
8 3. 625 ILCS 5/11-204 and 204.1.
9 4. 720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(4).
6-9-2: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES:
   A.   A motor vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment under this
chapter if such motor vehicle is used in the commission of any of the
following:
      1.   The possession or delivery of a controlled substance, drug
paraphernalia or cannabis;
      2.   Driving under the influence;
      3.   Driving while driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked;
      4.   The unlawful use of weapons;
      5.   Fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer;
      6.   Driving with an expired driver's license; or
      7.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued
a driver's license.
   B.   The owner of a vehicle found to be subject to seizure and impoundment
as set forth herein and shall be liable to the City for a penalty of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to fees for the towing and storage of the
vehicle.
   C.   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle. When the vehicle is towed,
the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the
vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the
fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary
hearing to be conducted under this section. (Ord. 2018-1, 2-20-2018)
6-9-3: POSTING OF BOND:
If a bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is posted with the
City, the impounded vehicle will be released to the owner, provided, however,
the owner first pays the towing and storage costs. If a penalty is imposed for
a violation of this chapter, the bond will be forfeited to the City; provided,
in the event that a violation of this chapter is not proven, the bond will be
returned to the person posting the bond. Any bond posted pursuant to this
chapter will be held by the City until the Hearing Officer issues a decision,
or, if there is a judicial review, until the court issues its final decision.
(Ord. 2018-1, 2-20-2018)
6-9-4: PRELIMINARY HEARING:
   A.   An owner of a motor vehicle seized under the provisions of this chapter
may request a preliminary hearing by delivering a written request to the
Abingdon Police Department within twenty four (24) hours after the seizure of
the motor vehicle.
   B.   If the written request is timely made, the Police Chief or Chairman of
the Police Committee shall conduct a preliminary hearing within seventy two
(72) hours after the request for preliminary hearing is received by the City;
provided that if the date for the hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday, the preliminary hearing will be held on the next business day
following the Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. For purposes of this section,
the following shall apply:
      1.   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the preliminary hearing.
      2.   The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing. Hearsay
testimony will be admissible.
      3.   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the Police Chief determines
that there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in the
commission of any offense as provided in section
6-9-2 of this chapter, the Hearing Officer shall order the continued
impoundment of the vehicle, unless the owner of the vehicle posts a cash bond
with the City in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus the towing
and storage costs.
      4.   If the Police Chief determines that there is not probable cause to
believe that the vehicle was used in the commission of any offense as provided
in section
6-9-2 of this chapter, the motor vehicle will be returned to the owner of the
vehicle without any penalty or other costs. (Ord. 2018-1, 2-20-2018)
6-9-5: FINAL HEARING:
   A.   Notice Of Right To Request Hearing: Within ten (10) days after a
vehicle is seized or impounded pursuant to this chapter, the City shall mail a
notice to the owner of the motor vehicle of his or her right to request a
hearing to determine whether the vehicle is subject to impoundment pursuant to
this chapter. Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner, as shown on the records of the Secretary of State of
the state in which the vehicle is registered.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: If the owner files a written request for a hearing
with the Abingdon Police Department no later than fifteen (15) days after the
notice was mailed or otherwise given as provided above, a hearing shall be
scheduled and held, unless continued by order of the Hearing Officer, no later
than forty five (45) days after the request for hearing was filed. Notice of
the hearing shall be given by regular mail to the owner at his or her address
as shown on the Secretary of State vehicle registration records.
   C.   Hearing: For purposes of this section, the following shall apply to the
final hearing:
      1.   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the hearing.
      2.   The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing. Hearsay
testimony will be admissible.
      3.   If the Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence
that the vehicle was used as provided in section
6-9-2 of this chapter, the Hearing Officer shall order the continued
impoundment of the vehicle until the owner of the vehicle pays to the City a
penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus the towing and
storage costs. The penalty and costs shall be a debt due to the City.
      4.   If the Hearing Officer determines that the vehicle was not used as
provided in section
6-9-2 of this chapter, the motor vehicle will be released to the owner of the
vehicle without any penalty or other costs, or, if a cash bond had previously
been posted, the cash bond shall be returned. (Ord. 2018-1, 2-20-2018)
6-9-6: LIENED VEHICLES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, whenever a person with a
lien of record against a vehicle impounded under this section has commenced
foreclosure proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given to that
person if he or she agrees in writing to refund to the City the net proceeds of
any foreclosure sale, less any amounts necessary to pay all lien holders of
record, up to the total amount of penalties and fees imposed under this
chapter. The lien must be shown on the title and recorded with the Secretary of
State. (Ord. 2018-1, 2-20-2018)
6-9-7: UNCLAIMED VEHICLE(S):
Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within thirty (30) days after a final
administrative decision is rendered in favor of the City upon a hearing or
against an owner who is in default or upon the failure of the owner to timely
request a hearing, will be considered abandoned and may be disposed of as an
unclaimed vehicle as provided by law. (Ord. 2018-1, 2-20-2018)
6-9-8: TOWING AND STORAGE:
Fees for towing and storage of vehicles under this chapter shall be at same
rates as those rates filed by the towing service providers with the City Clerk.
(Ord. 2018-1, 2-20-2018)
CHAPTER 10
GOLF CARTS AND SIDE-BY-SIDE VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-10-1: Policy Statement
6-10-2: Definitions
6-10-3: Rules And Regulations
6-10-4: Permits
6-10-5: Enforcement
6-10-1: POLICY STATEMENT:
This chapter is adopted in the interest of public safety. Golf carts and side-
by-side vehicles are not designed or manufactured to be used on public streets
and roads, and the City of Abingdon in no way, advocates or endorses their
operation on streets. The City of Abingdon, by regulating such operation, is
merely addressing safety issues. This chapter is not to be relied upon as
determination that operation on streets is safe or advisable even if done in
accordance, with this chapter. All persons operating a golf cart and/or side-
by-side vehicle must be observant of, and attentive to the safety of themselves
and others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicyclists, and
pedestrians. All persons who operate or ride a golf cart and side-by-side
vehicle on streets inside the City of Abingdon do so at their own risk and
peril. The City of Abingdon has no liability under any theory of liability for
permitting a golf cart and/or side-by-side vehicle to be operated on designated
City streets. (Ord. 2018-6, 11-5-2018)
6-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
GOLF CART: Means a vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes
of transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance
equipment while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf,
or maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private course.
SIDE-BY-SIDE VEHICLE: Is any motorized off-highway device designed to travel
primarily off-highway, sixty four inches (64") or less in width, having a
manufacturer's dry weight of two thousand (2,000) pounds or less, traveling on
four (4) or more non-highway tires, designed with a non-straddle seat and a
steering wheel for steering control, except equipment such as lawnmowers. (Ord.
2018-6, 11-5-2018)
6-10-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A golf cart and/or side-by-side vehicle may only be operated on streets, except
State Highway 41, located within the City of Abingdon in accordance with the
following rules and regulations:
   A.   Must be at least eighteen (18) years of age and possess a valid
driver's license to operate a motor vehicle issued by Illinois or any other
state.
   B.   Must adhere to graduated driving laws according to and as set by State
of Illinois with passenger limit.
   C.   Must possess proof of liability insurance, meeting Illinois Statutes
requirements.
   D.   The golf cart and/or side-by-side vehicle must, at a minimum, be
equipped with, brakes, a steering apparatus, tires, a rearview mirror, red
reflectorized warning devices in the front and rear, a slow moving emblem, as
required of other vehicles in section of 12-709 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
on the rear of the golf cart and/or side-by-side, a headlight that emits a
white light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front, a
tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least one hundred feet (100')
from the rear, brake lights, and turn signals, and when operated on a roadway,
the golf cart and/or side-by-side vehicle shall have its headlight and tail
lamps lighted, as required by section 12-201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   E.   Operator and every passenger shall be protected by glasses, goggles or
a transparent shield.
   F.   May not operate the golf cart and/or side-by-side vehicle when
visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, for or other conditions or at any
time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicle on the
roadway at a distance of five hundred feet (500').
   G.   May only operate the golf cart and/or side-by-side vehicle from five
o'clock (5:00) A.M. until ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   H.   May not operate the golf cart and/or side-by-side vehicle on any
sidewalk or within, except for parking areas, any park owned, operated and/or
maintained by the City of Abingdon.
   I.   May operate, a golf cart and/or side-by-side vehicle only on streets,
except State Highway 41, located within the City of Abingdon, and at a rate of
twenty (20) mph or less.
   J.   May operate a golf cart and/or side-by-side vehicle on State Highway 41
only to cross such highway at intersections in a path ninety degrees (90°) to
such highway.
   K.   May not operate a golf cart and/or side-by-side to tow or pull chattel
personal property of any kind and the operator of the golf cart and/or side-by-
side must adhere to all applicable State laws concerning the possession and use
of alcoholic beverages, and all other illegal drugs, and all other State
traffic laws.
   L.   Must yield the right-of-way to overtaking vehicles at all times.
   M.   A maximum occupancy of two (2) per bench seat.
   N.   Children must be properly seated, with seatbelts for children less than
six (6) years of age, while the golf cart and/or side- by-side vehicle is in
motion, and may not be transported in a negligent manner.
   O.   Only allowed to park in handicapped parking spaces if the driver or at
least one passenger has a valid State issued and properly displayed handicap
parking sticker.
   P.   Vehicles must be inspected by the Chief of Police or his/her designee,
and shall pay a fee to the City of Abingdon for such inspection of fifty
dollars ($50.00), per golf cart and/or side- by-side vehicle.
   Q.   Golf carts and/or side-by-side vehicles are subject to being stopped at
any time for a safety check, to verify that all required equipment is in good
working order, or to verify that the operator has valid permit and license.
(Ord. 2018-6, 11-5-2018)
6-10-4: PERMITS:
   A.   Every vehicle is required to have a permit issued by the City of
Abingdon as provided in chapter 2, article A of this title. Application for
such a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the City of Abingdon and
shall contain all such information as may, at the sole discretion of the City
of Abingdon, deem necessary and shall be accompanied with a non-refundable
permit application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). The permit is for the golf
cart and/or side-by-side vehicle being licensed and is nontransferable.
   B.   Any permit granted shall be subject to its being suspended and/or
revoked upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any provision of
this chapter or there is evidence that holder of the permit cannot safely
operate a qualified golf cart and/or side-by-side vehicle on the streets,
except State Highway 41, located within the City of Abingdon. The Chief of
Police and the City of Abingdon Police Committee shall decide the length of
suspension or revocation. (Ord. 2018-6, 11-5-2018)
6-10-5: ENFORCEMENT:
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each violation.
A second violation of this chapter shall, in addition to being subject to a
fine, be grounds for the immediate suspension of the permit or a revocation of
the vehicle's permit issued for a period up to one year.
The City of Abingdon reserves the right to amend or repeal this chapter at any
time and no person receiving a permit pursuant to the terms of this chapter
shall have any legal right to the continuation of said permit regardless of the
cost of rendering a golf cart and/or side-by-side vehicle in compliance with
this chapter. (Ord. 2018-6, 11-5-2018)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Supervision And Enforcement
7-1-2: Street Names And Numbers
7-1-3: Construction Specifications
7-1-4: Construction Permit Requirements
7-1-5: Construction And Repair Of Sidewalks, Curbs, Gutters And Driveways
7-1-6: Sidewalk Replacement
7-1-7: Obstructions And Encroachments
7-1-8: Safety Devices
7-1-9: Underground Utility Services
7-1-10: Deposits On Public Ways
7-1-11: Street Openings
7-1-12: Restricted And Prohibited Acts
7-1-13: Closing Streets
7-1-14: Trees, Shrubs And Decorative Items
7-1-15: Penalty
7-1-1: SUPERVISION AND ENFORCEMENT:
All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, sidewalks, and other
public ways shall be under the supervision of the superintendent of public
works. He shall be charged with the enforcement of all ordinance provisions
relating to such public places (except traffic ordinances), and is hereby
authorized to enforce such provisions. (2006 Code §
8-1-3)
7-1-2: STREET NAMES AND NUMBERS:
   A.   Street Names And Map: All streets shall be known and designated by the
names applied to them, respectfully, on the map of the city filed with the city
clerk, which map is hereby adopted and made a part of this subsection. The name
of any new street or the change of name of any street shall be done by
resolution, which shall provide that it amends the map. (2006 Code §
8-1-1)
   B.   Street Numbers: All premises shall bear a distinctive street number in
accordance with the present numbering system established by the city. Every
person owning or occupying any premises shall place the correct number on the
front of the premises, with the number facing the street and adjacent to the
principal entrance of the premises and in such position so to be plainly
visible from the street. (2006 Code §
8-1-2)
7-1-3: CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
All street and sidewalk pavements, and driveways that cross any public way,
shall be made in conformity with specifications laid down or approved from time
to time by the city council. (2006 Code §
8-1-8)
7-1-4: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement
on any public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way, or to repair the
same, or to construct any driveway or change or remove any curbing, without
having first secured a permit and received permission from the superintendent
of public works therefor. (2006 Code §
8-1-5; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Application For Permit; Fee: Applications for such permits shall be
made to the city clerk, on a form prescribed by the corporate authorities and
prepared by the city clerk, and shall be accompanied by payment of a fee of
twenty dollars ($20.00) for each application, which fee is not returnable. The
application shall state the location of the intended pavement, driveway, or
repair, the extent thereof, and the person or firm who is to do the actual
construction work. (2006 Code §
8-1-5)
   C.   Bond Required: Each applicant shall file a bond in an amount to be
determined, and surety to be approved, by the superintendent of public works,
conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss or damage resulting from the
work undertaken or the manner of doing the same. The superintendent shall
consult with the city engineer prior to making such determination and approval.
(2006 Code §
8-1-7)
   D.   Approval And Issuance Of Permit: No permit shall be issued until
approved by the superintendent of public works, who may require further
information or other material as a condition precedent to the issuance of a
permit. (2006 Code §
8-1-6)
7-1-5: CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS, GUTTERS AND DRIVEWAYS:
   A.   Permit And Compliance Required: No person shall construct, reconstruct,
repair or remove any sidewalk or any structure of any nature lying within the
limits of any street or alley right of way, or any curb, gutter, driveway, or
structure for regulating, governing, or facilitating the flow of water except
in accordance with the line, grade, and specifications established or approved
by the city engineer, and after having obtained a permit.
   B.   Sidewalk Specifications: All public sidewalks shall be constructed on
lines, grades, and specifications established or approved by the city engineer.
   C.   Responsibility For Curbs And Gutters: All curb and gutter construction
for any new driveway entrance shall be the responsibility of the property
owner. (2006 Code §
8-1-10)
7-1-6: SIDEWALK REPLACEMENT:
Sidewalk replacements in the city shall be made according to the following
provisions:
   A.   Replacement of a sidewalk across the entire front of a lot is fifty
percent (50%) the city's and fifty percent (50%) the property owner's expense.
   B.   All sidewalks to be so replaced must have the prior approval of the
city engineer in order to be eligible for reimbursement.
   C.   Reimbursement shall be made on the basis of the unit cost to the city
for sidewalk construction by the contractor selected for such work.
   D.   Small dangerous sections of sidewalks are replaced at one hundred
percent (100%) the city's expense as determined by the city engineer.
   E.   The private sidewalk which provides the property owner access from the
curb line to his house is one hundred percent (100%) the property owner's
expense including the maintenance.
   F.   A new public sidewalk is fifty percent (50%) the city's and fifty
percent (50%) the property owner's expense according to subsection C of this
section.
   G.   If a sidewalk, public or private, is disturbed during the course of
street construction, it will be replaced at one hundred percent (100%) the
city's expense.
   H.   A sidewalk repair list is kept by the superintendent of public works
and the city engineer and the repair program is organized from this list.
Effort is made to establish priority considering the location and condition of
the walk.
   I.   Sidewalks constructed in new subdivisions adjacent to major streets
shall be constructed one hundred percent (100%) by the developer.
   J.   Special sidewalks for school traffic are installed at one hundred
percent (100%) the city's expense.
   K.   All city participation is dependent upon the availability of city
funds. (2006 Code § 8-1-11)
7-1-7: OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS:
   A.   Obstructions Generally:
      1.   Prohibited: No person shall encumber, obstruct, or endanger the
proper use of any street, sidewalk, or alley.
      2.   Liability: Any person having the care, either as owner or occupant,
of any premises bordered by a public street or alley shall be liable to the
city for any legal liability that may be adjudged against the city as a result
if the placing of obstructions of any nature in the public street or alley by
such person. (2006 Code § 8-1-12)
   B.   Encroachments: No person shall erect or cause to be erected or retain
any "encroachment", as defined herein, within the limits of the street or
roadway, right of way, public alley, sidewalk, parkway, or other public way.
"Encroachment" means any building, fence, sign, or any other structure or
object of any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs)
which is placed, located, or maintained in, on, under, or over any portion of
the public ways described in this subsection. (2006 Code § 8-1-15)
   C.   Obstructing Drains: No person shall obstruct any drain in any public
street or property. (2006 Code § 8-1-16)
   D.   Building Materials In Streets And Alleys: No person shall use any
street or alley for the temporary storage of building material, equipment,
facilities, or merchandise, or for barricading or protecting building
operations without a permit. No building material, equipment, or facilities so
stored shall be placed in such a manner as to interfere with normal drainage of
the street or alley. (2006 Code § 8-1-22)
7-1-8: SAFETY DEVICES:
   A.   Required:
      1.   Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or
other public place, or making an excavation in the same, shall maintain
suitable barricades to prevent injury of any person or vehicle by reason of the
work, and such barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime.
      2.   Any defect in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent
injury, and any person properly maintaining any opening or excavation while the
same remains open shall guard the same with proper barricades and lights. (2006
Code § 8-1-13)
   B.   Disturbing Devices Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
disturb or interfere with any barricade or lights lawfully placed to protect or
mark any new pavement or excavation or opening in any public street, alley, or
sidewalk. (2006 Code § 8-1-14)
7-1-9: UNDERGROUND UTILITY SERVICES:
   A.   Plat Required: Each public utility having underground services within
the city limits shall file a plat or plats showing the location of such
facilities with the city public works department. (2006 Code § 8-1-25; amd.
2016 Code)
   B.   Determination Of Location Of Services Prior To Excavation: Any person
shall contact the joint utility location information for excavation (JULIE) in
order to determine the location of any underground service before making any
excavation that might endanger such service.
   C.   Liability For Damages: If any person damages any underground service
facility, that person shall be required to repay the utility concerned for the
facility repair or to repair the damaged facility under the direction of the
utility concerned. (2006 Code § 8-1-25)
7-1-10: DEPOSITS ON PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Prohibited Generally: No person shall leave, place, throw, deposit, or
allow to be placed or deposited any glass, dirt, rubbish, garbage, paper, wood,
plastic, or other waste material or refuse or snow upon any public street,
alley, or sidewalk. (2006 Code § 8-1-21; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Landscape Waste: No person shall allow grass cuttings, leaves, or other
landscape waste to be placed onto any street by reason of mowing, raking, or
otherwise. For the purposes of this subsection, the word person includes the
owner of the property from which the landscape waste originates, the person
legally entitled to occupy the premises, or any person who caused the landscape
waste to be placed into the street if that person is eighteen (18) years of age
or older. (2006 Code § 8-1-23)
7-1-11: STREET OPENINGS:
No person shall construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public
street or sidewalk or alley without approval from the city council. All such
lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or
railing approved by the superintendent of public works. (2006 Code § 8-1-20)
7-1-12: RESTRICTED AND PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Injury To New Pavements: It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any
vehicle or animal upon, or injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement
while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly
injure any soft or newly laid pavement. (2006 Code §
8-1-9)
   B.   Parking On, Damage To Boulevards: No person shall park any motor
vehicle (except by permission of the superintendent of public works), or in any
manner deface, damage, or disturb the boulevard areas located between the
northbound and southbound lanes on Main Street in the city. (2006 Code § 8-1-
26)
   C.   Burning Materials: It shall be unlawful to conduct any open burning on
any public street, sidewalk, or alley in the City; however, the burning of
leaves is permitted on the shoulders of public streets; provided, that the
burning is attended and kept under control and that it poses no threat to
traffic. (2006 Code § 8-1-24)
   D.   Poles And Wires Over Public Ways: No person, other than a recognized
public utility, shall erect any pole or wire or maintain any pole or wire over
any public street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way without having first
secured permission from the Superintendent of Public Works. In his discretion,
the Superintendent may consult with the City Engineer and/or the City Council.
(2006 Code § 8-1-17)
   E.   Gasoline Pumps: No person shall erect or maintain any gasoline pump on
any public street or sidewalk in the City. (2006 Code § 8-1-18)
   F.   Playing Games: No person shall play any game upon any street, alley, or
sidewalk where such game causes unnecessary noise or interferes with traffic or
pedestrians. (2006 Code § 8-1-19)
   G.   Alleys:
      1.   Definitions:
    ALLEY: Is defined as a narrow thoroughfare, usually less in width than a
street, giving access through the middle of a block, to the rear of lots,
residential structures or buildings.
   GARBAGE TRUCK: Is defined as any vehicle used for commercial purposes in, or
collecting payment for, the removal of, solid waste, refuse, garbage and
rubbish.
      2.   Use By Garbage Trucks: No person shall operate a garbage truck to
enter or drive on any alley, or otherwise engage in the use of an alley in any
manner which involves the use of a garbage truck being on the surface of any
alley, and all of such conduct is prohibited. (Ord. 2019-06, 8-5-2019)
7-1-13: CLOSING STREETS:
No person, other than the Superintendent of Public Works, a police officer, or
other duly authorized City employee, shall close any street. (2006 Code §
8-1-4)
7-1-14: TREES, SHRUBS AND DECORATIVE ITEMS:
   A.   Trees And Shrubs:
      1.   Planting Requirements: It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or
shrub in any public street or parkway or other public place without having
secured a permit. Application for a permit shall be made to the City Clerk and
referred by the City Clerk to the Superintendent of Public Works. Each tree and
shrub planted by permit from the Superintendent shall be placed subject to the
Superintendent's direction. In his discretion, the Superintendent may consult
with the City Engineer and/or the City Council. (2006 Code § 8-1-27; amd. 2016
Code)
      2.   Removal Requirements: It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any
tree or shrub in any public street or parkway or other public place without
having secured a permit. Application for a permit shall be made to the City
Clerk and referred by the City Clerk to the Superintendent of Public Works. If
the permit is granted, the removal or cutting shall be performed subject to the
direction and the approval of the Superintendent. (2006 Code § 8-1-28)
   B.   Decorative Items Prohibited In Streets And Parkways: No rock garden,
boulder, bench, or other item shall be built or maintained in any public street
or parkway. (2006 Code § 8-1-27)
7-1-15: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter by engaging in conduct which
is prohibited hereby shall be subject to a fine as provided by the general
penalty provisions of section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2006 Code § 8-1-29)
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Permit Required
7-2-2: Application For Permit; Fee
7-2-3: Approval And Issuance Of Permit
7-2-4: Expiration Of Permit
7-2-5: Bond And Insurance Requirements
7-2-6: Operation And Restoration Requirements
7-2-7: Rules And Regulations
7-2-8: Penalty
7-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Unless acting under a contract with the city, no person, other than a duly
authorized city official or employee in the course of his employment, or a
recognized public utility company, shall make any cut, excavation, or opening
in, on, or under any public street, alley, curb, sidewalk, or any other public
ground or property without an excavation permit. (2006 Code §
8-4-1)
7-2-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE:
Application for an excavation permit shall be made to the city clerk on a form
prescribed by the corporate authorities and prepared by the city clerk and
shall be accompanied by payment to the clerk of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
for the filing of each application for an excavation permit, which fee is not
returnable in the event that the permit is denied. (2006 Code §§
8-4-2,
8-4-3)
7-2-3: APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
No excavation permit shall be issued until approved by the superintendent of
public works, who may require, as a condition precedent to the issuance of such
permit, further information, more detailed plans and specifications, or such
other material as may be necessary in his examination of the project. (2006
Code §
8-4-4)
7-2-4: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
Any excavation permit shall expire and become void if the activity allowed
under said permit shall not be commenced within ninety (90) days after the date
of issuance of the permit, and in any event, any excavation permit shall expire
three hundred sixty (360) days subsequent to the date of its issuance. (2006
Code §
8-4-5)
7-2-5: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Surety Bond:
      1.   Each applicant for a permit shall post a corporate surety bond with
the city clerk, in an amount and type determined by the superintendent of
public works, to ensure restoration of the site to its former condition. Said
bond shall be posted with the city clerk and approved by the superintendent of
public works prior to the commencement of any activity granted by the permit.
Such surety shall be in good standing with the Illinois department of financial
and professional regulation and approved by the city corporate authorities.
      2.   In lieu of a bond for each excavation project, any individual, firm,
or corporation may post an annual corporate surety bond with the city clerk in
the principal amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and of the type
approved by the superintendent of public works. Such surety shall also be in
good standing with the Illinois department of financial and professional
regulation and approved by the city corporate authorities. Proof of its
continued existence, coverage, and applicability shall be filed with the city
clerk at least annually, and otherwise from time to time on request by the city
corporate authorities or the city clerk. (2006 Code §
8-4-6; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Liability Insurance:
      1.   Each applicant for a permit shall also file with the city clerk
adequate proof of liability insurance coverage as follows:
         a.   Bodily injury: One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per
person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence.
         b.   Property damage: Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per
occurrence, which shall also include coverage for underground occurrences,
including explosions, collapse, and other underground exposure (commonly known
as "XCU coverage"). (2006 Code §
8-4-7)
      2.   The insurer shall be a company in good standing with the Illinois
department of financial and professional regulation and approved by the city
corporate authorities. (2006 Code §
8-4-7; amd. 2016 Code)
7-2-6: OPERATION AND RESTORATION REQUIREMENTS:
For the purpose of governing the operations of the holder of an excavation
permit, the following requirements shall apply:
   A.   The permit holder shall keep the operation carefully barricaded,
lighted at night, and otherwise protected as required by the city for the
protection of the public.
   B.   No person shall drive a crawler type tread (even if equipped with
street pads) across or upon any asphalt pavement in the city.
   C.   The permit holder shall contact, in advance of commencement of
operations, any utility company which may have utility lines in the area of the
excavation in order to determine the location of each line.
   D.   If the permit holder damages any underground service facility, it shall
compensate in full the utility company or the city (as the case may be) for the
cost of repair; or, at the option of the utility company or the city (as the
case may be), the permit holder shall repair such damage under the direction of
the utility company or city (as the case may be).
   E.   All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the
operations of the permit holder shall be replaced or repaired thereby.
Materials for such repair shall conform with the requirements of any applicable
regulation, code, or ordinance. If, upon being ordered, the permit holder fails
to furnish the necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the city shall
have the authority to cause such necessary labor and materials to be furnished
by the city, or the city may contract to have them furnished, and the permit
holder shall be liable to the city for the cost of both such labor and
materials or the contract cost paid by the city.
   F.   From time to time, as may be ordered by the city, and in any event,
immediately after completion of operations, the permit holder shall, at his own
expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused material of any kind
resulting from said work, and, upon failure to do so within twenty four (24)
hours after having been notified to do so by the city, such work may be done by
the city, or the city may contract to have it performed, and the permit holder
shall be liable to the city for the cost of such labor or the cost paid by the
city to have such labor performed.
   G.   Permanent restoration of any excavation opening shall be made by the
permit holder in strict accordance with specifications prescribed by the city
for such restoration for the purpose of restoring the same to its original
condition, as nearly as possible. If the permit holder shall fail to restore
the excavation to its proper condition upon the expiration of a reasonable
time, not to exceed ninety (90) days after completion of the permit holder's
operations, the city shall have the right, in its discretion, to complete such
work, or to contract to have it completed, and the permit holder shall be
liable to the city for the actual cost of performance of such work or the
actual cost paid by the city to have such work performed, as the case may be;
and the permit holder shall also be liable for an additional amount equal to
ten percent (10%) of such cost.
   H.   The permit holder shall allow the city, its superintendent of public
works, and any other authorized agents and employees to inspect the premises,
even if entrance to private property controlled by the permit holder is
necessary to conduct such inspection. (2006 Code § 8-4-8)
7-2-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The superintendent of public works shall have the authority to promulgate and
cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be necessary to enforce
and effect the purpose and intent of this chapter. (2006 Code § 8-4-9)
7-2-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and each day during which any of such violations shall
occur shall be deemed a separate offense. This penalty is in addition to that
provided in subsection 7-2-6G of this chapter. (2006 Code § 8-4-10; amd. 2016
Code)
CHAPTER 3
CITY PARKS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Closing Hours
7-3-2: Prohibited Acts
7-3-3: Penalty
7-3-1: CLOSING HOURS:
No person shall be in or use any area within any city park after dusk till dawn
and all city parks will be closed from dusk until dawn. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-1-
2016)
7-3-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Camping: No person shall camp, erect tents or sleep in any city park.
   B.   Vandalism: It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, deface,
mutilate, or disturb in any manner any structure, fixture, equipment, or
planted area in any city park. For the purpose of this subsection, a planted
area includes grass and other ground cover, trees, shrubs, or flowers.
   C.   Alcoholic Beverages: No beer, wine or other alcoholic liquor is allowed
in any city park. (2006 Code §
8-3-1)
7-3-3: PENALTY:
Anyone convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be fined
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2006 Code §
8-3-2; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 4
CITY CEMETERIES
SECTION:
7-4-1: Cemeteries Designated
7-4-2: Catholic Portion Of Abingdon Cemetery Described
7-4-3: Charges And Regulations
7-4-4: Closing Hours
7-4-5: Mausoleum In Abingdon Cemetery
7-4-6: Vandalism Prohibited
7-4-1: CEMETERIES DESIGNATED:
The Abingdon Cemetery, including the mausoleum therein, and the Cherry Grove
Cemetery are declared to be the public burial grounds of the city, and each may
be described as a city cemetery. (2006 Code §
8-2-1)
7-4-2: CATHOLIC PORTION OF ABINGDON CEMETERY DESCRIBED:
The following described portion of the Abingdon Cemetery is hereby designated
as the "Catholic portion" of the cemetery:
Lots numbered 1 to 232 inclusive and lots numbered 323 to 435 inclusive,
together with that block of land wherein the sexton's office is presently
located, in the Eighth Addition to the Abingdon Cemetery of Abingdon, Illinois.
(2006 Code §
8-2-2)
7-4-3: CHARGES AND REGULATIONS:
Charges for the purchase of lots, perpetual care, digging of graves, and other
chargeable items in the use of the city cemeteries, and regulations governing
the use of the city cemeteries, shall be established by the city council and
shall be subject to change. (2006 Code §
8-2-3)
7-4-4: CLOSING HOURS:
No person shall enter, attempt to enter, or be in either city cemetery between
sundown and sunup of the following day. Any person violating any provision of
this section shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (2006 Code §
8-2-5; amd. 2016 Code)
7-4-5: MAUSOLEUM IN ABINGDON CEMETERY:
   A.   The city has previously agreed to care for and maintain the mausoleum
in the Abingdon Cemetery. The mausoleum shall be considered a part of the
Abingdon Cemetery, and the city may use municipal funds for the care and
maintenance of the mausoleum as is necessary.
   B.   The city shall have the right to sell any vaults remaining in the
mausoleum.
   C.   The city shall accept donations for the repair and maintenance of the
mausoleum, which funds shall be placed in a separate trust fund and shall be
used only for the care and maintenance of the mausoleum; and funds from the
sale of vaults shall be placed in the trust fund and shall be used only for the
care and maintenance of the mausoleum. (2006 Code §
8-2-4)
7-4-6: VANDALISM PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, deface, mutilate, or disturb in
any manner any headstone or gravestone, monument, tomb, structure, or fixture,
or any planted area in a city cemetery. For the purpose of this section, a
planted area includes grass or other ground cover, trees, shrubs, or flowers.
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (2006 Code §
8-2-6)
TITLE 8
WATER AND WASTEWATER
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-1-1: Water Department And Committee
8-1-2: Definitions
8-1-3: Public Water Supply Required; Well Restrictions
8-1-4: Connection Requirements
8-1-5: Deposit For Nonowner Occupied Premises
8-1-6: Water Meters And Services
8-1-7: Rates And Charges
8-1-8: Bills For Service; Delinquencies
8-1-9: Extension Of Mains
8-1-10: Enforcement And Penalties
8-1-1: WATER DEPARTMENT AND COMMITTEE:
   A.   Water Department:
      1.   Established; Functions: There is hereby established a department of
the city to be known as the water department. The functions and purposes of
this department shall be the proper operation, maintenance, and improvement of
the public water supply of the city, together with the equipment, buildings,
and grounds utilized in connection therewith. (2006 Code §
7-1-1)
      2.   Department Head: The city superintendent of public works shall be
the head of the water department. (2006 Code §
7-1-3)
   B.   Water Committee: The water committee shall be comprised of no fewer
than three (3) members of the city council, and shall serve as the liaison
between the city council and the water department. The water committee, when
necessary, shall make appropriate recommendations to the city council with
respect to the public water supply system. (2006 Code §
7-1-2)
8-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
AGENCY: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between
the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the receptacle. All air
gaps must be fixed proper air gaps, solidly piped; flexible couplings or spring
hoses do not constitute an air gap.
APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation For Cross-Connection Control Of The University Of Southern
California, American Water Works Association (AWWA), American Society Of
Sanitary Engineering (ASSE) or American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or
certified by the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) to be in compliance with
applicable industry specifications.
APPROVED CHECK VALVE: A check valve that seats readily and completely. It must
be carefully machined to have free moving parts and assured watertightness. The
face of the closure element and valve seat must be bronze, composition, or
other noncorrodible material which will seat tightly under all prevailing
conditions of field use. Pins and bushings shall be of bronze or other
noncorrodible, nonsticking material, and machined for easy, dependable
operation. The closure element (e.g., clapper) shall be internally weighted or
otherwise internally equipped to promote rapid and positive closure in all
sizes where this feature is obtainable.
APPROVED DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single,
independently acting check valves under ASSE standard 1015. A double check
valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the
assembly and suitable connections for testing the watertightness of each check
valve.
APPROVED DOUBLE DETECTOR CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: A double check valve that
detects leakage or unauthorized use of water from fire or automatic sprinkler
systems.
APPROVED FIRE ALARM RECEIPT POINT: A central facility constantly manned by
trained personnel with equipment installed to receive a signal from a sprinkler
alarm indicating that the sprinkler has been activated.
APPROVED INSTALLATION: The installation of approved backflow prevention devices
specified by the Research Foundation For Cross-Connection Control Of The
University Of Southern California, American Water Works Association, American
Society Of Sanitary Engineering, or American National Standards Institute.
APPROVED REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device
containing a minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves, together
with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located
between the two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE standard 1013. During
normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two
(2) check valves shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of
either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the
atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at
less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff
valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with
properly located test cocks.
APPROVED WATER SUPPLY: Water free from contaminants in amounts sufficient to
cause disease or harmful physiological effects. Its bacteriological and
chemical quality shall conform to the requirements of the federal and state
drinking water regulations and to any regulation of the public health authority
having local jurisdiction.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER: An antisiphon device consisting of a soft disc,
reaction cup, stem guide with machined brass seat, and large atmospheric vent
port hood.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system. These auxiliary waters may
include water from another purveyor's public water supply system; or water from
a source such as wells, lakes or streams, or process fluids; or used water.
These waters may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a
water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water of questionable quality, other liquids, mixtures,
substances, wastes or other contaminants, into the distribution pipes of the
public water supply system due to a reversal of flow, or from any source other
than the intended source of the potable water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method or type of construction intended
to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for backflow
prevention in the city must meet the standards of the Illinois state plumbing
code and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
BOARD: The Illinois pollution control board.
CCCDI: Cross connection control device inspector.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT: A building or building complex which houses stores,
offices, or businesses engaged in trade, sales, and services.
CONDITION OF SERVICE: All restrictions, requirements, permits, and fees
required by a public water supply prior to installation or supply of water from
the public water system.
CONSUMER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of any
premises supplied by or in any manner connected to the public water system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located on the customer's premises. A
building's plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system.
CONTAINMENT: The proper installation of an approved backflow device or assembly
at the service connection between the public water supply and the private water
system so as to contain any pollutant or contaminant within the private water
system, thus preventing its entrance into the public water supply distribution
system.
CONTAMINANT: Any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter, any odor or any form of
energy which, when present in the public water supply distribution system, may
cause the water to degrade so that the applicable water quality standards are
not met or physical illness or injury to persons consuming the water could
result.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the city water supply by the
entrance or presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological
or biological solid, liquid or gas) to a degree which could create or creates a
hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2)
otherwise separate piping systems or vessels, one of which contains potable
water and the other water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases,
or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other.
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE INSPECTOR OR CCCDI: A person who has
successfully completed agency sponsored training and certification to install
and test backflow devices, in accordance with law.
DIRECT CROSS CONNECTION: A cross connection formed when a potable water system
is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well
being of consumers. The word "severe", as used to qualify "health hazard",
means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in
death or significant reduction in the quality of life.
HIGH HAZARD CONNECTION: Any vessel, piping arrangement, or other direct
connection to a public water supply containing a contaminant.
ILLINOIS STATE PLUMBING CODE: 77 Illinois administrative code 890.
INDIRECT CROSS CONNECTION: A cross connection formed when an unknown substance
can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe potable
water supply.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT: A building or building complex which houses
mechanical, trade and/or manufacturing activities.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois state
plumbing code.
INSPECTOR: A plumber licensed in the state who has successfully completed a
course on cross connection control devices given by the agency and who has been
certified by the agency to inspect and repair such devices.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT: A building or building complex which houses
activities for social, health, educational, or religious purposes such as
hospitals, sanatoriums, correctional facilities, schools, churches, or
charitable organizations or agencies.
INTERCONNECTION: A physical connection between two (2) or more potable water
systems.
ISOLATION: The proper installation of an approved backflow device or assembly
at each connection within the private water system, between the public water
supply and each piping arrangement or plumbing appurtenance on those private
premises.
LOW HAZARD CONNECTION: Any vessel, piping arrangement, or other direct
connection to a public water supply containing a pollutant.
NFPA: The National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA
02269.
NATIONAL CONSENSUS STANDARDS: Standards which are adopted by a nationally
recognized organization which examines devices for such elements as the minimum
requirements for the design, installation, operation and safety aspects of such
devices, evaluated on the basis of sound engineering principles, test data, and
field experience.
NONPOTABLE SOURCE: Any source of water not an integral part of a public water
supply system or approved by the agency to be connected to a public water
supply system according to law.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust
or association of persons, joint venture, corporation, or company, and includes
the United States, the state, the county, any special purpose district, and any
officer or agent thereof.
PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension
of a plumbing system by any person. "Plumbing" includes all piping fixtures,
appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including,
without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a private water
supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to,
within and about any building where a person lives, works or assembles.
"Plumbing" includes all piping from discharge of pumping units to and including
pressure tanks in water supply systems. "Plumbing" includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary
drainage and related ventilation system of any building where a person lives,
works or assembles from the point of connection of such building drain to the
building sewer or private sewage disposal system five feet (5') beyond the
foundation walls.
POLLUTANT: Any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter, or any odor or form of energy
which, when present in the public water supply distribution system, may cause
the water to be aesthetically degraded to the senses of taste, sight or smell
without tending to cause any actual physical illness or injury to persons
consuming the water.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative
code 607.104 for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
POTENTIAL CROSS CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
PREMISES: An integrated land area, including improvements thereon, undivided by
public thoroughfares or water distribution mains of the city, and where all
parts of the premises are operated under the same management and for the same
purposes.
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM: All pipes, structures, and plumbing appurtenances not
part of a public water supply through which potable water is obtained and
distributed.
PROCESS FLUID: Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or
otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced into the
public or a consumer's potable water system. "Process fluid" includes, but is
not limited to:
   A.   Polluted or contaminated waters.
   B.   Process waters.
   C.   Used water originating from the water supply system which may have
deteriorated in sanitary quality.
   D.   Cooling waters.
   E.   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams, or irrigation systems.
   F.   Chemicals in solution or suspension.
   G.   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
PROTECTIVE DEVICE: Any of the following devices:
   A.   Air gap separation device.
   B.   Approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
   C.   Approved double check valve assembly.
   D.   Antisiphon vacuum breaker.
   E.   Approved double detector check valve assembly.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use.
REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW DEVICE: A device which includes two
(2) in-line independently acting spring loaded check valves, one differential
pressure relief valve vented to the atmosphere, plus four (4) test cocks. The
RPZ device is also available with a detector check which measures water usage
as an RPDC device.
REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE (RPZ) PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY: An assembly which
includes two (2) in-line independently acting spring loaded check valves, one
differential pressure relief valve vented to the atmosphere, plus four (4) test
cocks and two (2) resilient seated valves with full ports. The RPZ assembly is
also available with a detector check which measures water usage for use in fire
safety systems and is referenced as an RPDC assembly.
RISERS: The vertical pipes in a sprinkler system. The system riser is the
aboveground supply pipe directly connected to the water supply.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The terminal end of a service connection from the city
water supply at its point of delivery to the consumer. If a meter is installed,
"service connection" means the downstream end of the meter. No unprotected
takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow protective device
located at the point of delivery to the consumer shall be permitted.
SPRINKLER ALARM: An assembly of apparatus approved according to law and
installed so that any flow of water in either direction from a sprinkler system
which is equal to or greater than the flow from a single automatic sprinkler of
the smallest orifice size installed on the system will result in an audible
alarm on the premises and transmission of a signal to an approved fire alarm
receipt point.
SUBMERGED INLET: A water pipe or extension thereto from a public water supply
terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of
questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is unprotected
against backflow.
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
UL: Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., 333 Pfingsten Road, Northbrook, IL 60062.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by the public water supply system to a
consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the city. (2006 Code §
7-1-15; amd. 2016 Code)
8-1-3: PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY REQUIRED; WELL RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The owner of each house and other structure used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purposes, located within the city and abutting
on any public way in which there is located the public water supply, so that
such public water supply is available to such house or other structure, is
hereby required to connect directly with the public water supply system within
three (3) months after the date of official notice to do so.
   B.   No owner or occupant of any house or other structure used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes shall construct, install,
operate, or use any private water well for supplying water for human
consumption; nor shall any owner or occupant make, cause to be made, or permit
any physical connection between the potable portion of the public water supply
and the private well.
   C.   Any person constructing or installing, or causing to be constructed or
installed, any well for purposes other than human consumption shall notify the
superintendent of public works after the well, pump and other appurtenances are
connected but before the well is put into use; and the superintendent of public
works shall inspect the well and other appurtenances so to determine that they
are neither to be used for human consumption, nor physically connected to the
potable portion of the public water supply.
   D.   No person constructing or installing, or causing to be constructed or
installed, any well shall, subsequent to the inspection by the superintendent
of public works, alter any part of the well or its appurtenances so to enable
it to furnish water for human consumption. (2006 Code §
7-1-12)
   E.   Each private well which has been constructed, installed, operated, and
placed into use prior to May 1, 1981, is hereby exempted from the provisions of
this chapter, except for article A of this chapter; provided, however, that the
owner or user of such well registered with the office of the city clerk on or
before July 1, 1981. Each private well not registered with the city clerk by
July 1, 1981, shall not be eligible for said exemption, and the owner, user, or
consumer shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter. (2006 Code §
7-1-13)
8-1-4: CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: Any person desiring to connect or tap into any water
line, or any part of the water system of the city, shall first obtain a written
permit from the city clerk to make such connection or tap.
   B.   Annexation Agreement For Users Outside City: Any new user outside the
corporate limits shall enter into an agreement to annex to the city when such
user's property is or becomes contiguous to the city.
   C.   Restrictions On Issuance Of Permit: No connection permit will be issued
to connect to the transmission line between the Abingdon pumping station and
the point of connection with the system of the city of Galesburg, except for a
connection allowed by an easement agreement. (2006 Code §
7-1-4)
   D.   Permit And Connection Fees:
      1.   Required; Exemptions:
         a.   Each person applying for a building permit for construction of
any building within the city which will require city water service shall pay,
in addition to the applicable building permit fee, the following sums: (2006
Code §
7-1-5)
 
Water permit/inspection fee                            $100.00
Water connection                                       350.00
Water meter of an inlet diameter of 5/8 inch or less   330.77
Water connection for new water main extension          See section
                                                       8-1-9 of this chapter
Water meter of an inlet diameter greater than 5/8 inch Actual cost to the city
 
(2006 Code §
7-1-5; amd. 2016 Code)
         b.   The permit and connection fees do not apply to any person who has
been granted a connection to the transmission line between the Abingdon pumping
station and the point of connection with the system of the city of Galesburg by
an easement agreement.
      2.   Payment Of Fees: Payment for the items set out in subsection D1 of
this section, as applicable, shall be made in one payment in the office of the
city clerk prior to commencement of any construction and, if applicable, shall
be made at the same time as fees for connection to the sewerage system. (2006
Code §
7-1-5)
8-1-5: DEPOSIT FOR NONOWNER OCCUPIED PREMISES:
Any person who applies to the city for water service for a nonowner occupied
property shall, before being granted any service, pay to the clerk a meter
deposit in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The money so received
by the city shall be kept in a separate fund known as the meter deposit fund,
and when any consumer, for any reason other than involuntary discontinuation of
service, shall request service to be terminated, then the full amount of the
deposit, less the consumer's then current bill, shall be returned to the
consumer. (2006 Code §
7-1-7; amd. 2016 Code)
8-1-6: WATER METERS AND SERVICES:
   A.   Meter Requirements; Tampering Prohibited: Any person using water
furnished by the city shall install a meter provided by the city so that all
water consumed shall be passed through such meter and accurately measured and
the amount definitely ascertained. The location, installation and setting of
such meters shall meet the approval of the city. Any person tampering with or
rendering inoperable or attempting to render inoperable any water meter commits
a violation against the city and becomes subject to the enforcement provisions
of section
8-1-10 of this chapter.
   B.   Maintenance Of Meters:
      1.   For the purposes of making any inspection or discharging any duty
imposed by this chapter, any authorized employee of the water department shall
have the right to enter upon the premises of any consumer. Each consumer, as a
condition of the continued delivery of water from the city water supply to the
consumer's premises, shall be considered as having consented to such entry upon
the consumer's premises. (2006 Code §
7-1-6)
      2.   The city shall maintain all meters, and the city shall have the
right to determine, in its sole discretion, when the meter is required to be
changed. Any meter damaged due to failure of the consumer to protect the meter
from freezing shall be replaced at the expense of the consumer, which shall be
the cost of the meter. (2006 Code §
7-1-6; amd. 2016 Code)
      3.   a. Any service where the flow cannot be interrupted during normal
business hours shall be equipped with a locked meter bypass and a connection
for a test meter.
         b.   The consumer has the right to request a meter to be tested if the
consumer has cause to believe the meter is in error; however, the consumer
shall pay all costs of testing if the meter is shown to be accurate.
   C.   Service Line:
      1.   Installation: The property owner shall install, at the owner's
expense, the service line from the tap provided by the city to the point of
usage. A curb stop shall be installed at the property line. The property owner
shall install and maintain a shutoff valve on the street side of the meter.
(2006 Code §
7-1-6)
      2.   Specifications: The service line shall be one inch (1") approved
material. The city shall provide the curb stop, curb box, and up to sixty feet
(60') of one inch (1") approved material to be installed between the tap and
the curb stop. The property owner shall provide or purchase approved materials
for service lines over one inch (1") in diameter. (2006 Code §
7-1-6; amd. 2016 Code)
      3.   Maintenance By City: The city will maintain the service line from
the tap at the water main to the curb stop once the installation is inspected
and approved by the city.
      4.   Use Of Existing Lines: An existing service line may be reused if the
city determines that the service line meets all requirements of this chapter.
   D.   Disconnection Of Service: In the event that any consumer of the water
system desires that the water be shut off, the consumer shall notify the city
not less than two (2) weeks prior to the date it is to be shut off. The
consumer shall give the city not less than two (2) weeks' notice prior to the
date that the water service is to be recommenced. The consumer shall pay the
city the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) when the water service is
restored. (2006 Code §
7-1-6)
   E.   Emergency Interruption Of Service: In case of an "emergency
interruption", defined as breakage of the service line between the shutoff
valve at the meter and the curb stop, or breakage of the shutoff valve, there
will be no charge. However, in case of repeated requests to have the service
interrupted or nonemergency situations, the charge shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00). (2006 Code §
7-1-6; amd. 2016 Code)
8-1-7: RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Categories Of Users: Each consumer of the city water system shall be
classified in one of the following categories:
      1.   Located within the corporate limits of the city.
      2.   Located outside the corporate limits of the city.
      3.   Located outside the corporate limits of the city and connected to
the water transmission line from the city of Galesburg to the city of Abingdon.
   B.   Determination Of Rates And Charges: Rates or charges shall be made by
the city for the use and service of the water system of the city. Such rates
and charges shall be based on the amount of water used, as shown by the water
meter on the premises of the consumer, subject, however, to the minimum charge;
and shall also include a fixed charge to each consumer toward payment and
retirement of bonded indebtedness of the city incurred for improvements to the
public water supply system of the city. (Ord. 2007-5, 10-1-2007, eff. 11-1-
2007)
   C.   Rates And Charges Established:
      1.   Consumers In Subsections A1 And A3: Consumers located within the
corporate limits of the city and those connected to the water transmission line
from the city of Galesburg to the city of Abingdon, being subsections A1 and
A3, respectively, of this section, shall be charged each month of each calendar
year, according to the following schedule; provided, however, that the minimum
charge shall be twelve dollars fifty cents ($12.50):
 
First 1,000 gallons             $12.50
1,000 gallons to 24,000 gallons $4.75 per 1,000 gallons
Over 24,000 gallons             $3.85 per 1,000 gallons
 
(Ord. 2007-5, 10-1-2007, eff. 11-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2016-6, 3-21-2016)
      2.   Consumers In Subsection A2: Consumers located outside the corporate
limits of the city (and not connected to the water transmission line from the
city of Galesburg to the city of Abingdon), subsection A2 of this section,
shall be charged each month of each calendar year according to the following
schedule; provided, however, that the minimum charge shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00): (Ord. 2007-5, 10-1-2007, eff. 11-1-2007)
 
First 1,000 gallons             $25.00
1,000 gallons to 24,000 gallons $9.50 per 1,000 gallons
Over 24,000 gallons             $6.20 per 1,000 gallons
 
(Ord. 2007-5, 10-1-2007, eff. 11-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2016-6, 3-21-2016)
      3.   Annual Consumer Pricing Index Rate: From May 1, 2016, forward, rates
and charges for water and sewer services as set forth in subsections C1 and C2
of this section will be increased, if applicable, by the rate shown by the
annual consumer pricing index. (Ord. 2016-6, 3-21-2016)
      4.   Charge For Bond Debt: In addition to the respective charges provided
by subsections C1 and C2 of this section, each consumer of the city water
system shall be charged each month of each calendar year the sum of six dollars
fifty cents ($6.50) to provide for the payment and retirement of the bonded
indebtedness of the city. (Ord. 2007-5, 10-1-2007, eff. 11-1-2007; amd. Ord.
2016-6, 3-21-2016)
8-1-8: BILLS FOR SERVICE; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Rendition Of Bills; Due Date: The city clerk shall prepare and render
billings for water service and all other charges in connection therewith and
shall collect said charges. Billing shall be mailed to each consumer as soon as
practicable after the water meter is read and shall be payable monthly. Each
charge provided in section
8-1-7 of this chapter shall be due and payable by the consumer within fifteen
(15) days after the date of the billing by the city to the consumer.
   B.   Delinquent Payments: If the consumer shall fail to pay such bill,
including the sewer charge, within fifteen (15) days after the date of the
billing, ten percent (10%) of the amount thereof shall be added and collected
with the amount billed, and the city clerk is authorized and empowered to
initiate any one or more of the actions provided in subsections D and E of this
section. (2006 Code §
7-1-7; amd. Ord. 2007-5, 10-1-2007, eff. 11-1-2007)
   C.   Liability For Rates And Charges: The owner of the premises, the
occupant thereof, and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally
liable to pay for the service to such premises, and the service is furnished to
the premises by the city only upon that condition. Water service to rental
properties will not be restored if any prior delinquent charges for service
exist. (2006 Code §
7-1-7)
   D.   Lien Provisions: Any delinquent charge for the use and service of the
water system, and any delinquent surcharge for such use and service that may be
established by the city from time to time, together with penalty, shall
constitute a lien upon the real estate for which the water service is supplied,
and the city clerk is hereby authorized to file a sworn statement, showing such
delinquency, in the office of the Knox County recorder, and the filing of such
statement shall be deemed notice of the lien of such charge or surcharge and
penalty. In addition to the establishment of a lien herein, the city may, in
its discretion, commence court proceedings against the consumer or the owner of
the premises to collect any delinquent charge or surcharge and penalty.
However, as to each matter in which judgment is obtained, such judgment shall
operate as a release or waiver of the lien upon the real estate for the amount
of the judgment; provided, that the charge or surcharge, together with the
penalty as provided in this chapter, plus reasonable attorney fees to be fixed
by the court, and court costs shall be included as part of the judgment.
   E.   Discontinuance Of Service:
      1.   Disconnection: If the charges or surcharges, or any part thereof,
for the use and service of the water system remain delinquent, the city may
discontinue all water service to the premises pursuant to subsection E3 of this
section. (2006 Code §
7-1-8)
      2.   Reinstatement: In order to reinstate water service after the same
has been turned off pursuant to subsection E1 of this section, a delinquent
water consumer shall be required to pay in full all outstanding water charges,
surcharges, penalty, and (if judgment has been obtained in court) applicable
attorney fees, statutory interest and costs, plus a reinstatement fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00). (2006 Code §
7-1-8; amd. 2016 Code)
      3.   Hearing Procedure: In the event that any charge or surcharge, or any
part thereof, for the use and service of the water system of the city remains
unpaid for fifteen (15) days after rendition of the billing for same, and said
charge or surcharge remains delinquent, the following shall apply: (2006 Code §
7-1-9; amd. Ord. 2007-5, 10-1-2007, eff. 11-1-2007)
         a.   The city clerk shall send written notification to the person or
persons responsible for payment the date that water service to the premises
will be discontinued. If the account is not paid by the date set for the
discontinuance of water service, the city shall discontinue such service.
         b.   Any person responsible for payment may request a hearing at which
such person may appear before the city council and set forth any reason for the
failure of payment. The request must be received by the city clerk not less
than five (5) days prior to the date set for the discontinuance of the water
service. Upon receipt of the request, the city clerk shall notify the mayor,
who shall set the hearing, to be held within twenty one (21) days, and the city
clerk shall give notice of the hearing to the person who made the request.
(2006 Code §
7-1-9)
         c.   At such hearing, the city council may take such action as
necessary under this subsection and subsection D of this section and in the
public interest, and shall notify the person or persons responsible for the
payment when such water service will be discontinued, or what other action
shall be taken by the city. (2006 Code §
7-1-9; amd. 2016 Code)
         d.   If more than one person is responsible for payment, any notice
provisions herein shall be deemed satisfied so long as any one of such
responsible persons receives actual notice.
         e.   The city clerk shall also report to the city council the name and
address of each person responsible for payment which remains delinquent. (2006
Code §
7-1-9)
8-1-9: EXTENSION OF MAINS:
   A.   Permit Required; Fee: Before any new water line connection is made to
the city's water system, a permit must be obtained and a permit fee paid as
provided in subsection 8-1-4D of this chapter, except where a water main
extension is needed. The record owner of the premises to be served by the new
water main extension shall pay to the city a sum equal to the cost for labor
and materials incurred by the city in constructing the new water main extension
in addition to the permit connection fee.
   B.   Request For Extension; Payment Of Fee: Before construction of a new
water main extension may be commenced, the owner of record of the premises to
be served by the new water main extension shall request said extension in
writing on forms supplied by the city. The city shall estimate the cost for
labor and materials to be incurred for said construction, and the record owner
shall pay to the city fifty percent (50%) of said estimate prior to the
commencement of construction. The balance of said cost for labor and materials
incurred by the city shall be paid by the record owner to the city immediately
upon completion of construction, notwithstanding the amount of the original
estimate.
   C.   Contract For Installation: The property owner may, at his expense,
contract to have a water extension installed. However, any such extension shall
be approved by the city and the Illinois environmental protection agency prior
to installation. The extension shall be inspected and a report furnished by a
licensed professional engineer that the extension complies with the "Illinois
Recommended Standards For Water Line Construction".
   D.   Time Of Installation; Applicability Of Fee:
      1.   If the services are installed at the time of the extension in
subsection C of this section, the connection and permit fee will be waived.
      2.   If the services are installed at a later date, only the connection
fee will be waived, and only for a period of five (5) years after acceptance of
the water extension provided in subsection C of this section. (2006 Code §
7-1-14)
8-1-10: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who owns or is in possession of any premises and who
violates any provision of this chapter, except subsection 8-1-6A of this
chapter, shall be served by the city with written notice, stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within such period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all further violations. Any person who continues
any violation beyond the time limit provided shall be guilty of an offense
subject to prosecution by the city.
   B.   Any person who violates subsection 8-1-6A of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense subject to immediate prosecution by the city.
   C.   The city's remedies to prevent violations shall include injunctive and
other civil relief and shall not be limited to criminal or quasi-criminal
prosecution under the general penalty provisions of section
1-4-1 of this code. (2006 Code § 7-1-16)
ARTICLE A.  CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
8-1A-1: Purpose And Scope
8-1A-2: City Has Complied With State Regulations
8-1A-3: Components Of City Water System
8-1A-4: Cross Connections Restricted
8-1A-5: Inspections, Investigations And Surveys
8-1A-6: Protection Of Public Water Supply; Approved Backflow Prevention Devices
8-1A-7: Booster Pumps
8-1A-8: City's Right Of Entry
8-1A-9: Administration And Enforcement
8-1A-10: Violations, Penalties And Liabilities
8-1A-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this article is to protect and promote the
public health, safety and general welfare of the city by establishing
requirements for cross connection control and backflow prevention which:
      1.   Protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system;
      2.   Promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety; and
      3.   Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's potable water systems.
   B.   Scope: This article shall apply to all premises served by the public
potable water supply system of the city. (2006 Code §
7-1-11)
8-1A-2: CITY HAS COMPLIED WITH STATE REGULATIONS:
This article has been developed in accordance with and as required under the
following state requirements: (2006 Code §
7-1-11)
   A.   The Illinois state plumbing code section 890.1130, which requires
protection of the potable water system from contamination due to backflow or
back siphonage of contaminants through the water service connection; and (2006
Code §
7-1-11; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   The Illinois environmental protection agency regulations, 35 Illinois
administrative code 601 et seq., which require an active program of cross
connection control which will prevent the contamination of all potable water
supply systems. (2006 Code §
7-1-11)
8-1A-3: COMPONENTS OF CITY WATER SYSTEM:
The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the public
water supply system and the consumer's water system.
   A.   Public Water System:
      1.   The public water supply system shall consist of the source
facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities
of the potable water system under the control of the city up to the point where
the consumer's water system begins.
      2.   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized
in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public
water supply distribution system.
      3.   The public water supply distribution system shall include the
network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's
water system.
   B.   Consumer's Water System: The consumer's water system shall include all
parts of the facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from
the public water supply distribution system to points of use. (2006 Code §
7-1-11)
8-1A-4: CROSS CONNECTIONS RESTRICTED:
   A.   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited, except when and where approved cross connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   B.   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion
of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the agency.
   C.   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply. (2006 Code §
7-1-11)
8-1A-5: INSPECTIONS, INVESTIGATIONS AND SURVEYS:
   A.   The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
city for the inspection of the presence or absence of cross connection control
devices within the consumer's premises.
   B.   On request by the city, the consumer shall furnish information
regarding the piping system or water use within the consumer's premises. The
consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the city for the
verification of information submitted by the consumer to the city regarding
cross connection inspection results. (2006 Code §
7-1-11)
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross connections to his water system. All cross
connection control or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in
accordance with the Illinois plumbing code section 890.1130. (2006 Code §
7-1-11; amd. 2016 Code)
   D.   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow into
the public water system by ensuring that:
      1.   All cross connections are removed, or approved cross connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back siphonage.
      2.   Cross connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.
      3.   Cross connection control devices shall be inspected at least
annually by a person approved by the agency as a cross connection control
device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical devices shall include
physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. (2006 Code
§
7-1-11)
      4.   Each device shall be tested at least annually, or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer. Records submitted to the city shall be
available for inspection by agency personnel in accordance with the Illinois
plumbing code section 890.1140. Each device shall have a tag attached listing
the date of the most recent test, the name of CCCDI, and the type and date of
repairs. A maintenance log shall be maintained and include: (2006 Code §
7-1-11; amd. 2016 Code)
         a.   Date of each test;
         b.   Name and approval number of the person performing the test;
         c.   Test results;
         d.   Repairs or servicing required;
         e.   Repairs and date completed; and
         f.   Service performed and date completed. (2006 Code §
7-1-11)
8-1A-6: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY; APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION
DEVICES:
   A.   Protection Required: The consumer shall be responsible for protection
of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or back
siphonage of contaminants through the consumer's water service connection. If,
in the judgment of the city, an approved backflow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the city shall give
notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at
each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall immediately install
such approved device or devices at his own expense. Failure, refusal or
inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or devices
immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the
premises until such device or devices have been installed. The consumer shall
retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required in
subsection E of this section for a period of at least five (5) years.
   B.   Approved Backflow Prevention Devices Required:
      1.   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules
and regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation For Cross-
Connection Control Of The University Of Southern California, American Water
Works Association, American Society Of Sanitary Engineering, or American
National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation
to be in compliance with applicable industry specifications and be in
compliance with the Illinois state plumbing code. (2006 Code §
7-1-11)
      2.   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with 35
Illinois administrative code 607 and 653, and only as specified by the Research
Foundation For Cross- Connection Control Of The University Of Southern
California or applicable industry specifications and in compliance with the
most recent edition of the Illinois state plumbing code. Maintenance of the
devices shall be performed as recommended by the manufacturer. The
manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on site for each type of
device being utilized. (2006 Code §
7-1-11; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Where Protection Required:
      1.   An approval backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where, in the
judgment of the city, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply
system exist.
      2.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving any of the following
premises:
         a.   The premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such
auxiliary supply is an approved water supply, is accepted as an additional
source by the city, and the source is approved by the agency.
         b.   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the city.
         c.   Premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment
of the city, are not correctable, or intricate plumbing arrangements which make
it impractical to determine whether or not cross connections exist.
         d.   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross connection survey.
         e.   Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
         f.   Connections on the transmission line between the Abingdon pumping
station and the point of connection with the system of the city of Galesburg.
      3.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited
to, the following types of facilities, unless the city determines that no
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists:
         a.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes, and churches.
         b.   Laboratories.
         c.   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater
pumping stations.
         d.   Food or beverage processing plants.
         e.   Chemical plants, pesticide, herbicide, or extermination trucks.
         f.   Metal plating industries.
         g.   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
         h.   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
         i.   Car washes and laundromats.
         j.   Pumps for nonpotable water, chemicals or other substances.
         k.   Potable water connections to boilers.
         l.   Refrigerating unit condensers and cooling jackets.
         m.   Bidets.
         n.   Farm service/fertilizer plants and trucks.
      4.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
fire safety system service line connected to the public water supply. All such
installations shall include a metered detection system to indicate and measure
unauthorized use.
   D.   Types Of Protection Required:
      1.   The type of protection required under subsections C1, C2 and C3 of
this section shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
         a.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard.
         b.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
         c.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation, approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device, or a double check valve assembly
shall be installed where the public water supply system may be polluted with
substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
      2.   a. The type of protection required under subsection C4 of this
section shall be:
            (1)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced principle backflow prevention device; or
            (2)   An approved double detector check valve assembly prevention
device; or
         b.   (1) Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is
used for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow
preventers shall be installed on fire sprinkler systems connected to the public
water supply when:
               (A)   The sprinkler system contains antifreeze, fire retardant,
or other chemicals;
               (B)   Water is pumped and/or flows by gravity into the fire
safety system from a nonpotable source capable of serving the fire system. A
nonpotable source of water shall be considered capable of serving the fire
safety system under the following conditions: it must be capable of year round
use, maintained with not less than fifty thousand (50,000) gallons of usable
water not subject to freezing, accessible to firefighting pumper equipment,
located within one thousand seven hundred feet (1,700') of the facility; or
               (C)   There is a permanent or emergency connection whereby water
can be pumped into the fire safety system from any other nonpotable source,
such as a river, lake, lagoon, retention pond, or swimming pool.
            (2)   An approved double detector check valve assembly backflow
prevention device shall be installed on all existing fire sprinkler systems
whenever physical space for installation of the device is available, except as
provided under subsection D2b(1) of this section or:
               (A)   When physical space is not available, existing fire
sprinkler systems which include a single check valve shall be retrofitted by
installing a weighted detector check and an alarm valve approved under UL
standard 193 with alarm accessories approved under UL standard 753. The
weighted detector check shall consist of a single check with a weighted
clapper. Alarm valves shall be equipped with a connection to transmit a signal
to a remote monitoring station which is an approved fire alarm receipt point.
               (B)   Sprinkler alarms installed in accordance with this article
shall be installed so that any flow of water in either direction from a
sprinkler system which is equal to or greater than the flow from a single
automatic sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed on the system will
result in an audible alarm on the premises and transmission of a signal to an
approved fire alarm receipt point. Installation of sprinkler alarm systems
shall be in accordance with NFPA 13 (section 3-17), "Installation Of Sprinkler
Systems"; or NFPA 71, "Standard For The Installation, Maintenance, And Use Of
Signaling Systems For Central Station Service"; or NFPA 72B, "Standard For
Auxiliary Protective Signaling Systems"; or NFPA 72C, "Standard For Remote
Station Protective Signaling Systems"; or NFPA 72D, "Standard For Proprietary
Protective Signaling Systems".
               (C)   When an existing fire safety system is expanded to the
extent that an additional riser is required, the entire system must be brought
into compliance with existing regulations and equipped with a backflow
protection device according to subsection D2a(2) of this section.
   E.   Inspections, Tests And Maintenance:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which
backflow prevention devices required by this article are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following
schedule, or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
the instructions of the manufacturer of the device:
         a.   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected at the time
of installation and at least annually thereafter.
         b.   Double detector check valve assemblies shall be inspected and
tested for tightness at the time of installation and at least annually
thereafter, and required service performed within fifteen (15) days after the
inspection.
         c.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
tested at least annually, or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer
of the device, and required service performed within five (5) days after the
inspection.
         d.   Alarm valves shall be tested annually using methods described in
NFPA 13, section 3-17.6.3.
         e.   If successive inspections disclose repeated failures in operation
of any backflow prevention device, the city may require more frequent
inspections.
      2.   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
agency as a cross connection control device inspector (CCCDI).
      3.   The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing
in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
      4.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test or visual inspection, the name of CCCDI, and the type and date of
repairs.
      5.   A maintenance log shall be maintained on the premises and include:
         a.   Date of each test or visual inspection;
         b.   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
         c.   Test results;
         d.   Repairs or servicing required;
         e.   Repairs and date completed; and
         f.   Servicing performed and date completed.
      6.   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations
are found to be defective, they shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at
the expense of the consumer without delay.
      7.   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective.
      8.   Copies of records of all tests, repairs and overhauls shall be
submitted to the city, which shall maintain files for the backflow prevention
devices and make them available for inspection by agency personnel. The city
shall determine whether or not the inspection and testing required herein are
performed properly. If, following the city's written request, the consumer
fails to have any of the inspections and tests made as required herein, or to
make the above described records available, the city shall deny or discontinue
the water service after reasonable notice to the consumer. There shall be a
water turn on charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for turning on the water
after it has been turned off pursuant to this subsection E8. (2006 Code §
7-1-11)
8-1A-7: BOOSTER PUMPS:
   A.   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the consumer to maintain the low pressure
cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the city, at least once
a year, that the device is operable. (2006 Code §
7-1-11)
8-1A-8: CITY'S RIGHT OF ENTRY:
For the purpose of making any inspections or discharging the duties imposed by
this article and the Illinois state plumbing code, any authorized employee of
the water department has the right to enter upon the premises of any consumer.
Each consumer, as a condition of the continued delivery to his premises of
water from the city water supply, shall be considered as having stated his
consent to such entry upon his premises for the purposes stated herein. (2006
Code §
7-1-11)
8-1A-9: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   This article shall be administered by the city water department and
enforced by the city.
   B.   The water department, with the approval of the corporate authorities,
may from time to time, and as often as necessary, establish reasonable
administrative rules and regulations to implement and carry out this article.
Copies of any such rules and regulations shall be prepared and made available
to all interested persons without charge.
   C.   The city water department shall keep a record containing a full and
separate account of all inspections and tests made. (2006 Code §
7-1-11)
8-1A-10: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND LIABILITIES:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of
this article shall be served with written notice stating the notice of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit, not to exceed fifteen (15)
days, for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. (2006
Code §
7-1-11)
   B.   Penalty: Any person who shall continue such violation after receipt of
a written notice, as provided in subsection A of this section, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2006 Code §
7-1-11; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Discontinuance Of Service:
      1.   The city shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the
occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any backflow
prevention device required by this article is not installed, tested, maintained
and repaired in a manner acceptable to the city, or if it is found that the
backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected
cross connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure cutoff required
by this article is not installed and maintained in working order.
      2.   Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected by the
city when the city is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of
the public water system exists. Such action shall be followed by written
notification to the consumer of the cause of disconnection.
      3.   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the city.
   D.   Liability For Costs:
      1.   The consumer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
cleanup of the potable water supply system.
      2.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, in
addition to the fine provided, shall become liable to the city for any expense,
loss, or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation, whether the
same was caused before or after notice. (2006 Code §
7-1-11)
CHAPTER 2
WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEMS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Water Pollution Control Department And Committee
8-2-2: Definitions
8-2-3: Use Of Public Sewers Required
8-2-4: Connection Requirements
8-2-5: Building Sewers And Connections
8-2-6: Use Of The Wastewater Collection And Treatment Systems
8-2-6-1:    Discharges Into System
8-2-6-2:    Interceptors
8-2-6-3:    Preliminary Treatment Or Flow Equalization
8-2-6-4:    Control Manhole
8-2-6-5:    Measurements, Tests And Analyses
8-2-6-6:    Special Agreements
8-2-7: Extension Of Mains
8-2-8: Tampering With, Damage To Systems Prohibited
8-2-9: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
8-2-10: Violation; Penalty
8-2-1: WATER POLLUTION CONTROL DEPARTMENT AND COMMITTEE:
   A.   Water Pollution Control Department:
      1.   Established; Functions: There is hereby established a department of
the city to be known as the water pollution control department. The functions
and purposes of the department shall be the proper operation, maintenance, and
improvement of the wastewater collection and treatment systems of the city.
(2006 Code §
7-2-1)
      2.   Department Head: The city superintendent of public works shall be
the head of the water pollution control department. (2006 Code §
7-2-3)
   B.   Water Pollution Control Committee: The water pollution control
committee shall consist of at least three (3) members of the city council
appointed by the mayor. The committee shall serve as liaison between the city
council and the department. When necessary, the committee shall make
appropriate recommendations to the city council with respect to the wastewater
collection and treatment systems. (2006 Code §
7-2-2)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the meanings of terms used in this
chapter shall be as follows:
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS: Improvements to the wastewater facilities, including
replacement or improvement of existing facilities, or construction of new
facilities, to meet current or future needs.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are
discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a control manhole is to provide access for the city representative
to sample and/or measure discharges.
EFFLUENT CRITERIA: Those defined in an applicable NPDES permit.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance discharged, permitted
to flow, or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial, or
business establishment or process, or from the development, recovery, or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY: An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment
works that:
   A.   Has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average
workday; or
   B.   Has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste; or
   C.   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under applicable federal legislation; or
   D.   Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
NPDES PERMIT: The national pollutant discharge elimination system permit, or
any equivalent document or requirements, issued by the United States
environmental protection agency or, where appropriate, by the Illinois
environmental protection agency, pursuant to applicable federal legislation,
and, where appropriate, the delegation of such regulation to the state of
Illinois.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE: Includes replacement.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, unincorporated association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity.
POPULATION EQUIVALENT: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pound of biochemical
oxygen demand and 0.20 pound of suspended solids.
REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories,
or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment
works to maintain the capacity and performance for which the works were
designed and constructed.
SEWAGE FUND: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received in
the operation of the sewerage system.
SEWER TYPES AND APPURTENANCES:
   Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
   Building Sewer: That extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
   Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater
plus surface water, groundwater, and stormwater runoff drainage.
   Public Sewer: Any sewer, the construction for which a permit from the
Illinois environmental protection agency is required, excepting any sewer
serving an industry or any sewer serving a single building or site designed or
intended to serve more than fifteen (15) persons. A public sewer may lie within
or without the geographical limits of the city and may or may not have been
constructed with city funds.
   Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes, or a
combination of both, and into which surface water, groundwater, and stormwater
runoff, or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including groundwater, surface water, and stormwater runoff.
   Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation, and pumping of sewage.
   Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries surface water, groundwater, and stormwater
runoff drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than
unpolluted cooling water.
SHALL; MAY: "Shall" means mandatory; "may" means permissible.
STANDARD METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And
Wastewater", published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: That portion of natural precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated, and shall be twenty (20) years from the date
of startup of any wastewater facilities constructed with a state or federal
grant.
USER TYPES OR CLASSES:
   Industrial User: A. Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of a publicly
owned treatment works which discharges more than the equivalent of twenty five
thousand (25,000) gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary wastes and which is
identified in the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" of the United
States office of management and budget, as amended and supplemented, under one
of the following divisions:
      1.   Division A, agriculture, forestry and fishing.
      2.   Division B, mining.
      3.   Division D, manufacturing.
      4.   Division E, transportation, communications, electric, gas, and
sanitary service.
      5.   Division I, services.
   B.   A user in the divisions listed in subsection A of this definition may
be excluded if it is determined by the city that it will introduce primarily
segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary convenience.
   Residential Or Commercial Or Nonindustrial User: Any user of the treatment
works not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an industrial user as
provided in this section.
WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
   Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter.
   Floatable Oil: Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. Wastewater shall be considered free from floatable oil if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
   Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent; and is 0.0001 gram of the constituent in one thousand milliliters
(1,000 ml) of water. (The term has replaced the unit formerly used commonly,
"parts per million", to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the
results of water and wastewater analyses.)
   ppm: Parts per million by weight.
   pH: The logarithm (base-10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in standard methods.
   Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that no particle in
any public sewer is greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in any
dimension.
   Sewage: Used interchangeably with "wastewater".
   Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
   Suspended Solids: Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. (Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in standard methods.)
   Unpolluted Water: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   Wastewater: The spent water of a community. Wastewater may be a combination
of the liquid and water carried waste from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water, and stormwater runoff that may be present.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT:
   Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewater from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   Wastewater Facilities: The structures, equipment, and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and to transport
effluent to a watercourse.
   Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge; and is sometimes used
interchangeably with "waste treatment plant", "wastewater treatment plant", or
"pollution control plant".
WATER QUALITY STANDARDS: Those defined in the water pollution regulations
promulgated by the Illinois pollution control board.
WATERCOURSE AND CONNECTIONS:
   Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface water or groundwater.
   Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently. (2006 Code § 7-2-16)
8-2-3: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Discharge Of Human And Animal Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the city or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste.
   B.   Discharge To Natural Outlets: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any
natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (2006 Code §
7-2-8)
   C.   Private Systems: Except as authorized by the county, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   D.   Connection To Sewer System Required: The owner of all dwellings,
buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or
other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or
right of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a
public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at the owner's expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, within ninety (90) days after the date of official notice to do so;
provided, that said public sewer is within four hundred feet (400') of the
property line. (2006 Code §
7-2-8; amd. 2016 Code)
8-2-4: CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: Any person desiring to connect or tap into any
sanitary sewer or sanitary sewer main line operated by the city shall, before
tapping any such sanitary sewer line or main, obtain a written permit from the
city clerk to make the connection or tap. (2006 Code §
7-2-4)
   B.   Preannexation Agreement For Users Outside City: New connections to the
sewer system shall be prohibited to properties outside the city limits unless
the property owner signs a preannexation agreement to annex when the property
is contiguous to the city.
   C.   Permit And Connection Fees:
      1.   Required; Exemptions:
         a.   Each person applying for a permit shall pay the following sums:
(2006 Code §
7-2-5)
 
Permit and inspection fee                                 $  50.00
Sewer tap for existing sewers                             250.00
Sewer connection, new extension pursuant to the extension See section
agreement                                                 8-2-7 of this chapter
 
(2006 Code §
7-2-5; amd. 2016 Code)
         b.   The connection and permit fees shall be waived for any property
found to be illegally connected to a storm sewer where sewer use fees have been
paid over a minimum of ten (10) years.
      2.   Payment Of Fees: Payment shall be made in one payment in the office
of the city clerk prior to commencement of any construction. (2006 Code §
7-2-5)
8-2-5: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit To Connect:
      1.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
      2.   Classes Of Permits; Applications: There shall be two (2) classes of
building sewer permits: a) for residential and commercial service; and b) for
service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the
owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the
city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the city.
      3.   Fees:
         a.   Residential Or Commercial Buildings: Fees for permit, connection,
and inspection in accordance with section
8-2-4 of this chapter for a residential or commercial building sewer permit
shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
         b.   Industrial Buildings: Industrial permits are subject to the fees
in section
8-2-4 of this chapter and are subject to approval by the Illinois environmental
protection agency.
      4.   Conditions Of Permit: A building sewer permit will be issued and a
sewer connection allowed only if it can be demonstrated that the downstream
sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations, and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   B.   Separate Building Sewers: A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building; except, that where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
   C.   Use Of Existing Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection
with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the
city, to meet all requirements of this chapter. Reuse of old sewers will
require payment of the permit and inspection fee.
   D.   Installation And Connection Requirements And Specifications:
      1.   The size, slope, alignment, and construction materials of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of
the city. In the absence of said provisions, or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications by the
American Society Of Testing Materials, "Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual Of Practice No. 9", and "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer
Main Construction In Illinois", shall apply.
      2.   The building sewer shall be constructed of extra strength clay sewer
pipe and fittings meeting the requirements of American Society Of Testing
Materials (hereinafter referred to as ASTM) C-700 with rubber joints meeting
the requirements of ASTM C-425; or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe and
fittings meeting the requirements of ASTM D-3034 with joints meeting the
requirements of ASTM D-2855 for solvent welded joints, or D-3212 for
elastomeric gasket joints. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the pipe
shall be laid on a suitable improved bed or cradle as approved by the city. All
joints shall be made in strict accordance with manufacturer's recommendations.
      3.   The size of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of
the city, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches (4"). The
slope of such four inch (4") pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch (1/8")
per foot. The minimum slope for larger size pipe shall be in accordance with
the current regulations of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
      4.   a. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer
shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the city. Pipe laying
and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM C-12 for sewer pipe, or
ASTM D-2321 for flexible thermoplastic sewer pipe; except, that no backfill
shall be placed until the work has been inspected by the city. The building
drain shall be connected to the building sewer with a flexible coupling of a
type approved by the city.
         b.   Any excavation for building sewer installation shall be subject
to the excavation regulations of this code. Permit requirements, safety
precautions, restoration requirements, and other provisions therein shall be
fully met.
      5.   a. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
be made at the tee or wye branch designated for that property, if such branch
is available at a suitable location. If no properly located tee or wye branch
is available, the owner shall, at his expense, install a factory made tee
branch in the public sewer or make said connection with a saddle of a type
approved by the city and at a location approved by the city. The making of a
branch by concreting a section of pipe to the existing sewer is prohibited.
         b.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or other procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society Of Testing Materials, "Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual Of Practice No. 9", and "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". Every
connection shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before
installation.
      6.   The separation of building sewers and building drains from water
service lines shall be in accordance with the technical policy statements of
the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water
supplies, which requires that a proposed drain or sewer line must be laid at
least ten feet (10') horizontally from any water main or water service line.
(2006 Code § 7-2-10)
      7.   The building drain shall exit the structure at a depth of three feet
(3') below grade. There shall be no direct gravity flow from plumbing fixtures
below grade into the building sewer. All such flow shall be lifted into the
building drain by suitable pump equipment meeting the standards of the Illinois
plumbing code. The building sewer shall be laid at a uniform grade and in
straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in grade or alignment shall be
made only at manholes or properly curved pipes and fittings, as approved by the
city. The building sewer shall be constructed without the use of ninety degree
(90°) bends. If that is not possible, then only a long radius ninety degree
(90°) bend or two (2) 45-degree bends shall be used. In any building in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is
approved in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code and the city building
code, and discharged to the public sewer. (2006 Code § 7-2-10; amd. 2016 Code)
   E.   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall make connection of roof
downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of
surface runoff or groundwater to any building sewer or building drain which in
turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   F.   Inspections: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city or
its representative.
   G.   Liability For Costs And Expenses: All costs and expenses incident to
the installation, connection, operation, and maintenance of the building sewer
shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss
or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of
the building sewer. (2006 Code § 7-2-10)
8-2-6: USE OF THE WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEMS:
8-2-6-1: DISCHARGES INTO SYSTEM:
   A.   Stormwater, Surface Waters, Etc.:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
      2.   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling waters or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged, on approval of the city and the Illinois
environmental protection agency, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
   B.   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, which injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute
a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard
in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastic, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and entrails,
sanitary napkins, disposable diapers, and any item composed of nonbiodegradable
paper, either whole or ground by garbage grinder.
   C.   Restricted Discharges:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the city that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream; or can otherwise endanger health, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
city will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The
substances prohibited are:
         a.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
         b.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter
(100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F) (0 and 65°C), respectively.
         c.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
city.
         d.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
         e.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the city for such materials.
         f.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the city as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
         g.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
         h.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
         i.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 milligram
per liter as mercury, at any time, except as permitted by the city in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
         j.   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 milligram per liter at any time,
except as permitted by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations.
         k.   Materials which exert or cause:
            (1)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as,
but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
            (2)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);
            (3)   Unusual biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, or
chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on
the sewage treatment works;
            (4)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting "slugs" as defined in section
8-2-2 of this chapter.
         l.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
      2.   a. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsection C1 of this section, and/or which
are in violation of the standard for pretreatment provided in the applicable
rules and regulations of the United States environmental protection agency then
in force and which, in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city
may:
            (1)   Reject the wastes; or
            (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public sewers;
            (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
and/or
            (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing rates of sewer charges under the
provisions of section
8-2-6-6 of this chapter.
         b.   If the city permits the pretreatment, equalization of waste
flows, or payment for treatment, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city and the
Illinois environmental protection agency, and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. (2006 Code § 7-2-11)
8-2-6-2: INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the city, and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (2006 Code § 7-2-11)
8-2-6-3: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZATION:
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at its expense. (2006 Code § 7-2-11)
8-2-6-4: CONTROL MANHOLE:
Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole, and when required
by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by
the owner at the owner's expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to
be safe and accessible at all times. (2006 Code § 7-2-11)
8-2-6-5: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this section
8-2-6 shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard
Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater", published by the American
Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event
that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the
sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to health and property.
The particular analysis involved shall determine whether a twenty four (24)
hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab
sample or samples should be taken. Biochemical oxygen demand and suspended
solids analyses shall usually be determined from twenty four (24) hour
composites of all outfalls, and pHs shall be determined from periodic grab
samples. (2006 Code § 7-2-11)
8-2-6-6: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this section
8-2-6 shall be construed to prevent any special agreement or arrangement
between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment,
subject to payment therefor, in accordance with the provisions of subsection 8-
2-6-1C2 of this chapter and approval by the Illinois environmental protection
agency. (2006 Code § 7-2-11)
8-2-7: EXTENSION OF MAINS:
   A.   Permit Required; Fee: Before any new sanitary sewer line connection is
made to the city sanitary sewer system, a permit must be obtained and a permit,
inspection and connection fee shall be paid as provided in section
8-2-4 of this chapter, except where a sewer main extension is needed. The
record owner of the premises to be served by the new sewer main extension shall
pay to the city a sum equal to the cost for labor and materials incurred by the
city in constructing the new sewer main extension in addition to permit and
inspection fees.
   B.   Request For Extension; Payment Of Fee: Before construction of a new
sewer main extension may be commenced, the record owner of the premises to be
served by the new sewer main extension shall request said extension in writing
on forms supplied by the city. The city shall estimate the cost for labor and
materials to be incurred for said construction, and the record owner shall pay
to the city fifty percent (50%) of said estimate prior to the commencement of
construction. The balance of said cost for labor and materials incurred by the
city shall be paid by the record owner to the city immediately upon completion
of the construction, notwithstanding the amount of the original estimate.
   C.   Contract For Installation: The property owner may, at his expense,
contract to have a sewer extension installed. However, any such extension shall
be approved by the city and the Illinois environmental protection agency prior
to installation. The extension shall be inspected and a report furnished by a
licensed professional engineer that the extension complies with the "Illinois
Recommended Standards For Sewer Construction".
   D.   Time Of Installation; Applicability Of Fee:
      1.   If the building sewers are installed at the time of the sewer
extension provided in subsection C of this section, the connection and permit
fee will be waived.
      2.   If the building sewers are installed at a later date, only the
connection fee will be waived, and only for a period of five (5) years after
acceptance of the sewer extension provided in subsection C of this section.
(2006 Code § 7-2-15)
8-2-8: TAMPERING WITH, DAMAGE TO SYSTEMS PROHIBITED:
No person shall wilfully or maliciously break, damage, destroy, or tamper with
any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage
treatment works or sewage system. Any person charged with the violation of this
section shall be subject to prosecution pursuant to section
8-1-10 of this title. (2006 Code § 7-2-12; amd. 2016 Code)
8-2-9: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   Entry Powers; Limitation On Requested Information:
      1.   Duly authorized employees of the city, the United States
environmental protection agency and the Illinois environmental protection
agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
However, they shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including
metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other process of any
industry beyond that point which has a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
      2.   Any duly authorized employee of the city bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter any private property through or
on which the city holds a duly negotiated easement, for the purposes of, but
not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within said easement.
All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the easement. (2006 Code § 7-2-13)
   B.   Safety Precautions: While performing the necessary work on private
properties referred to in subsection A of this section, such employees of any
of such governmental unit or agency shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the owner, and the owner shall be held harmless
for injury to or the death of any such employee. The city shall indemnify the
owner against loss or damage to its property by any city employee and against
all liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the owner and growing out of such necessary work referred to
in subsection A1 of this section, except as such may be caused by the
negligence or other failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions as
required in section
8-2-6-4 of this chapter. (2006 Code § 7-2-13; amd. 2016 Code)
8-2-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of
sections
8-2-3,
8-2-5 or
8-2-6 of this chapter shall be served by the city with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease each violation.
   B.   Penalty: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided in subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a municipal
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each day in which any
such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (2006 Code §
7-2-14; amd. 2016 Code)
ARTICLE A.  RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
8-2A-1: Basis For Wastewater Service Charge
8-2A-2: Measurement Of Flow
8-2A-3: Rates And Charges Established
8-2A-4: Computation Of Rates And Charges
8-2A-5: Bills For Service; Delinquencies
8-2A-6: Liability For Service
8-2A-7: Revenues
8-2A-8: Accounting
8-2A-9: Access To Records
8-2A-1: BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE:
The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the
wastewater facilities of the city is hereby established. It shall consist of a
basic user charge for operation and maintenance plus replacement, a debt
service charge, a capital improvement charge, and a surcharge, if applicable.
The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed annually by
certified public accountants for the city in the annual audit report. The
wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in
the costs to operate the wastewater facilities.
   A.   Basic User Charge: The basic user charge shall be based on water usage
as recorded by water meters and/or sewer meters for wastes having the following
normal concentrations:
      1.   a. A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical
oxygen demand of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l).
         b.   A suspended solids content of two hundred fifty milligrams per
liter (250 mg/l).
      2.   The basic user charge shall consist of operation and maintenance
costs plus replacement and shall be computed as follows:
         a.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities, including a replacement fund for the year,
for all works categories.
         b.   Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories
by volume, suspended solids, and biochemical oxygen demand, if possible.
         c.   Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of suspended solids and pounds
of biochemical oxygen demand to be treated.
         d.   Proportion the estimated costs to nonindustrial users by volume,
suspended solids, and biochemical oxygen demand.
         e.   Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons for normal sewage
strength.
         f.   Compute surcharge costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons per
milligrams per liter in excess of normal sewage strength for biochemical oxygen
demand and suspended solids.
   B.   Debt Service Charge: The debt service charge shall be computed by
dividing the annual debt service of all outstanding revenue bonds by the number
of users. Through further divisions, the monthly debt service charges can be
computed. In the case of outstanding general obligation bonds, each user
located outside the city limits shall pay a debt service charge for the
duration of the debt in the amount of real estate tax not paid by reason of
being outside the city limits.
   C.   Capital Improvement Charge: The capital improvement charge shall be
levied on all users based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or
sewage meters.
   D.   Surcharge: The surcharge shall be levied to all users whose waters
exceed the normal concentration for biochemical oxygen demand (200 milligrams
per liter) and suspended solids (250 milligrams per liter). The surcharge will
be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for
all wastes which exceed the two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) and two
hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l) concentration for biochemical
oxygen demand and suspended solids, respectively. Subsection A2d of this
section specifies the procedure by which the surcharge is computed. (2006 Code
§
7-2-6)
8-2A-2: MEASUREMENT OF FLOW:
   A.   The volume of flow used for computing the basic user charge, the
capital improvement charge, and the surcharge, shall be the metered water
consumption read to the lowest even increments of one hundred (100) gallons.
   B.   If the user discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his water from sources other than the public waterworks system
of the city, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the
user shall install and maintain, at the user's expense, one or more water
meters of a type approved by the city for the purpose of determining the volume
of water obtained from such other sources.
   C.   One or more metering devices for measuring the volume of waste
discharged may be required by the city if such volume cannot otherwise be
determined from the metered water consumption records.
   D.   When any metering device for determining the volume of waste is
required by the city, such device shall be installed, owned, and maintained by
the user. Following approval and installation, no such meter may be removed
without the consent of the city. (2006 Code §
7-2-6)
8-2A-3: RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Basic User Charge:
      1.   Metered Users: A minimum charge of eight dollars seventy five cents
($8.75) monthly shall be applied to each user whose water consumption does not
exceed one thousand (1,000) gallons monthly. A charge of three dollars twenty
five cents ($3.25) monthly per one thousand (1,000) gallons shall be applied to
each user for water consumption in excess of one thousand (1,000) gallons
monthly. From May 1, 2016, forward, this rate will be increased, if applicable,
by the rate shown by the annual consumer pricing index. (Ord. 2006-4, 9-18-
2006, eff. 10-1-2006; amd. Ord. 2016-6, 3-21-2016)
      2.   Nonmetered Users: A flat rate charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
monthly shall be applied to each nonmetered user. The flat rate charge will
include a maximum of twelve thousand (12,000) gallons monthly. In the event
usage of the wastewater facilities is determined by the city to be in excess of
twelve thousand (12,000) gallons monthly, the city may require the user to
install a metering device on the water supply or sewer main to measure the
amount of service supplied. (Ord. 2006-4, 9-18-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
   B.   Debt Service Charge: When necessary, a debt service charge to each user
of the wastewater facility of the city may be established by ordinance. A debt
service charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per month shall be charged to
each user who is located outside the city limits.
   C.   Capital Improvement Charge: When necessary, a capital improvement
charge to each user of the wastewater facility of the city may be established
by ordinance.
   D.   Surcharge Rate: The surcharge for biochemical oxygen demand and
suspended solids shall be as follows:
 
Biochemical oxygen demand $0.30 per 100 milligrams per liter per 1,000 gallons
Suspended solids          $0.24 per 100 milligrams per liter per 1,000 gallons
 
(2006 Code §
7-2-6)
8-2A-4: COMPUTATION OF RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service charge shall be
computed by the following formula:
      CW = CD + CM + (Vu-X)CU + CS + CI
When:
When:
 CW = Amount of wastewater service charge per billing period.
 CD = Debt service charge.
 CM = Minimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement.
 Vu = Wastewater volume for the billing period.
 X  = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge.
 CU = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement.
 CS = Amount of surcharge.
 CI = Capital improvement charge = Vu x CA.
 CA = Capital improvement rate.
 
The minimum charge for the sum of CM+(Vu-X)CU+CI shall be $7.00 for users with
meters.
(2006 Code §
7-2-6; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Surcharge: The concentration of wastes used for computing a surcharge
shall be established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as
often as may be deemed necessary by the city and shall be binding as a basis
for a surcharge. (2006 Code §
7-2-6)
8-2A-5: BILLS FOR SERVICE; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Rendition Of Bills; Payment Date:
      1.   Charges for service shall be payable monthly. The owner of the
premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the service shall be jointly
and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises, and the service
is furnished to the premises by the city only upon that condition.
      2.   All sewer bills are due and payable within fifteen (15) days after
being sent. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to all bills not paid
within fifteen (15) days from the date of the billing.
   B.   Lien For Delinquent Charges: Any delinquent charge for the use and
service of the sewerage system, and any delinquent surcharge for such use and
service that may be established by the city from time to time, together with
penalty, shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which the sewerage
service is supplied, and the city clerk is hereby authorized to file a sworn
statement showing such delinquency in the office of the Knox County recorder,
and the filing of such statement shall be deemed notice of the lien of such
charge or surcharge and penalty. In addition to the provision herein for the
establishment of a lien, the city may, at its discretion, commence court
proceedings against the user or the owner of the premises to collect any
delinquent charge or surcharge and penalty. However, as to each matter in which
judgment is obtained, such judgment shall operate as a release or waiver of the
lien upon the real estate for the amount of the judgment; provided, that the
charge or surcharge, together with the penalty as provided by this article,
plus reasonable attorney fees to be fixed by the court, and the court costs
shall be included as part of the judgment. (2006 Code §
7-2-7)
8-2A-6: LIABILITY FOR SERVICE:
The rates and charges herein established shall be collected from the owners,
occupants and users of the premises from and after the effective date hereof.
In the case of any mobile home or trailer coach user, upon failure of the owner
or occupant of such unit to pay said rates and charges, the owner of the real
estate upon which such mobile home or trailer coach is or was situated shall be
subject to collection of such rates and charges. (2006 Code §
7-2-7)
8-2A-7: REVENUES:
   A.   All revenues derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall be
deposited in the water pollution control account of the combined water and
sewer fund. All such revenues shall be held by the city treasurer separate and
apart from all other funds of the city and shall be delivered to the city
treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such
more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the city
council.
   B.   The city treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the water
pollution control system and all other funds incident to the operation of the
system as the same may be delivered to him and shall deposit them in the water
pollution control account. (2006 Code §
7-2-7)
8-2A-8: ACCOUNTING:
   A.   System Of Accounts: The city treasurer shall establish a proper system
of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which
complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the
sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system. (2006 Code §
7-2-7)
   B.   Annual Audit Report: In addition to the customary operating statements,
the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses
of the wastewater facilities, including an estimate of the replacement cost of
such facilities, to indicate that sewer service charges recovered under the
waste cost recovery system and capital amounts to be recovered under the
regulations are reasonably necessary and proper. In this regard, the financial
information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following: (2006
Code §
7-2-7; amd. 2016 Code)
      1.   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for
the current fiscal year.
      2.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
      3.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      4.   Number of users connected to the system.
      5.   Number of nonmetered users.
      6.   A list of users discharging nondomestic wastes (industrial users)
and volume of waste discharged. (2006 Code §
7-2-7)
8-2A-9: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The Illinois environmental protection agency or its authorized representative
shall have access to any books, documents, papers, and records of the city
which are applicable to the city system of user charges for the purpose of
making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcriptions thereof to ensure
compliance with the terms of the grant received by the city. (2006 Code §
7-2-7)
CHAPTER 3
ENCROACHMENTS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Encroachments Prohibited
8-3-2: Notice And Removal Of Encroachments
8-3-1: ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED:
No encroachment or obstruction whatever, other than provided by law, authorized
by the board of trustees, or by ordinance of the town, shall be made or placed
upon any street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, curb walk or other public place
within the town. (1997 Code § 12.12.010)
8-3-2: NOTICE AND REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENTS:
   A.   Notice; Time Limit For Removal: Whenever any encroachments or
obstruction including ice, snow, mud, dirt, debris, rubbish and filth, is made,
located, permitted or maintained contrary to this chapter, the town
administrator or chief of police shall give notice to the person who made,
caused or permitted same, or to the person who owns or controls the premises on
which same is located or connected, directing such person to remove such
encroachment or obstruction within forty eight (48) hours after receipt of the
notice.
   B.   Removal By Town; Assessment Of Costs: In the event such notice shall
not be obeyed, the town administrator or chief of police may order the removal
of the encroachment or obstruction and the costs and expenses of such removal
shall be assessed against the responsible person. (1997 Code § 12.12.020)
CHAPTER 4
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Authority And Supervision
8-4-2: Permit Required; Specifications
8-4-3: Permit Application
8-4-4: Commencement And Completion
8-4-5: Barricades And Lights
8-4-6: Width And Minimum Inconvenience To Public
8-4-7: Sidewalks And Gutters Clear
8-4-1: AUTHORITY AND SUPERVISION:
All work on any excavation, cut, trench or opening in or under any street,
curb, gutter, curb walk, alley or other public place shall be done only on
authority of a permit issued by the town administrator and such work shall be
supervised by the town administrator. (1997 Code § 12.16.010)
8-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person, other than those under
contract with the town, to excavate, cut, open or trench in or under any
street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, curb walk, alley or other public place without
having first obtained a permit from the town administrator.
   B.   Rules And Regulations: A complete set of rules and regulations shall be
prepared by the town administrator and approved by the board describing the
procedures, precautions and specifications under which the excavation work and
backfilling shall be done and any other provisions deemed necessary to the best
interests of the town in connection therewith. (1997 Code § 12.16.020)
8-4-3: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Every person desiring to do any excavation work shall apply to the town
administrator for a permit therefor on a form provided by the town, stating the
applicant's name, the location, length, width and purpose of the proposed
excavation, the amount of the permit fee, the dates of commencement and
completion of the work and a statement that the work will be performed in
strict compliance with the plans, specifications, and procedures furnished by
the town administrator. (1997 Code § 12.16.030)
8-4-4: COMMENCEMENT AND COMPLETION:
   A.   Time Of Commencement: All work authorized by a permit issued pursuant
to this chapter shall be commenced within a reasonable time after issuance of
the permit and shall be diligently and continuously performed until completion.
   B.   Stoppage Of Work; Order Excavation Refilled: In the event that weather,
process of law, or any other unexpected obstacles shall cause work to be
stopped for so long a time that public travel shall be unreasonably obstructed,
the town administrator may order the excavation refilled and repaved as if the
work contemplated in the permit were actually completed. (1997 Code §
12.16.040)
8-4-5: BARRICADES AND LIGHTS:
Every person making or causing to be made any excavation shall keep the
excavation barricaded at all times and, between the hours of sunset and
sunrise, he shall keep such excavation properly lighted so as to warn all
persons thereof. (1997 Code § 12.16.050)
8-4-6: WIDTH AND MINIMUM INCONVENIENCE TO PUBLIC:
   A.   Width Allowing Street Access: No opening or excavation shall be
undercut or have a greater width at the bottom than at the top. In no case
shall more than one-half (1/2) of the width of any street, alley or other
public place be opened or excavated at any one time, and in all cases, one-half
(1/2) of such street, alley or other public place shall remain untouched for
the accommodation of traffic until the other one-half (1/2) is restored for
safe use.
   B.   Minimum Inconvenience: All such work shall be performed in such way as
to cause minimum inconvenience and restriction to the public and to both
pedestrian and vehicular traffic. (1997 Code § 12.16.060)
8-4-7: SIDEWALKS AND GUTTERS CLEAR:
It is unlawful for any person performing any excavation work to place any dirt
or other materials upon any sidewalk or in any gutters, and such work shall be
performed so as to permit the free passage of water along the gutters. (1997
Code § 12.16.070)
CHAPTER 5
PAVING ALLEYS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Petition Of Property Owners
8-5-2: Compliance With Grade; Materials
8-5-3: Notice To Property Owners To Construct Or Repair
8-5-4: Assessment Of Costs When Owner Fails To Construct Or Repair
8-5-1: PETITION OF PROPERTY OWNERS:
Whenever the owners of the majority of the frontage of the lots or land
adjacent to or abutting upon any alley or designated portion thereof within the
town shall petition the board of trustees for the grading of alley or the
grading and paving of such alley, the board shall immediately order the grading
or grading and paving to be done. (1997 Code § 12.20.010)
8-5-2: COMPLIANCE WITH GRADE; MATERIALS:
   A.   Construction Material: All paving constructed in any of the alleys in
the town shall be constructed of either concrete or asphaltum and the same
shall cover the entire surface of the alley, except as hereinafter provided,
and shall be laid with a firm and permanent foundation of suitable material,
according to the specifications of the town administrator.
   B.   Grade: Such paving shall be laid upon the established grade of the
alleys and in all respects be under the supervision and to the satisfaction of
the town administrator.
   C.   Repairs: Paving shall be repaired with the same kind of material as
that used in the construction thereof. (1997 Code § 12.20.020)
8-5-3: NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS TO CONSTRUCT OR REPAIR:
   A.   Notice; Time Limit To Comply: Whenever the board shall order the
grading or paving of any alley or portion thereof or the construction or repair
of any pavement, the town administrator shall forthwith serve a written or
printed notice upon the owner or agent of each lot or parcel of land fronting
upon, adjacent to or abutting upon such pavement or alley to be so graded or
paved, requiring him to grade, construct or repair as much thereof as abuts the
lot or parcel of land owned by him or for which he is agent within thirty (30)
days from the date of the service of such notice, in case of grading and
construction, and in fifteen (15) days in case of repair of such pavement,
according to the plans and specifications provided by the town administrator
and under the direction and to the satisfaction of the town administrator.
   B.   Nonresidents; Publication Of Notice: In case the owner of any such
parcel of land or lot is a nonresident and has no agent in the town upon whom
such notice can be served, the town administrator shall publish a notice of
like tenor and effect for a period of two (2) weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town. (1997 Code § 12.20.030)
8-5-4: ASSESSMENT OF COSTS WHEN OWNER FAILS TO CONSTRUCT OR REPAIR:
   A.   Construction Or Repair By Town; Costs; Lien:
      1.   In case the owner or agent fails to grade such alley or to construct
or repair such pavement within the time specified in the notice provided for by
this chapter, the town administrator may cause the same to be done under the
direction of the town and shall, upon the completion of such work, make out and
deliver to the town clerk a certificate showing the cost thereof and a
description of the property adjacent to or abutting upon such work and
pavement, the name of the parties who performed the work or furnished the
materials therefor and the amounts owing to each.
      2.   The board shall, at their next regular meeting, assess the cost of
such grading, construction or repair of such pavement against the land adjacent
to or abutting upon such pavement or grading, specifying the exact amount so
assessed.
      3.   The expense of the construction or repair of such pavement is
assessed against such property and is made and declared to be a lien against
the same until the agreement is paid.
   B.   Hearing; Appeal By Landowner; Failure To Pay Assessment:
      1.   Upon filing with the town clerk of any such certificate and the
assessment by the board, the board shall designate and set a time and place
when and where such land or lot owner may appear before the board and be heard
as to the justness and correctness of the amount so certified and assessed
against his lot or parcel of land. (1997 Code § 12.20.040)
      2.   The town clerk shall then cause to be published in some newspaper of
general circulation in the town, for a period of ten (10) days, a notice to
such lot owner or landowners, setting forth the time and place so fixed and
when and where he or they may appear before the board for the purpose of an
appeal. At the time and place mentioned in such notice, the board shall meet
and hear and consider any and all complaints of any lot owner affected by such
assessments, and correct any errors, and remedy any injustice there may be in
any such certificate and assessment. (1997 Code § 12.20.040; amd. 2016 Code)
      3.   In case the owner of any lot or parcel of land shall fail to pay any
such assessment to the town clerk within thirty (30) days after the meeting of
the board mentioned in subsection A2 of this section, the same shall be
certified to the county treasurer to be placed upon the tax roll for the
current year and collected in the same manner as other taxes assessed upon such
property. (1997 Code § 12.20.040)
CHAPTER 6
TREES
SECTION:
8-6-1: Planting And Maintenance
8-6-2: Trimming Trees
8-6-3: Species And Location
8-6-4: Collection Of Costs Of Trimming By Town
8-6-1: PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE:
It shall be the obligation of each property owner within the town to plant,
water and maintain all trees and other vegetation in the parking area, being
the area between the lot line and the curb line, to the front and on the side
of property owned by the property owner within the town. (1997 Code §
12.24.010)
8-6-2: TRIMMING TREES:
Every property owner shall be responsible for the trimming of trees in the
parking in front and at the side of his property and also along the alley
adjoining his property. The trees shall be kept trimmed at all times so that
there is a clearance of at least fourteen feet (14') between the surface of the
street or alley and the overhanging branches. (1997 Code § 12.24.020)
8-6-3: SPECIES AND LOCATION:
All trees hereafter planted in the parking area along the streets of the town
and in the parks thereof shall be planted under the supervision of the town
administrator. Only such species as may be approved by the town will be
planted, and only in such spacing or arrangement as may be approved by the
town. (1997 Code § 12.24.030)
8-6-4: COLLECTION OF COSTS OF TRIMMING BY TOWN:
   A.   Trimming By Town; Assessment Of Cost: In the event any property owner
shall fail or neglect to trim the trees or maintain parking as provided by
sections
8-6-1 through
8-6-3 of this chapter, then the town board may order the work done by the town
and the whole cost thereof, plus five percent (5%) for inspection and other
incidentals, shall be paid to the town clerk within thirty (30) days after
mailing by the town clerk to the owner of the property, by registered or
certified mail, notice of the assessment of such cost.
   B.   Failure To Pay; Lien: Failure to pay such assessment within such period
of thirty (30) days shall cause such assessment to become a lien against such
property and shall have priority over all liens, except general taxes and prior
special assessments, and the same may be certified at any time, after such
failure to so pay the same within thirty (30) days, by the town clerk to the
county treasurer to be placed upon the tax list for the current year and to be
collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with ten percent
(10%) penalty to defray the cost of collection. (1997 Code § 12.24.040)
CHAPTER 7
TOWN CEMETERY
SECTION:
8-7-1: Establishment; Administration And Supervision
8-7-2: Duties Of Superintendent
8-7-3: Rules And Regulations; Fees
8-7-4: Map And Records; Burial Permits
8-7-5: Applications For Burial Spaces; Contract
8-7-6: Space Fees; Cemetery Trust Fund
8-7-7: Perpetual Care Defined; Cost
8-7-8: Transfer, Assignment Or Conveyance Of Property Right
8-7-9: Selling Lots Or Spaces For Resale
8-7-10: Rights And Interest In Lot Or Space Reverting To Town
8-7-11: Interments
8-7-12: Erection Of Monuments, Markers And Vaults
8-7-13: Fences; Decorations; Planting Vegetation
8-7-14: Prohibitions Within Cemetery
8-7-15: Closing Driveways; Establishing Grades
8-7-16: Nonliability Of Town For Acts Of Trespassers
8-7-17: Abandoned Plots Revert To Town
8-7-1: ESTABLISHMENT; ADMINISTRATION AND SUPERVISION:
   A.   Cemetery Established: There is established as the town cemetery the
following described property:
The North 710 feet of the East Half, Northeast Quarter of Section seven,
Township Two North, Range Fifty-two West.
   B.   Administration And Supervision: The administration and supervision of
the town cemetery shall be by direction of the town administrator through a
superintendent appointed by him, who will employ such other persons as may be
necessary for the care and maintenance of the town cemetery. (1997 Code §
12.28.010)
8-7-2: DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT:
   A.   Duties: It shall be the duty of the superintendent to dig graves,
supervise funerals, set monuments or markers, supervise all decoration of lots
and graves, plant and care for all vegetation, maintain and repair driveways
and walks, endeavor to prevent the defacing, destruction or damage of
monuments, markers and other property in the cemetery and carry out and enforce
the rules and regulations of the cemetery.
   B.   Burial; Report Location Of Grave: After each burial, the superintendent
shall report to the town clerk in writing in detail the location of the grave.
(1997 Code § 12.28.030)
8-7-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS; FEES:
   A.   Adoption By Board:
      1.   The board of trustees shall adopt rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter governing the cemetery, which
rules and regulations shall be on file and available for public examination in
the office of the town clerk.
      2.   Failure to comply with any rule or regulation promulgated under this
chapter shall be deemed a violation of this code. (1997 Code § 12.28.020)
   B.   Fees: Fees for opening graves, disinterring bodies, and use of
equipment shall be governed by the rules and regulations of the cemetery. (1997
Code § 12.28.130)
8-7-4: MAP AND RECORDS; BURIAL PERMITS:
   A.   Keeping Map And Records; Permit Issuance:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the town clerk to keep a map and the records
of the cemetery and issue required permits.
      2.   No permits shall be issued without the name and address of the lot
owner and the lot and block number for which application is made. Burial
permits shall be addressed to the superintendent giving the lot and block
number for burial and time of the funeral.
   B.   Time Of Application: The town clerk shall require application for all
burial permits to be made at least eight (8) working hours before the funeral
and shall not issue permits for funerals less than one hour apart. (1997 Code §
12.28.040)
8-7-5: APPLICATIONS FOR BURIAL SPACES; CONTRACT:
Applications for the purchase of burial spaces shall contain a description of
the space, purchase price and method of payment, and when executed by the
purchaser and the town, it shall become a binding contract of purchase and
sale. Upon payment of the full purchase price to the town, a cemetery deed by
the town, executed by the mayor conveying the space free and clear of all
encumbrances shall be executed and delivered to the purchaser. (1997 Code §
12.28.050)
8-7-6: SPACE FEES; CEMETERY TRUST FUND:
   A.   Price Of Spaces: The sale price of grave spaces shall be:
 
         Lot Only Price With Perpetual Care
1 space  $100.00        $180.00
2 spaces 200.00         320.00
3 spaces 300.00         460.00
4 spaces 400.00         600.00
5 spaces 500.00         740.00
6 spaces 600.00         880.00
 
   B.   Cemetery Trust Fund: The fees set forth in this section and subsection
8-7-7B of this chapter shall be placed into the cemetery trust fund established
by the town. (Ord. 504, 9-6-2011)
8-7-7: PERPETUAL CARE DEFINED; COST:
   A.   Perpetual Care Defined: The term "perpetual care" means the cutting of
the grass at reasonable intervals; the raking and cleaning of the plots; the
general care and pruning of the trees and shrubs that may be placed along the
walks, roadways and boundaries by the town. The term shall not include the
maintenance, repair or replacement of any gravestones, monuments or memorials;
nor the planting of flowers or ornamental plants; nor the maintenance or doing
of any special or unusual work in the cemetery. (1997 Code § 12.28.140)
   B.   Obtaining Perpetual Care; Cost:
      1.   All persons purchasing cemetery spaces shall pay a cost of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per space for the actual space, and a onetime fee for
perpetual care in the following amount:
 
1 space  $ 80.00
2 spaces 120.00
3 spaces 160.00
4 spaces 200.00
5 spaces 240.00
6 spaces 280.00
 
      2.   The fees set forth in this subsection B shall, from time to time, be
established by resolution of the board of trustees.
      3.   The fees set forth in this subsection B shall be placed into the
cemetery trust fund established by the town. (Ord. 504, 9-6-2011)
8-7-8: TRANSFER, ASSIGNMENT OR CONVEYANCE OF PROPERTY RIGHT:
No transfer, assignment or conveyance of any property right or interest in the
town cemetery shall be valid without the consent in writing of the town. The
town shall not consent to the transfer of any property right or interest in the
town cemetery upon which there is any indebtedness due the town. (1997 Code §
12.28.070)
8-7-9: SELLING LOTS OR SPACES FOR RESALE:
No lot or space shall be sold to or purchased by a funeral director or other
persons for purposes of resale or speculation. (1997 Code § 12.28.080)
8-7-10: RIGHTS AND INTEREST IN LOT OR SPACE REVERTING TO TOWN:
In the event a lot or space is vacated by reason of bodies being removed
therefrom, all right and interest in the lot or space shall revert to the town.
(1997 Code § 12.28.090)
8-7-11: INTERMENTS:
   A.   Town Authority To Allow Interments: Applications and permission for
interment, interment charges and payments, and permissible use of burial space
shall be governed by the rules and regulations of the cemetery. It shall be
conclusively presumed, unless written notification to the contrary is filed
with the town clerk, that the purchase of any space in the town cemetery is
being acquired for family use, and the town shall have the right, without
obtaining any interment permit from the owners, to allow interment in such
space of any members of the family of the owners.
   B.   Interments In Akron Cemetery Only: Under no circumstance shall
interment be allowed in any location within the town, other than designated
spaces at the Akron Cemetery. (1997 Code § 12.28.100)
8-7-12: ERECTION OF MONUMENTS, MARKERS AND VAULTS:
All monuments or markers shall be placed at least six inches (6") inside the
space lines and shall be made of granite, marble or real bronze and shall be
erected upon a foundation. Erection, construction, specifications, materials
and placing of marker foundations, monuments, vaults and corner stones shall be
governed by the rules and regulations of the cemetery. (1997 Code § 12.28.110)
8-7-13: FENCES; DECORATIONS; PLANTING VEGETATION:
Fences, railings, hedges and other obstructions and decorations other than
flowers, vases, wreaths and flags are prohibited, and will be removed without
notice. All decoration of lots or spaces and planting of vegetation within the
cemetery shall be under the control, supervision and direction of the
superintendent, who will be governed by the rules and regulations of the
cemetery. (1997 Code § 12.28.120)
8-7-14: PROHIBITIONS WITHIN CEMETERY:
No person in the town cemetery shall:
   A.   Drive or ride any machine or animal on lots, lawns or walks.
   B.   Drive an automobile or other vehicle in excess of twenty (20) miles per
hour or such lesser speed as shall be prudent under the conditions and
circumstances then existing. (1997 Code § 12.28.190)
   C.   Picnic or discard paper boxes and other unsightly articles in the
cemetery. (1997 Code § 12.28.190; amd. 2016 Code)
   D.   Cause any employee to do work for lot owners without an order from the
superintendent or give to any employee any valuable consideration to do work
for a lot owner.
   E.   Do work on the grounds, except by permission of the superintendent.
   F.   Perform or cause to be performed a burial in the cemetery on Sunday,
Christmas, Thanksgiving or Memorial Day.
   G.   Hunt or in any way disturb the birds or fowl or discharge any firearms,
fireworks or other missiles within or over any portion of the cemetery or
around the gates, fences or roads adjoining the same, except as a part of
military funerals or similar occasion.
   H.   Take any animal or permit any animal to be taken into the cemetery.
   I.   Deface, damage, destroy or injure any monuments, markers or other
property or thing in the town cemetery. (1997 Code § 12.28.190)
8-7-15: CLOSING DRIVEWAYS; ESTABLISHING GRADES:
The town shall have the right to close any walk or driveway in the cemetery
heretofore existing or hereafter constructed and to establish grades. (1997
Code § 12.28.200)
8-7-16: NONLIABILITY OF TOWN FOR ACTS OF TRESPASSERS:
The town shall not be liable for any act of lot owners, visitors, licensees or
trespassers within the cemetery or for any damage to person or property while
within the town cemetery. (1997 Code § 12.28.210)
8-7-17: ABANDONED PLOTS REVERT TO TOWN:
Any cemetery plot for which perpetual care has not been paid shall be deemed to
have been abandoned, and title to any unused portion of said lot shall revert
to the town, which shall have the right to make resale of such lot, plot or
unused portion thereof. (1997 Code § 12.28.180)
CHAPTER 8
PARKS
SECTION:
8-8-1: Definitions
8-8-2: Authority To Establish
8-8-3: Rules And Regulations
8-8-4: Daily Park Hours
8-8-5: Destruction Of Park Property
8-8-6: Erection Of Tents And Buildings
8-8-7: Lighting Fires
8-8-8: Riding Or Leading Animals
8-8-9: Huckstering
8-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, unless the context
requires otherwise, shall have the following meanings:
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other
area in the town, either now existing or which shall be subsequently acquired
in accordance with the provisions of section
8-8-2 of this chapter, owned or used by the town, and devoted to active or
passive recreation.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
TOWN: The town of Akron. (1997 Code § 12.32.020)
8-8-2: AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH:
The town, which is incorporated under the laws of the state, shall have
authority to acquire, establish and maintain in the manner provided for by
state law, public parks or pleasure grounds, boulevards, parkways, avenues and
roads. (1997 Code § 12.32.010)
8-8-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The town administrator is empowered and authorized to adopt rules and
regulations for the management, operation and control of parks, parkways and
recreational areas. (1997 Code § 12.32.090)
8-8-4: DAILY PARK HOURS:
   A.   Hours: The city park, the library grounds, and the swimming pool park
will be open daily from five o'clock (5:00) A.M. until nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
All other municipal parks shall be open daily to the public from five o'clock
(5:00) A.M. until eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
   B.   Extend Time Limits By Permit: No person not an employee of the parks
shall remain in any of them at any other time; provided, however, that the town
administrator may, by permit first having been obtained, extend or limit the
times herein specified. (1997 Code § 12.32.030)
8-8-5: DESTRUCTION OF PARK PROPERTY:
It is unlawful to cut, mark, remove, break or climb upon, or in any way injure,
damage or deface the trees, shrubs, plants, turf, or any of the buildings,
fences, bridges or other structures or property within or upon park premises;
or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any
park or recreation area. (1997 Code § 12.32.040)
8-8-6: ERECTION OF TENTS AND BUILDINGS:
It is unlawful to build or place any tent, building, booth, stand or other
structure in or upon any of the parks, parkways or other recreational
facilities without first having obtained a permit to do so from the town
administrator. (1997 Code § 12.32.050)
8-8-7: LIGHTING FIRES:
   A.   Prohibition; Exception: It is unlawful to light, make or use any
unenclosed picnic or trash fire within the parks, parkways or other recreation
facilities owned or operated by the town; provided, however, that this section
shall not apply to authorized park employees.
   B.   Certain Fires Allowed: Fires may only be built in fireplaces or on
grills constructed for that purpose in such areas and under such rules and
regulations as may be prescribed by the town administrator. (1997 Code §
12.32.060)
8-8-8: RIDING OR LEADING ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for any person to ride or lead any horse or other livestock in
any public park or recreational area except upon paths or other ways expressly
provided and posted for that purpose. (1997 Code § 12.32.070)
8-8-9: HUCKSTERING:
It is unlawful to offer any goods, services or things for sale within parks,
parkways or recreational facilities, or on the streets and sidewalks within
three hundred feet (300') of the boundary of the same without first having
obtained a license or permit to do so in the manner and pursuant to the terms
and conditions fixed by the town board. (1997 Code § 12.32.080)
TITLE 9
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING PERMITS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Permit Required; Application
9-1-2: Approval Or Denial Of Application
9-1-3: Permit Fees
9-1-4: Commencement Of Construction
9-1-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
   A.   1. Any person desiring to erect any new building, to remodel any
existing building, to repair by replacement with new materials different from
existing worn materials, to add on, or to alter or change the structure of any
existing building, shall first obtain a building permit application form from
the office of the city clerk.
      2.   Any person desiring to repair by replacement, including overlay,
with new materials different from existing worn materials, to any existing roof
of a residential home or building shall first obtain a building permit
application form from the office of the city clerk. A permit fee will be
assessed by the clerk of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the issuance of a building
permit for and such to repair by replacement. (Ord. 2016-8, 4-18-2016)
   B.   When obtaining a building permit application form from the city clerk,
the person shall file in writing with the clerk a statement of his intention as
to the building or buildings involved, which shall become part of his
application for said permit. (2006 Code §
4-1-2)
   C.   The city clerk shall furnish the form to be used for such applications,
and the use of said form in making the application shall be required. (2006
Code §
4-1-3)
9-1-2: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION:
Upon receiving the application, the city clerk shall immediately transfer said
application to the building official, who shall examine the application and
determine whether or not the permit should be approved and issued, or denied,
and shall inform the applicant of the requirements of the city which are
applicable to said application. (2006 Code §§ 2-6-3,
4-1-4)
9-1-3: PERMIT FEES:
The person making application for a building permit shall pay the city clerk
the following:
   A.   Single-family or two-family residences (not including basement unless
split foyer or affordable living space): Ten cents ($0.10) per square foot.
   B.   Garages (attached or detached), sheds, and other structures accessory
to a residential structure: Five cents ($0.05) per square foot.
   C.   Commercial or institutional buildings (when finished for retail or
office use): Ten cents ($0.10) per square foot.
   D.   Warehouses and industrial buildings (when primarily unfinished): Five
cents ($0.05) per square foot.
   E.   Each fence and each sign (except exempt signs): Twenty dollars
($20.00).
   F.   In any event, the minimum charge shall be twenty dollars ($20.00).
(2006 Code § 4-1-5)
9-1-4: COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION:
Any permit issued by the building official shall expire and become void unless
the construction or remodeling or other action granted by said permit shall be
commenced within ninety (90) days and completed within three hundred sixty
(360) days after the date of issuance of the permit. (2006 Code § 4-1-6)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
9-2-1: Compliance With Codes; Codes Adopted
9-2-2: Amendments To Codes
9-2-2-1:    International Building Code
9-2-2-2:    International Residential Code
9-2-1: COMPLIANCE WITH CODES; CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   Compliance With Codes: It shall be unlawful to build, construct,
remodel, repair, alter, move, or demolish any building or structure in the city
without complying with: (2006 Code §
4-2-1)
      1.   The rules and regulations contained in the international building
code (IBC), 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc.,
and including all amendments thereto; and
      2.   The rules and regulations contained in the international residential
code (IRC), 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc.,
and including all amendments thereto. (Ord. 2009-6, 5-4-2009)
   B.   Codes Adopted: Said codes are adopted as the building code of the city
for the standards and requirements of construction, and the provisions of said
codes are adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this
chapter, subject, however, to sections
9-2-2-1 and
9-2-2-2 of this chapter, containing provisions in lieu of the language
contained in said codes. (2006 Code §
4-2-1)
   C.   Copies On File: One copy of the 2006 IBC and one copy of the 2006 IRC
shall be and remain on file in the office of the city clerk for use and
examination by the public. (Ord. 2009-6, 5-4-2009)
9-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODES:
9-2-2-1: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE:
The following provisions are adopted in lieu of those contained in the 2006
IBC:
Section 101.1 shall read as follows:
Title: These regulations shall be known as the building code of the city of
Abingdon, and shall be hereinafter referred to as "this code".
Section 113.4 shall read as follows:
Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or
shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
construct; alter, or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved
plan or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a petty offense as
defined in the unified code of corrections, adopted by law in Illinois,
punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
Section 114.3 shall read as follows:
Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or about the
structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as
that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be liable to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(2006 Code §
4-2-2; amd. Ord. 2009-6, 5-4-2009)
9-2-2-2: INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE:
The following provisions are adopted in lieu of those contained in the 2006
IRC:
Section 106.4 shall read as follows:
Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this code shall be guilty of a petty offense as defined in the unified code of
corrections, adopted by law in Illinois; and shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each day during which any violation is continued, or
permitted; and on conviction of any violation, shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).
Deleting from Part VII, Plumbing, which includes chapters 25-35, inclusive.
Section R301.2, Table R301.2(1) is completed as follows:
Ground Snow Load - 20 pounds per square foot
Wind Speed (mph) - 75 mph
Seismic Design Category - zone B
Subject To Damage From
Weathering - severe
Frost line depth - 36 inches
Termite - yes, moderate to heavy
Winter Design Temp - minus 4
Ice Barrier Underlayment Required - yes
Flood Hazards - flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and flood boundary floodway map
(FBFM), effective date June 19, 1985
Air Freezing Index - 1500
Mean Annual Temp - 50 degrees Fahrenheit
Figure 403.1a (page 26), Concrete And Masonry Foundation Details:
            (1)   For masonry foundation and poured concrete walls, the footing
shall be a minimum of sixteen inches (16") wide and eight inches (8") deep.
            (2)   Poured concrete walls shall be a minimum of eight inches (8")
wide.
            (3)   Bolting down of the sill (plate) to a foundation block of
poured concrete slab shall not be required.
            (4)   Houses built on poured or concrete slabs shall be required to
have footings as described in no. 1.
            (5)   Houses built on concrete slabs shall be required to use bolts
as indicated in figure 604.10b (page 75), or use other approved means of
anchoring the sill (plate) to the foundation.
            (6)   Minimum thickness of concrete foundation floor shall be four
inches (4").
Section R409, Utility Sheds, is added as follows:
Utility Sheds: Permanent foundations are not required for utility sheds having
one hundred sixty (160) square feet or less and a height of twelve (12) feet or
less. Utility sheds with no permanent foundation, however, must have a floor of
one of the following: pressure- treated wood, metal, concrete, asphalt, brick,
rock, or gravel. Utility sheds must also be properly anchored in one of the
following manners: bolting into concrete, screw anchors at each corner of the
shed, or an approval equal. Skids shall be permitted to remain under a utility
shed.
Section R506.25, Floating Concrete Slabs, is added as follows:
      1.   A floating concrete slab may be utilized in an accessory building
(which is not attached to a dwelling), provided:
(a) The slab covers an area of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet or
less;
(b) A lug eight inches (8") in width is constructed around the perimeter of the
slab which extends at least eight inches (8") below the top of said slab;
(c) The slab and lug consist of a continuous pour of concrete;
(d) No water or sewer lines serve the building;
(e) The building is securely anchored to the slab by an approved fashion (e.g.,
bolts set in concrete, nails shot into concrete);
(f) A pressure-treated bottom plate is used; and
(g) All vegetation is removed in the area where concrete is to be poured, or
sand is placed to cover all vegetation to a thickness of at least two inches
(2").
      2.   An existing floating slab may be utilized in the construction of a
new accessory building, provided the existing slab meets the approval of the
building official. In the event a new section of concrete is to be added onto
an existing floating slab, the following requirements shall be met:
(a) The existing slab must meet the approval of the building official; and
(b) The new section of concrete shall be tied to the existing slab by one-half
inch (1/2") reinforcement bars placed eighteen inches (18") on center and run
six inches (6") into the existing slab and twenty inches (20") into the area to
be poured.
(2006 Code §
4-2-3; amd. Ord. 2009-6, 5-4-2009)
CHAPTER 3
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
9-3-1: Code Adopted
9-3-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The 2004 Illinois plumbing code (IPC) which was promulgated pursuant to
authority granted by the Illinois plumbing license law and established and
adopted by the Illinois department of public health, pursuant to authority
included in said law, and contained in the Illinois administrative code, is
adopted as the plumbing code of the city; and the provisions of the Illinois
plumbing code, including amendments, are incorporated by reference as if fully
set forth in this chapter. One copy of the Illinois plumbing code shall be and
remain on file in the office of the city clerk for use and examination by the
public. (2006 Code §
4-3-1; amd. Ord. 2009-6, 5-4-2009)
CHAPTER 4
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
9-4-1: Code Adopted
9-4-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The 2008 national electrical code (NEC), as published by the National Fire
Protection Association, is adopted as the electrical code of the city for the
standards and requirements in electrical construction and maintenance, and the
provisions of the national electrical code, including amendments, are
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this chapter. One copy of
the national electrical code shall be and remain on file in the office of the
city clerk for use and examination by the public. (2006 Code § 4-4-1; amd. Ord.
2009-6, 5-4-2009)
CHAPTER 5
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
9-5-1: Code Adopted
9-5-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The 2006 edition of the international mechanical code (IMC) and as hereinafter
amended, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted as
the mechanical code of the city for the standards and requirements in
mechanical construction and maintenance. One copy of the international
mechanical code shall be and remain on file in the office of the city clerk for
use and examination by the public. (Ord. 2009-6, 5-4-2009)
CHAPTER 6
FUEL GAS CODE
SECTION:
9-6-1: Code Adopted
9-6-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The 2006 edition of the international fuel gas code (IFGC) and as hereinafter
amended, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted as
the fuel gas code of the city for the standards and requirements in fuel gas
construction and maintenance. One copy of the international fuel gas code shall
be and remain on file in the office of the city clerk for use and examination
by the public. (Ord. 2009-6, 5-4-2009)
CHAPTER 7
FENCE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Permit Requirements
9-7-2: Location Restrictions
9-7-3: Electric Fences
9-7-4: Barbed Wire Fences
9-7-5: Nonconforming Fences
9-7-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall erect or relocate a fence within the city without first
obtaining a building permit as provided in chapter 1 of this title. No permit
shall be issued if the building official determines that the proposed fence
does not meet the requirements of this chapter. A sketch or design of the
proposed fence, including a description of materials to be used and
specification of height, shall be submitted with the application for a permit.
(2006 Code § 4-6-5)
9-7-2: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   No fence composed of more than thirty percent (30%) solid material or
more than three feet four inches (3'4") high may be located within thirty feet
(30') of a street intersection. (2006 Code § 4-6-1; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Except as provided in subsection A of this section:
      1.   Fences less than four feet four inches (4'4") high may be located on
any part of a lot.
      2.   Fences no more than six feet four inches (6'4") high may be erected
on those parts of a lot that are as far back or farther back from a street than
the main building.
      3.   Corner lots which have rear yards abutting each other may have
fences no more than six feet four inches (6'4") high erected on that part of
the lot which is at least as far back from the front of the lot as the front
building line. Corner lots which have rear yards abutting each other need have
only one front yard, which shall be in the front of the main building. The
building official shall maintain a diagram to illustrate the requirements of
this subsection B3, and a copy of said diagram shall remain on file with the
city clerk.
      4.   Corner lots which have rear yards abutting the side yard of an
adjacent lot may have fences less than six feet four inches (6'4") high erected
on that part of the corner lot which is at least as far back from the street
fronting said lot as the front building line; provided, that one of the
following additional requirements is met:
         a.   The fence shall cut off at a ninety degree (90°) angle for a
distance at least equal to the minimum front lot requirement for the district
at that point on the rear lot line of the corner lot which intersects with the
front building line of the adjacent lot, after which distance, the fence may
cut back at an angle of at least ninety degrees (90°) to the side lot line of
the corner lot. The building official shall maintain a diagram to illustrate
the requirements of this subsection B4a, and a copy of said diagram shall
remain on file with the city clerk.
         b.   The fence shall cut off at a minimum of a forty five degree (45°)
angle from that point on the rear lot line of the corner lot which intersects
with the front building line of the adjacent lot, to the side lot line of the
corner lot. The building official shall maintain a diagram to illustrate the
requirements of this subsection B4b, and a copy of said diagram shall remain on
file with the city clerk. (2006 Code § 4-6-1)
   C.   The provisions herein for fences may be considered as exceptions to the
yard requirements. (2006 Code § 4-6-2)
9-7-3: ELECTRIC FENCES:
No electrically charged fence shall be erected or maintained within the city;
except, that the building official may issue a permit for an electrically
charged fence to retain animals upon proof that the fence will not be hazardous
to life. (2006 Code § 4-6-3)
9-7-4: BARBED WIRE FENCES:
No barbed wire fencing shall be erected or maintained within the city except:
   A.   One course of barbed wire may be installed above the top line of a
chainlink fence located in a district zoned for industrial purposes or on
property used for industrial purposes under a valid nonconforming use.
   B.   Barbed wire fences which comply with Illinois statutes may be erected
and maintained on premises within the city which are zoned for agricultural
purposes. (2006 Code § 4-6-4)
9-7-5: NONCONFORMING FENCES:
Any fence in lawful use existing before January 18, 1982, may be continued even
though such fence does not conform with this chapter. However, any fence which
has been damaged to the extent of more than eighty percent (80%) of its
reproduction value shall be restored only in conformity with this chapter.
(2006 Code § 4-6-6)
CHAPTER 8
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
SECTION:
9-8-1: Statute Authority; Purpose
9-8-2: Definitions
9-8-3: General Duties Of Administrative Officials
9-8-4: Development Permit
9-8-5: Review Of Proposed Development
9-8-6: Subdivisions And Other New Developments
9-8-7: Water, Sewer And Waste Disposal Systems
9-8-8: Variances
9-8-9: Disclaimer Of Liability
9-8-10: Penalty
9-8-11: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
9-8-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY; PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the city and
the Illinois municipal code 1  in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   A.   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   B.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   C.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, as well as flood rescue and relief operations;
   D.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   E.   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   F.   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   G.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate floodwater and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 2011-4, 5-2-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
9-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meanings as they have
in common usage and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
DEVELOPMENT: A. Any manmade change to real estate including, but not
necessarily limited to:
      1.   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
      2.   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
      3.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
      4.   Installation of utilities and construction of roads, bridges,
culverts or similar projects;
      5.   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls, or fences;
      6.   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
      7.   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks; and
      8.   Channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of floodwaters or surface waters.
   B.   "Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface water from any source.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source. See definition of Flood.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
STRUCTURE: For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including gas or liquid storage tanks, that is principally aboveground. The
term includes RVs and travel trailers on site for more than one hundred eighty
(180) days.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: A. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is
started.
   B.   "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure.
   C.   The term does not, however, include either: 1) any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe living conditions; or 2) any alteration of a structure listed on the
national register of historic places or the Illinois register of historic
places. (Ord. 2011-4, 5-2-2011)
9-8-3: GENERAL DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS:
   A.   The mayor shall be responsible for the general administration of this
chapter and shall ensure that all development activities under the jurisdiction
of the city meet the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   The building official shall be responsible for receiving applications
for the development permit and examining the plans and specifications for the
application and the mayor may promulgate and require any additional measures
which are necessary to meet the minimum requirements of this chapter. (Ord.
2011-4, 5-2-2011)
9-8-4: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not
exempted by state law shall commence any development activity without first
obtaining a development permit from the building official.
   B.   Application For Permit: To obtain a permit, the applicant must first
file a permit application on a form furnished for that purpose. The form must
be completed and submitted to the building official.
   C.   Review Of Application: The building official shall review all permit
applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably
safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood prone area, all
new construction and substantial improvements (including the placement of
prefabricated buildings and manufactured homes) shall:
      1.   Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure;
      2.   Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
      3.   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
and
      4.   Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/
or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during flooding. (Ord. 2011-4, 5-2-2011)
9-8-5: REVIEW OF PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   The building official shall review the proposed development to assure
that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies
from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404
of the federal water pollution control act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
   B.   If the development is proposed for a channel or adjacent area of a
stream draining one square mile or more, the applicant must first secure a
permit from the Illinois division of water resources, or a letter stating
"permit not required". (Ord. 2011-4, 5-2-2011)
9-8-6: SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER NEW DEVELOPMENTS:
The building official shall review subdivision proposals and other proposed new
developments to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from
flooding. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development is in a
flood prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to assure that:
   A.   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage within the flood prone area;
   B.   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
   C.   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood hazards.
(Ord. 2011-4, 5-2-2011)
9-8-7: WATER, SEWER AND WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
The building official shall require within flood prone areas new and
replacement water supply systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; new and replacement sanitary
sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters;
and on site waste disposal systems to be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 2011-4, 5-2-2011)
9-8-8: VARIANCES:
   A.   Authority: Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship
on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the city
council, who shall review the applicant's request for a variance, and the city
council may attach such conditions to the granting of a variance as it deems
necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
   B.   Standards For Variance Request: No variance shall be granted unless the
applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      4.   There will be no additional threat to the public health or safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      7.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   C.   Variances From Specific Provisions: The city council shall notify an
applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of the building
protection standards that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability. (Ord. 2011-4, 5-2-2011)
9-8-9: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the city, or any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damage that results
from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully hereunder. (Ord. 2011-4, 5-2-2011)
9-8-10: PENALTY:
Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2011-4, 5-2-2011;
amd. 2016 Code)
9-8-11: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the city council
to fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance program. However,
this chapter does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance adopted to
achieve eligibility in the program; nor does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or
impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this
chapter and other ordinance easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict
or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 2011-4, 5-2-2011)
CHAPTER 9
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-9-1: Plat Required
9-9-2: Platting Procedure
9-9-3: Design Requirements And Standards
9-9-4: Required Improvements
9-9-5: Filing Fees
9-9-6: Administrative Officer
9-9-1: PLAT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or person having control of any land
within the corporate limits of the city or within one and one-half (11/2) miles
thereof to subdivide or lay out such land in lots, blocks, streets, alleys,
public ways or grounds unless platted in accordance with the laws of the state
of Illinois and the provisions of this chapter. (2006 Code §
11-1-1)
9-9-2: PLATTING PROCEDURE:
   A.   Preliminary Plat:
      1.   Any person proposing to subdivide land shall file with the city
clerk seven (7) copies of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision,
together with the filing fee specified in subsection 9-9-5A of this chapter and
any application form which may then be prescribed. The city clerk shall deliver
the plat to the administrative officer, who shall cause the plan commission to
convene for consideration of the plat at a public hearing. No hearing shall be
held by the plan commission until notice thereof has been given by publication
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least seven (7) days prior
to the date of the hearing. The preliminary plat shall show:
         a.   The boundaries of the property and all existing section lines,
streets, buildings, watercourses and other physical features in and adjoining
the area to be subdivided.
         b.   The locations and sizes of sanitary and storm sewers, water
mains, culverts, and other underground structures in or near the property.
         c.   The location and width of proposed streets, alleys, lots,
building and setback lines, and easements.
         d.   The proposed title of the subdivision and the name, address, and
telephone number of the engineer, the registered land surveyor, and the
subdivider.
         e.   Contours at intervals of two feet (2') or less.
         f.   The north point, scale and date.
         g.   Plans or written statements setting out the proposed grades or
profiles of the streets and other improvements proposed and their means of
accomplishment, as required in section
9-9-4 of this chapter.
      2.   If the plan commission finds that the proposed plat satisfies the
requirements of this chapter, it shall approve the plat and recommend final
approval by the city council on submission of such plat pursuant to subsection
B of this section. If the plan commission finds otherwise, it shall specify in
writing the objections found to such plat and may either recommend disapproval
or recommend approval conditioned upon specific changes in the plat. One copy
of the proposed plat, together with the plan commission's findings thereon,
shall be filed by the plan commission with the city clerk for submission to the
city council.
   B.   Final Plat:
      1.   The final plat shall consist of an accurate map on polyester
drafting film and seven (7) paper copies, drawn to a scale of not more than one
hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100') on one or more sheets not exceeding twenty
four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"), and shall show:
         a.   The boundary lines of the area subdivided with accurate distances
and angles.
         b.   The lines of all proposed streets and alleys with their widths
and names and the line of departure of one street from another.
         c.   The lines of adjoining property and of adjoining streets and
alleys, with their widths and names.
         d.   Any portions of the property to be dedicated or granted for
public use.
         e.   The locations of all easements for public use, services, or
utilities.
         f.   All lots designated by numbers or by letters and numbers.
         g.   All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating
the boundaries of the subdivision, and the lots, streets, alleys, easements,
and other features. (Dimensions shall be given to the nearest 1/100 of a foot.)
         h.   The radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency, and central angles
for all curvilinear streets and the radii for rounded corners.
         i.   The locations and descriptions of all survey monuments.
         j.   The name of the subdivision, the scale of the plat, the north
point, and the name of the owner or owners.
         k.   Certification by a registered professional Illinois land surveyor
to the accuracy of the survey and the correct locations of the monuments.
         l.   Private restrictions and covenants and their effective periods.
(In lieu of their lettering on the plat, these may be handled by separate
instrument(s) with reference to the instrument(s) on the plat.)
         m.   Acknowledgment of the owner or owners to the plat and
restrictions, including dedication to public use of all streets, alleys, parks,
and other open spaces shown thereon, and the granting of the easements.
         n.   Certificate of approval by the city council for endorsement by
the city clerk.
      2.   After payment to the city clerk of the fee specified in subsection
9-9-5B of this chapter, and if the final plat is in accord with all of the
following:
         a.   The preliminary plat, or any modification thereof, approved by
the plan commission;
         b.   All the requirements of this section;
         c.   All the requirements of section
9-9-3 of this chapter governing design requirements and standards; and
         d.   All the requirements of section
9-9-4 of this chapter specifying minimum improvements,
the final plat may be approved by the city council and so endorsed. After
approval by the city council, the city clerk shall, on receipt from the
subdivider of the statutory filing fees then required by the recorder, cause
the final plat to be filed for record in the office of the county recorder.
(2006 Code §
11-1-2)
9-9-3: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS:
The arrangement of streets and lots shall give due regard to the topography and
other physical features of the property and shall meet the following
requirements and standards:
   A.   Streets And Alleys:
      1.   Insofar as practicable, streets shall be coterminous with existing
streets in adjoining areas (or their projections). In their overall
arrangement, consideration shall be given to reasonable relation with any
adjoining unplatted property to foster good neighborhood development and to
avoid hardship in platting the adjoining areas. The angle of intersection
between minor and major streets shall be within ten degrees (10°) of a right
angle. Alleys shall not be provided except behind business lots. (2006 Code §
11-1-3)
      2.   The width and location of major streets shall conform with the major
street plan. Streets other than major streets shall be at least fifty feet
(50') wide. Where appropriate at the edge of the subdivision, a half street of
thirty feet (30') in width may be dedicated. Alleys, where permitted, shall be
at least twenty feet (20') wide.
   B.   Easements:
      1.   Easements of at least five feet (5') in width shall be provided on
each side of all rear lot lines and on side lot lines where necessary for
wires, sewers, gas, water and other utilities. (2006 Code §
11-1-3; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   Whenever any stream or important surface drainage course is located
within an area being subdivided, the subdivider shall provide an adequate
easement along each side of the stream for widening, deepening, sloping,
improving or protecting the stream.
   C.   Blocks: No block shall be longer than one thousand two hundred feet
(1,200') nor shall it be shorter than five hundred feet (500') between cross
streets, unless specifically approved by the plan commission. Cul-de-sacs and
dead end streets may be permitted, where made necessary by topography or other
physical conditions, up to a length of five hundred feet (500') when
terminating in a turnaround having a minimum radius of fifty feet (50'). Block
corners shall have an eight foot (8') radius.
   D.   Lots:
      1.   Lots shall be arranged and designed to create good building sites,
properly related to topography and the character of surrounding development.
All side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to the street lines except
where a variation of this rule will provide a better street and lot layout.
Lots with double frontage shall be avoided.
      2.   No lot shall have a depth of less than one hundred feet (100') or of
more than three (3) times its width. Lot area and width shall meet the minimum
standards provided for similar development under the zoning regulations of this
code.
      3.   Corner lots shall have sufficient width to permit front yard
setbacks on both streets, and at major streets and acute angle intersections
(under 85 degrees), a radius of twenty feet (20') shall be used at the street
corner. On business lots, a chord may be substituted for the circular arc.
   E.   Building Lines: Street setback building lines conforming with the
zoning regulations of this code or official plan standards shall be shown on
all lots.
   F.   Parks And School Sites: Where the duly adopted official plan proposes
land for a park or school within the area being subdivided, the subdivider
shall reserve such land on the subdivision plat for a period of not less than
three (3) years to permit arrangements to be made for acquisition of the land
by the proper public agency. (2006 Code §
11-1-3)
9-9-4: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Improvements Required: No subdivision shall be laid out within
the city or within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits
thereof without providing the following minimum improvements:
      1.   Street Grading And Specifications: Grading to their full width,
including side slopes, and to the appropriate street grade, of all streets
within the area being subdivided. Streets shall be constructed according to
specifications of the Illinois department of transportation with a wearing
surface of not less than two inches (2") of class I bituminous concrete surface
course. The base shall be of aggregate, gradation CA-6, the depth of which
shall be determined by soil tests in accordance with Illinois department of
transportation standards but not less than eight inches (8") thick, compacted
to not less than ninety eight percent (98%) of the standard laboratory density.
In lieu of flexible pavement, a structurally equal concrete pavement
constructed according to the specifications of the Illinois department of
transportation may be used.
      2.   Street Paving; Curbs And Gutters: Permanent concrete or asphalt
paving, at least twenty seven feet (27') in width, including combination
concrete curb and gutter on each side, on all streets within the subdivided
area where property is platted in lots which, on average, are less than twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet in area and one hundred feet (100') in frontage
width; and in all other cases, permanent concrete or asphalt paving, as
specified in subsection A1 of this section, at least twenty feet (20') in width
without curbs or gutters. Along such pavements of twenty feet (20'), usable
shoulders with a slope of one-half inch (1/2") per foot and drainage ditches
where appropriate with slopes of three feet (3') horizontal for each foot
vertical and at least one foot (1') in depth shall be provided. Any combination
concrete curb and gutter shall have a mountable curb, four inches (4") high and
six inches (6") wide, with nine inch (9") wide gutter, one and one-half inches
(11/2") high and twelve inches (12") wide.
      3.   Sidewalks: Concrete sidewalk on at least one side of each street at
least four feet (4') in width and four inches (4") thick where property is
platted in lots which, on average, are less than twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet in area and one hundred feet (100') in width.
      4.   Sewer System:
         a.   Sanitary sewers and service to each lot where an existing public
sewer is reasonably accessible.
         b.   Where an existing sewer is not reasonably accessible, individual
sewage disposal devices may be used, provided all lots are twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet or more in area, and the disposal devices are constructed
in accordance with regulations and requirements of, and are specifically
approved by, the Illinois department of public health, and Knox County, where
applicable.
      5.   Water Supply:
         a.   Connections to a public water supply and service to each lot.
         b.   Where a public water supply is not reasonably accessible, wells
or some other private water supply may be used, provided such source will
supply adequate quantities of potable water and is approved as to construction
and its relation to lot areas and the method of sewage disposal by the Illinois
department of public health.
      6.   Surface Water Drainage: Adequate drainage of the property to prevent
the accumulation of stormwater. The subdivider shall install catch basins,
culverts, and laterals leading to an outfall into the main channel or trunk
line drain for the basin of which the subdivision is a part. If no outfall
exists, an estimate of the cost of the outfall shall be prepared by the
engineer ordinarily retained by the city for the design or construction of
public improvements therein or, if no engineer is ordinarily retained for such
purpose, by an engineer registered in the state of Illinois mutually agreed
upon by the city and the subdivider, and the subdivider shall make a onetime
payment of the fair share of the costs of the outfall to be charged against the
subdivision on the basis of percentage of acreage of the total basin. Cash,
bond, or securities shall be deposited with the city treasurer into a special
outfall improvement account for that drainage prior to approval of the final
plat.
   B.   Review Of Improvements: Before final approval of any subdivision plat
is granted by the city council, the proposed plans for and the methods of
providing the improvements required in this section shall be reviewed and
approved by the engineer described in subsection A6 of this section.
   C.   Installation And Costs: All improvements required in this section shall
either be installed prior to submission of the final plat or, in lieu thereof,
an estimate of the cost of all improvements shall be prepared by the engineer
described in subsection A6 of this section, and a surety bond, cash, or escrow
agreement shall be submitted along with the plat to guarantee construction of
all such improvements. (2006 Code § 11-1-4)
9-9-5: FILING FEES:
For the processing of plats as provided herein, the filing fees shall be as
follows:
   A.   Preliminary plat: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per plat.
   B.   Final Plat: One hundred dollars ($100.00) per plat, plus fifteen
dollars ($15.00) per lot. (2006 Code § 11-1-6)
9-9-6: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER:
For the purposes of assisting in the administration and supervision of land
subdivision pursuant to this chapter, the building official shall be designated
as the administrative officer. (2006 Code § 11-1-5)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Interpretation And Application Of Provisions
10-1-2: Definitions
10-1-1: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this title, they
shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public good,
including safety, health, comfort, convenience, morals, prosperity, and the
general welfare. This title does not intend to abrogate or annul or interfere
with any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties; except, that
if this title imposes a greater restriction, this title shall control. (2006
Code §
10-1-2)
10-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this title, shall have
the meanings set forth in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning. The singular number shall include the plural and
the plural the singular.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building which is incidental to and customary
in connection with the principal building or use and which is located on the
same lot or zoning lot with such principal building or use.
ACCESSORY USE: A subordinate use which is incidental to and customary in
connection with the principal building or use and which is located on the same
lot or zoning lot with such principal building or use.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See definition of Dwelling, Multiple.
BASEMENT: A story having part but not more than one-half (1/2) of its height
below grade. A basement is counted as a story for the purposes of height
regulation if subdivided and used for dwelling purposes.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN: An owner occupied single-family residence or portion
thereof used for the renting of three (3) or fewer rooms to six (6) or fewer
adults on an overnight basis for compensation.
BOARD: The zoning board of appeals of the city of Abingdon.
BOARDING HOUSE: See definition of Lodging House.
BUILD: To erect, convert, enlarge, reconstruct or structurally alter a building
or structure.
BUILDABLE WIDTH: The width of a lot left to be built upon after the side yards
are provided.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls built for
the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property
of any kind. The term "building" does not include any vehicle, or trailer (with
or without wheels), or any movable device, such as machinery or equipment. The
term shall include the word "structure" and the word "premises".
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point
of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the
mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The individual designated by the mayor to administer this
title. The term shall include the term "building inspector".
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below grade. A
cellar is not counted as a story for the purposes of height regulation.
CLINIC: An establishment where a number of physicians, dentists, or other
healthcare professionals associate themselves together to practice their
respective professions in a joint endeavor, in which patients are not lodged
overnight.
CODE: The city code of the city of Abingdon.
COMMISSION: The plan commission of the city of Abingdon.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Abingdon.
DAYCARE HOME: A facility which meets the requirements (including definition and
licensing) of the appropriate governing agency of the state of Illinois. Also,
any facility receiving one to three (3) children and any facility receiving
only children from a single household.
DISTRICT: A part of the city wherein regulations of this title are uniform.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof which is designed and used
exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building designed for occupancy by more than two (2)
families.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed for occupancy by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed for occupancy by two (2) families.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling intended to be occupied as
separate living quarters by a single family as defined herein.
FAMILY: Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption
occupying a dwelling unit as an individual housekeeping organization. A family
may include not more than two (2) persons not related by blood, marriage, or
adoption.
FARM: An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as
vegetables, fruit, trees, and grain, and their storage on the area as well as
the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals, such as horses,
cattle, sheep and swine, and including dairy farms. The word "farming" includes
the operating of such an area for one or more of the above uses with the
necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce; provided,
however, that the operation of such accessory uses shall be secondary to that
of the normal farming activities; and provided further, that "farming" does not
include the extraction of minerals, the feeding of collected garbage or offal
to swine or other animals, intensive livestock raising, confined swine or
cattle or poultry operations, commercial feedlots, or large batteries of rabbit
hutches.
FILLING STATION OR SERVICE STATION: Any building or premises used for the sale,
at retail, of motor vehicle fuels, oils, or accessories, or for the servicing
or lubricating of motor vehicles, or installing or repairing parts and
accessories. The term does not include the repairing or replacement of motors
or bodies (or portions of bodies) of motor vehicles, or the painting of motor
vehicles. The term also does not include public garages.
FIXED MOBILE HOME: A structure designed for permanent habitation and so
constructed as to permit its transport by trailer or on wheels temporarily
attached to its frame from the place of its construction to the location at
which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and designed to permit the
occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more persons. Such a structure
shall have the hitch and wheels removed and shall be placed on a concrete block
foundation, with or without supporting piers, without which such modifications,
no occupancy permit for such structure shall be issued.
FLOOR AREA: The total number of square feet of floor space within the exterior
walls of a building, excluding space in cellars or basements not used for
business or commercial purposes.
FRONTAGE: All the property on one side of a street or highway, between two (2)
intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or for a distance of four
hundred feet (400') on either side of a proposed building or structure,
measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead ended, then all
of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the
dead end of the street, but not including property more than four hundred feet
(400') distant on either side of a proposed building or structure.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building housing not more than four (4) vehicles
owned and used by occupants of the main building. Of the four (4) vehicles,
only one may be a commercial vehicle.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any building or premises, except those used as private or
storage garages, used for equipping, repairing, hiring, selling, or storing
motor driven vehicles. The word "repairing" shall not include an automotive
body repair shop, and shall not include the rebuilding, dismantling, or storage
of wrecked or junked vehicles.
GARAGE, STORAGE: Any building or premises used for housing only motor driven
vehicles, other than trucks and commercial vehicles, pursuant to previous
arrangements and not to transients, and at which automobile fuels and oils are
not sold and motor driven vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired, or sold.
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building; except when any wall approximately parallels
and is not more than five feet (5') from a road line, then the elevation of the
road at the center of the wall adjoining the road shall be the grade.
HOME OCCUPATION: A. Any activity carried on for gain by a resident conducted as
an accessory use in the resident's dwelling or accessory building, and which is
clearly subordinate to the residential use of the dwelling unit; or
   B.   A gainful occupation or profession customarily carried on wholly within
the principal building or within a building accessory thereto only by members
of the immediate family occupying the premises and subject to the following
restrictions:
  1. There shall be no exterior display; no exterior signage; no exterior
storage of material, unless all material is completely covered or contained
within a fenced area such that no materials can be viewed by the general public
and, in any event, no such material shall remain, whether covered or contained,
for a period exceeding twenty four (24) hours.
  2. There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation or variation
from the residential character of the principal building, and no offensive
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare shall be produced.
   C.   The following uses are deemed not to be and are excluded from the
definition of "home occupation" herein:
   Automobile repair, whether major or minor;
   Automobile wrecking yard;
   Junkyard;
   Used car lot; or
   Welding shops.
HOTEL: A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for
compensation, and which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction to a
"boarding house" or "lodging house" as herein defined.
INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING: A building exclusively occupied by a nonprofit
corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public use.
JUNKYARD: Any land or structure used for salvaging operations including, but
not limited to, the storage or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, and
discarded materials; or the dismantling, storage, and salvaging of unlicensed,
inoperative vehicles.
KENNEL: An establishment where dogs are boarded for compensation or where dogs
are bred or raised on a commercial scale.
LODGING HOUSE: A building where lodging is provided (or which is equipped
regularly to provide lodging by prearrangement for definite periods), for
compensation, for three (3) or more, but not exceeding twelve (12) individuals,
not open to transient guests, in contradistinction to hotels open to
transients.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in
this title, including one main building, together with its accessory buildings,
and the open spaces and parking spaces required (if applicable) by this title,
and having its principal frontage upon a street or road.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets or roads at their
intersection.
LOT, DEPTH OF: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting roads,
as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot or parcel of land, the deed to which has been recorded in
the office of the county recorder of Knox County.
LOT WIDTH: The width of a lot at the building line.
MANUFACTURED HOME OR MODULAR HOME, QUALIFYING: A prefabricated home meeting all
the requirements of the international residential code, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., as adopted by the city council, appropriate
for use as a dwelling to be placed in residential districts R-1, R-2, and R-3.
Any manufactured home or modular home failing to meet all requirements of said
international residential code shall be deemed nonqualifying, and shall be
classified as a mobile home.
MOBILE HOME: A structure designed for permanent habitation and so constructed
as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently attached to
its frame, from the place of its construction to the location, or subsequent
locations, at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and designed to
permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more persons.
MOBILE HOME PARK: An area where one or more mobile homes can be or are intended
to be parked, designed, or intended to be used as an area in which one or more
families live.
MOTEL, MOTOR COURT, MOTOR LODGE, OR TOURIST COURT: Any building or group of
buildings containing guestrooms or dwelling units, some or all of which have a
separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building, with a
garage or parking space conveniently located on the lot, and designed, used, or
intended, wholly or in part, for the accommodation of vehicle transients
traveling by motor vehicle.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the
effective date hereof, or amendment hereto, which does not conform after the
effective date hereof, or amendment hereto, with the use regulations of the
district in which it is situated.
NURSING HOME: A home for the aged or infirm, in which three (3) or more
persons, not of the immediate family, are received, kept, or provided with food
and shelter or care, for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics, or
similar facilities.
PARKING SPACE: A surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, not less than nine feet
(9') wide and twenty feet (20') long, together with a surfaced driveway or
access aisle connecting the parking space with a street, road, or alley and
permitting ingress and egress of an automobile without the necessity of moving
any other vehicle. The words "surfaced area" and "surfaced" as used herein mean
an area improved with concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam, crushed stone, gravel,
or other similar material.
PLAT: A map or drawing as required in title 9, chapter 9 of this code.
PLAT, LOT: A drawing of a lot showing its dimensions, the building arrangement
thereon, and such other information as may be necessary for enforcement of this
title and title 9, chapter 9 of this code.
PREMISES: A lot, together with any building(s) thereon.
PRIVATE CLUB OR LODGE: A building owned or operated by a corporation organized
under the laws of the state of Illinois, not for pecuniary profit, solely for
the promotion of some fraternal, social, educational, recreational, or cultural
enrichment purpose. This definition includes accessory recreational uses
including, but not limited to, dance, gymnastics, class instruction, bingo, and
receptions.
ROOMING HOUSE: See definition of Lodging House.
SATELLITE EARTH STATION: An antenna, the purpose of which is to receive
television or radio signals from orbiting satellites.
SHED, STORAGE: An accessory building used for the storage of tangible personal
property.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is
no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it.
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of
roof decking and wall face not more than three feet (3') above the top floor
level.
STREET: A public way which affords the principal means of access to abutting
property. The street centerline is a line halfway between the street lines.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, except those required by law, that would
prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as
the bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, not including openings in
bearing walls as permitted by other regulations.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected in such a manner that a permanent
location on the ground is required, or which is attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground.
TRAILER: Any vehicle designed to be hauled along a highway for the
transportation of property or materials, and not to be used for human
habitation.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of the building from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided in this title.
YARD, FRONT: A yard across the full width of the lot extending from the front
line of the main building to the front line of the lot. On corner lots, the
front yard shall face the shortest street dimension of the lot; except, that if
the lot is square or almost square, i.e., has dimensions in a ratio of from
three to two (3:2) to three to three (3:3), then the front yard may face either
street.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending the full width of the lot between the rear line of
the main building and the rear lot line.
YARD SALE OR GARAGE SALE: Any holding or selling of personal property,
articles, materials, or other items for sale to the public in general on a
property zoned residential. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sales
titled "apartment", "attic", "back yard", "basement", "house", "lawn", "patio",
"porch", or "room" sales. The term does not include auctions, bankruptcy sales,
or estate sales.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the main building and a side line of the lot, and
extending from the inner front yard line to the inner rear yard line.
YARD WIDTH OR DEPTH: The shortest horizontal distance from a lot line to the
main building.
ZONING LOT: A contiguous tract of land located within a single block, which may
consist of two (2) or more lots of record, and which is designated by its owner
as a tract to be used or developed or built upon as a unit, under single
ownership and control, and has been assigned a single property identification
number by the assessor. (2006 Code §
10-1-1; amd. Ord. 2013-9, 9-3-2013; 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-2-1: Enforcement Official; Appeals From Decisions
10-2-2: Building Permit
10-2-3: Certificate Of Occupancy
10-2-4: Special Uses
10-2-5: Amendments
10-2-6: Violation; Penalties
10-2-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL; APPEALS FROM DECISIONS:
The building official shall enforce this title. Appeals from his decision may
be taken to the zoning board of appeals. (2006 Code § 10-2-1-1)
10-2-2: BUILDING PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: No building may be undertaken in the city without a
building permit, including the excavation for or the erection or alteration of
a building.
   B.   Application For Permit:
      1.   Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a
plat in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the name of the person making the
application, the actual dimension of the lot to be built upon as shown by a
survey, the size, shape, and location of the building to be erected or the
alteration to be made, and such other information as may be necessary to
provide for the enforcement of this title. A record of applications and plats
shall be kept in the office of the city clerk.
      2.   Each application for a building permit in the B-1, B-2, M-1, and M-
2 districts shall also require a hearing before the zoning board of appeals
with regard to the front yard, side yards, and rear yard areas. The application
shall contain dimensions of such areas so to provide the building official and
the board sufficient information to determine whether such yard areas are
adequate, considering the buildings and use of other property in the immediate
vicinity, the property values within the neighborhood, and the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public good, including safety, health,
comfort, convenience, morals, and general welfare. The approval of the yard
areas by the board shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a building
permit in said districts. (2006 Code § 10-2-1-2)
10-2-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Certificate Required: No new building may be occupied until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building official.
   B.   Contents Of Certificate: Every certificate of occupancy shall state
that the new occupancy complies with all provisions of this title.
   C.   Records Kept: A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept
on file in the office of the city clerk, and copies shall be furnished on
request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in land or a
building affected by such certificate of occupancy. (2006 Code § 10-2-1-3)
10-2-4: SPECIAL USES:
   A.   Special Uses Enumerated: The city council may, by special permit, in
accordance with the same procedure utilized by the zoning board of appeals set
forth in section
10-2A-6 of this chapter, authorize the following special uses in any district
from which they are otherwise prohibited:
Cemetery or mausoleum.
Greenhouse or nursery.
Landfill for the disposal of solid waste.
Landing field or strip for aircraft.
Private garage which is not an accessory building, but otherwise as defined in
section
10-1-2 of this title.
Public utility.
Radio or television tower or broadcasting station.
Removal of gravel, topsoil, or similar natural material.
Riding stable.
Roadside stand, commercial amusement, or recreational development for temporary
or seasonal periods. (2006 Code § 10-2-3-1)
   B.   Conditions And Protective Restrictions: Before authorizing the issuance
of a special use permit, the city council shall make findings that, in its
judgment, the use for which the permit is applied will:
      1.   Not be detrimental to, or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, or general welfare;
      2.   Not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the
immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted;
      3.   Not substantially diminish and impair property values within the
neighborhood; and
      4.   Not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of
surrounding property for uses permitted in the district. (2006 Code § 10-2-3-2)
10-2-5: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority To Amend; Hearing; Commission Recommendations: The city
council may from time to time amend this title in the manner prescribed by law.
No such amendment shall be made until it shall have been referred to the
commission and a report received from the commission of the effect of the
proposed amendment upon the city and the welfare of the inhabitants thereof.
The commission shall hold a public hearing upon the proposed amendment as
required by law and is hereby designated as the body to hold such hearing. If
no report is received by the council from the commission within thirty (30)
days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the commission shall be deemed
to have approved the amendment. (2006 Code § 10-2-1-4)
   B.   Notice Requirements:
      1.   The building official shall post a conspicuous sign on the premises
for which an amendment to this title is proposed not less than fifteen (15) nor
more than thirty (30) days before the public hearing, providing notice of the
proposed amendment and the date, time, and place of the hearing thereon.
      2.   The building official shall also cause to be published at least one
notice in a newspaper of general circulation published within the city or, if
none, then one having a circulation within the city, setting forth the proposed
amendment, the premises affected, and the date, time, and place of the hearing,
which publication shall not be less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30)
days before the public hearing.
      3.   a. The building official shall also post a conspicuous sign on the
premises which is the subject of a proposed preannexation agreement, which
affects the zoning of such premises, not less than fifteen (15) nor more than
thirty (30) days before the public hearing as required by law, providing notice
of the proposed zoning and the date, time, and place of the hearing.
         b.   The building official shall also cause to be published at least
one notice in a newspaper of general circulation published within the city or,
if none, then one having a circulation within the city, setting forth the
proposed zoning, the premises affected, and the date, time, and place of the
hearing, which publication shall not be less than fifteen (15) nor more than
thirty (30) days before the public hearing. (2006 Code § 10-2-1-4; amd. 2016
Code)
   C.   Written Protests: A written protest against any proposed amendment of
the regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of
twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley
therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly
opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, may be filed with the city clerk.
A copy of the written protest shall be served by the protestor on the applicant
for the proposed amendment by mailing to the address of the applicant and the
applicant's attorney, if any, shown in the application.
   D.   Recommendation To City Council: The plan commission shall either
recommend to the city council that an amendment be adopted, or that the
amendment be adopted with modifications as recommended by the plan commission,
or may recommend to the city council that the proposed amendment be denied. The
city council may approve the amendment and enact the amendment by ordinance,
with or without change, or may refer the matter back to the plan commission for
further consideration, or may deny the proposed amendment; provided, however,
that if the plan commission recommends that the amendment be denied, or if a
written protest is made against the proposed amendment, then the amendment
shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the
aldermen of the city then holding office. (2006 Code § 2-7-2-3)
   E.   Fee: The person who applies for a change in the district regulations or
district boundaries shall pay a filing fee to the city clerk in the sum of
fifty dollars ($50.00), which fee shall not be refundable. (2006 Code § 10-2-1-
4)
10-2-6: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   The owner or agent of a building or premises in or upon which a
violation of any provision of this title has been committed or shall exist, or
the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises in or upon which
a violation has been committed or shall exist, or the agent, architect,
building contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part, or assists in
any violation, or who maintains any building or premises in or upon which such
violation shall exist, shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that such violation continues may constitute a
separate offense. (2006 Code § 10-1-4; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or
land is used in violation of this title, the appropriate authorities of the
city, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use, or to correct or abate such
violation, or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure, or land.
(2006 Code § 10-1-4)
ARTICLE A.  ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
10-2A-1: Board Created; Appointment And Terms; Chair; Vacancies
10-2A-2: Organization
10-2A-3: Appeals To Board
10-2A-4: Conditional Use Permits
10-2A-5: Variances
10-2A-6: Hearings Procedure
10-2A-7: Other Functions Of Board
10-2A-1: BOARD CREATED; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS; CHAIR; VACANCIES:
   A.   A zoning board of appeals is hereby created, which shall consist of
seven (7) members appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the council, for
terms of five (5) years each; except, that the first seven (7) members shall be
appointed for terms varying respectively from one to seven (7) years in order
that the term of not more than one member shall expire each year.
   B.   One member of the board shall be designated by the mayor as chair and
shall hold office as chair until his successor is appointed. The chair, or in
his absence the acting chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
   C.   Vacancies on the board shall be filled for the unexpired term of the
member whose seat has become vacant in the same manner as provided for
appointment. (2006 Code § 10-2-2-1)
10-2A-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Meetings: The board shall meet at the call of the chair and at such
other times as it may determine.
   B.   Minutes: The board shall keep minutes of all its proceedings, including
findings of fact, all its determinations and decisions, the reasons therefor,
and the vote of each member upon every question, which minutes shall
immediately be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be a public
record.
   C.   Secretary: The chair may appoint the building official or some other
person as secretary to the board. (2006 Code § 10-2-2-2)
10-2A-3: APPEALS TO BOARD:
   A.   Right Of Appeal: An appeal may be taken to the zoning board of appeals
by any person affected by a decision of the building official. Such appeal
shall be taken within forty five (45) days of the action complained of, by
filing with the building official and with the board a notice of appeal,
specifying the grounds thereof. (2006 Code § 10-2-2-3; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Fee: A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the city prior to
filing an appeal.
   C.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal shall stay all proceedings and
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building official certifies
to the board of zoning appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed, that
a stay would, in the building official's opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property, in which case, the proceedings shall not be stayed except by a
restraining order granted on due cause by the circuit court, on notice to the
building official. (2006 Code § 10-2-2-3)
10-2A-4: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   Hearing On Applications; Permit Fee: The board of zoning appeals is
authorized to conduct public hearings on applications for conditional use
permits listed in the district regulations of this title. A fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the city with the application.
   B.   Conditions Of Permit: Before recommending to the city council that a
conditional use permit be issued, the board may impose such conditions as will,
in the board's judgment, ensure that:
      1.   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort, or general welfare.
      2.   The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
and will not substantially diminish and impair property values within the
neighborhood.
      3.   The establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district.
      4.   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and other necessary
facilities will be provided.
      5.   Adequate measures will be taken to provide ingress and egress so
designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
   C.   Grant Or Denial Of Permit: The city council is empowered to make the
final determination whether or not a conditional use permit is granted, and may
accept the board's recommendation to grant or deny the permit, or may refuse
the board's recommendation and grant or deny the permit notwithstanding the
recommendation.
   D.   Nontransferability Of Permit: A conditional use permit shall not be
transferred to another location, and shall not be conveyed to another use at
the same location. A new conditional use permit shall be required for either of
such changes. (2006 Code § 10-2-2-4)
10-2A-5: VARIANCES:
   A.   Hearing On Application; Fee: The board of zoning appeals is authorized
to conduct public hearings on applications for variances. A fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the city with the application.
   B.   Conditions Of Granting A Variance: The board is empowered to grant a
variance in those circumstances when a yard area requirement, parking space
requirement, fence regulation requirement, or setback requirement is found by
the board to impose an illogical, unnecessary, or unreasonably burdensome
requirement on a lot where there is an exceptional or unusual physical
condition, or where the board finds that specific use of the premises makes
unnecessary the parking spaces required, or when the applicant shows to the
board that a variance will benefit the applicant but will not be detrimental to
the public health or safety, or to the use, enjoyment, or value of property in
the immediate vicinity. (2006 Code § 10-2-2-5)
10-2A-6: HEARINGS PROCEDURE:
The procedure for all hearings conducted by the zoning board of appeals shall
be as follows:
   A.   The board shall select a reasonable date, time, and place for the
hearing and shall give fifteen (15) days' advance notice thereof to the
parties. (2006 Code § 10-2-2-6)
   B.   Public notice shall be given not less than fifteen (15) nor more than
thirty (30) days prior to the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation which is published in the city or, if none, then one which has a
circulation within the city. The notice shall specify the nature of the
proceeding, identify the premises involved, and set forth the date, time, and
place of the hearing. In addition, not less than fifteen (15) nor more than
thirty (30) days prior to the hearing, a conspicuous sign shall be placed on
the subject premises, which shall specify the nature of the proceeding and the
date, time, and place of the hearing. (2006 Code § 10-2-2-6; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   All hearings shall be open to the public.
   D.   Any person may appear and testify at the hearing in person or by a duly
authorized agent or attorney.
   E.   The board shall render a decision or determination without unreasonable
delay. The decision or determination shall be in writing, shall specify the
basis or reasons therefor, and shall specify the vote of each member of the
board on each question. (2006 Code § 10-2-2-6)
10-2A-7: OTHER FUNCTIONS OF BOARD:
   A.   The zoning board of appeals is authorized to hold public hearings and
make recommendations to the city council concerning the following:
      1.   The extension of a district where the boundary line thereof divides
a lot held in a single ownership at the effective date of the zoning
classification.
      2.   The interpretation of the provisions of this code in order to carry
out the intent and purpose of the zoning plan and the building, housing, and
subdivision regulations of the city.
      3.   The use of premises for public utility and railroad purposes.
      4.   The determination of disputed issues which arise concerning the
repair or reconstruction of a building which is a nonconforming use.
   B.   The zoning board of appeals shall approve or deny applications for
building permits in the B-1, B-2, M-1, and M-2 districts as provided in
subsection 10-2-2B2 of this chapter. (2006 Code § 10-2-2-7)
CHAPTER 3
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
10-3-1: Districts Established
10-3-2: Zoning Map
10-3-3: Zoning Of Annexed Territory
10-3-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
   A.   The city is divided into the following general zoning classifications:
R Residence classification
B Commercial classification
M Industrial classification
   B.   The general zoning classifications are divided into the following
districts:
R-1 Single-family residential district
R-2 Two-family residential district
R-3 General residential district
R-4 Mobile home park district
B-1 Central business district
B-2 Commercial district
M-1 Light industrial district
M-2 Industrial district
(2006 Code §
10-3-1)
10-3-2: ZONING MAP:
The boundaries of the districts are as shown on the zoning district map, which
is referred to herein and made a part hereof by reference. The original zoning
district map shall remain on file with the city clerk. (2006 Code §
10-3-1)
10-3-3: ZONING OF ANNEXED TERRITORY:
Territory hereafter annexed to the city shall automatically be placed in the
zoning district most closely corresponding with the district in which it was
placed by the Knox County zoning resolution immediately preceding the
annexation. (2006 Code § 10-3-4)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1: General Restrictions; Compliance Required
10-4-2: Landowner's Notice To Purchaser
10-4-3: Use Of Premises And Buildings
10-4-4: Buildings On Lots
10-4-5: Maximum Building Height; Exceptions
10-4-6: Minimum Width And Lot Areas
10-4-7: Yards
10-4-1: GENERAL RESTRICTIONS; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, moved, or
structurally altered, nor shall any building or premises be used for any
purpose other than allowed in the district in which such building or premises
is located.
   B.   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, moved, or
structurally altered except in conformity with the height, yard, area, parking,
and other regulations prescribed in this title, if any, for the district in
which such lot is located.
   C.   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed,
except as hereinafter provided, and no yard or lot area shall be reduced so as
to be smaller than the applicable district requirements. (2006 Code §
10-3-2)
10-4-2: LANDOWNER'S NOTICE TO PURCHASER:
The owner of property within the city shall, prior to the consummation of a
sale of the property, give written notice to the buyer concerning the district
in which the property is currently placed under this title, and any conditional
use permit or special use permit to which the property is subject, if
applicable. However, the owner's failure to provide such notice shall not
abrogate the existing provisions or permits governing the property. (2006 Code
§ 10-3-5)
10-4-3: USE OF PREMISES AND BUILDINGS:
   A.   Use of premises and all buildings within the city shall be in
accordance with the minimum standards established by this title.
   B.   Any applicable yard, parking space, or lot area requirement for one
building may not be used for another building; nor can the size of a lot be
reduced below any requirement of this title. (2006 Code § 10-1-3)
10-4-4: BUILDINGS ON LOTS:
   A.   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be
located on a "lot", as defined in section
10-1-2 of this title, and in no case shall more than one residential building
be located on a lot. (2006 Code §
10-3-3)
   B.   Every building shall be on a lot. Except as provided in the B
commercial classification and the M industrial classification, only one
principal building may be on one lot. (2006 Code § 10-1-3)
10-4-5: MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Maximum height limits for buildings are established as follows:
      1.   Thirty five feet (35') in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts, except
any private garage accessory to a dwelling.
      2.   Eighteen feet (18') for an unattached private garage accessory to a
dwelling in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts.
      3.   Forty feet (40') in the B-1 and B-2 districts; provided, that where
a lot in the B-2 district is adjacent to a lot in any R district, the building
shall be set back from the lot line at least one foot (1') for each seven feet
(7') of building height.
      4.   Forty five feet (45') in the M-1 and M-2 districts; provided, that
where a lot in the M-1 or M-2 district is adjacent to a lot in any R district,
the building shall be set back from the lot line at least one foot (1') for
each seven feet (7') of building height.
   B.   The height limits set forth in subsection A of this section may be
exceeded in the following instances:
      1.   Churches and senior citizen high rise apartment buildings.
      2.   Chimneys, church steeples, cooling towers, fire towers, stacks,
water towers, spires, wireless towers, silos, grain elevators, radio towers, or
necessary mechanical appurtenances.
   C.   Any part of an existing building that violates height regulations may
be repaired and remodeled, but may not be reconstructed or structurally
altered. (2006 Code §
10-5-1)
10-4-6: MINIMUM WIDTH AND LOT AREAS:
   A.   The minimum width, minimum lot area, and minimum lot area per family
shall be as shown in the following table; except, that no minimum lot area per
family is required when a dwelling unit(s) is constructed over a commercial
structure in the B-1 or B-2 district, or over an industrial structure in the M-
1 district. (2006 Code §
10-5-2)
      LOT AREAS PER FAMILY
         Lot Width In Lot Area In Single- Family Two-Family   Multiple- Family
District Feet         Square Feet Dwellings In   Dwellings In Dwellings In
                                  Square Feet    Square Feet  Square Feet
         Lot Width In Lot Area In Single- Family Two-Family   Multiple- Family
District Feet         Square Feet Dwellings In   Dwellings In Dwellings In
                                  Square Feet    Square Feet  Square Feet
R-1      60           7,500       7,500          3,750        See note 1
R-2      55           6,000       6,000          3,000        See note 1
R-3      50           6,000       6,000          3,000        1,500
R-4      See section
         10-5-4 of this title
B-1      None         None        1,500          1,500        1,500
B-2      None         None        6,000          3,000        1,500
M-1      None         None        6,000          3,000        1,500
M-2      None         None        See note 1     See note 1   See note 1
 
   Note:
      1.   Not permitted in district.
(2006 Code §
10-5-2; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Lots of record with less area or width than required in subsection A of
this section may be used for one single- family dwelling or for a permitted
nondwelling use.
   C.   Existing buildings that are in violation of lot area requirements may
be remodeled or repaired, but may not be reconstructed or structurally altered,
unless made to conform with these requirements.
   D.   Lots being subdivided which contain sufficient area but do not meet
minimum lot width requirements shall be permitted if they are not less than
five percent (5%) of the minimum lot width requirements as specified in
subsection A of this section. (2006 Code §
10-5-2)
10-4-7: YARDS:
   A.   The following minimum yards shall be provided:
District 1 Front Yard Of 2 Side Yards Of 1 Rear Yard Of
District 1 Front Yard Of 2 Side Yards Of 1 Rear Yard Of
R-1      30'             8'              35'
R-2      25'             7'              30'
R-3      25'             7'              30'
R-4      See section
         10-5-4 of this title
B-1      See requirements for building permit, section
         10-2-2 of this title
B-2      See requirements for building permit, section
         10-2-2 of this title
M-1      See requirements for building permit, section
         10-2-2 of this title
M-2      See requirements for building permit, section
         10-2-2 of this title
 
   B.   The following requirements shall also be observed:
      1.   On lots fronting on two (2) nonintersecting streets, a front yard
must be provided on both streets.
      2.   On corner lots, there must be a front yard on both streets.
      3.   Where a frontage is divided among districts with different front
yard requirements, the deepest front yard required shall apply to the entire
frontage.
      4.   Those parts of existing buildings that violate yard regulations may
be repaired, remodeled, reconstructed, or structurally altered; provided,
however, that any new construction or structural alteration does not cause an
increase in the degree or extent of the preexisting violation.
      5.   In any district, a loading dock shall be set back a sufficient
distance from the lot line so that any truck loading or unloading at such dock
will not extend into the sidewalk or the street.
      6.   On corner lots in the B and M districts which adjoin an R district
on the rear, a ten foot (10') yard must be provided along the side street.
      7.   Where a lot is in a B or M class district and is next to an R class
district, the side yard or rear yard required in that R class district must be
provided along the boundary line.
      8.   Any parking lot allowed to be constructed in an R class district
shall provide a front yard of the depth called for in this section.
   C.   The following exceptions or modifications may be made to the yard
requirements:
      1.   On lots of less than sixty feet (60') in width, the property owner
may reduce a side yard to ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot, but to not
less than five feet (5').
      2.   On lots of record on the effective date hereof, a property owner may
reduce the rear yard to twenty percent (20%) of the lot depth.
      3.   Where on the effective date hereof, forty percent (40%) or more of a
frontage was occupied by two (2) or more buildings, the front yard is
established as follows:
         a.   Where the building farthest from the street provides a front yard
not more than ten feet (10') deeper than the building closest to the street,
the front yard for the frontage is and remains an average of the then existing
front yards.
         b.   Where subsection C3a of this section is not applicable and a lot
is within one hundred feet (100') of a building on each side, the front yard is
a line drawn from the closest front corners of the two (2) adjacent buildings.
         c.   Where neither subsection C3a nor C3b of this section is
applicable and the lot is within one hundred feet (100') of an existing
building on one side only, the front yard is the same as that of the existing
adjacent building.
      4.   Sills, belt courses, cornices, and ornamental features are permitted
to project into a required yard not to exceed two feet (2').
      5.   Open fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and balconies
opening upon fire towers, and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues
may project into a rear yard not more than three and one-half feet (31/2');
provided, that the placement will not obstruct light and ventilation.
      6.   Paved terraces which do not extend above the level of the ground
level may project into a required yard; provided, that the projection is not
less than three feet (3') from the adjacent side lot line.
      7.   a. Accessory buildings and outside storage of operable motor
vehicles, camper trailers, motor homes, van campers, travel trailers, boats,
and boat trailers may be located in a rear yard, but shall not occupy more than
fifteen percent (15%) of a rear yard; provided, however, that in any case, the
outside storage of at least one motor vehicle of the first division, as defined
in the Illinois vehicle code, shall be permitted, even though the fifteen
percent (15%) requirement may be exceeded thereby.
         b.   Outside storage of semitruck trailers is prohibited.
         c.   Off street parking areas required under chapter 8 of this title
are not subject to this provision.
      8.   An accessory building more than ten feet (10') from a main building
may be erected within five feet (5') of a side lot line or rear lot line;
provided, that:
         a.   It is located behind the main building; and
         b.   If on a corner lot, both front yard requirements must be
observed.
      9.   When the entry into a garage is from an alley, the garage must be
not less than ten feet (10') from the alley line.
      10.   On corner lots, the minimum buildable width of thirty five feet
(35') for the main building remains thirty five feet (35') for accessory
buildings.
      11.   Nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow as to
impede visibility for a height of three feet (3') above the edge of the
pavement grade within thirty feet (30') of the intersection of the right of way
of intersecting streets. (2006 Code §
10-5-3)
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-5-1: R-1 Single-Family Residential District
10-5-2: R-2 Two-Family Residential District
10-5-3: R-3 General Residential District
10-5-4: R-4 Mobile Home Park District
10-5-1: R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
In the R-1 single-family residential district, premises shall be used only for
the purposes provided in this section. (2006 Code §
10-4-1)
   A.   Permissive Uses: The following are permissive uses in the R-1 district:
Home occupations.
Private garages accessory to single-family dwellings.
Single-family dwellings.
Storage sheds accessory to single-family dwellings having a floor area not to
exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
   B.   Conditional Uses: The following uses may be permitted in the R-
1 district if approved pursuant to the procedures and under the conditions set
forth in chapter 2, article A of this title:
Accessory buildings.
Churches.
Community buildings and community covers.
Funeral homes.
Medical, dental, and other healthcare professional offices or clinics.
Nursing homes.
Office of a healthcare professional or other person engaged in a profession
when the office is located within the residence of such person.
Private clubs and lodges.
Public buildings erected by any governmental unit or department of a
governmental unit.
Public libraries.
Public parks, playgrounds, and tennis courts.
Public schools.
Single-family dwellings of qualifying modular construction.
Two-family dwellings. (Ord. 2013-9, 9-3-2013)
10-5-2: R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
In the R-2 two-family residential district, premises shall be used only for the
purposes provided in this section.
   A.   Permissive Uses: The following are permissive uses in the R-2 district:
Permissive uses under the R-1 district.
Duplex dwellings designed for two-family use.
Private garages accessory to duplex dwellings.
Storage sheds accessory to duplex dwellings having a floor area not to exceed
one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
   B.   Conditional Uses: The following uses may be permitted in the R-
2 district if approved pursuant to the procedures and under the conditions set
forth in chapter 2, article A of this title:
Conditional uses under the R-1 district. (2006 Code §
10-4-2)
10-5-3: R-3 GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
In the R-3 general residential district, premises shall be used only for the
purposes provided in this section.
   A.   Permissive Uses: The following are permissive uses in the R-3 district:
Permissive uses under the R-1 district.
Permissive uses under the R-2 district.
Private garages accessory to the dwelling buildings.
Single-family dwellings converted to two-family or multiple dwellings.
Storage sheds accessory to the dwelling buildings having a floor area not to
exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
Two-family dwellings.
   B.   Conditional Uses: The following uses may be permitted in the R-
3 district if approved pursuant to the procedures and under the conditions set
forth in chapter 2, article A of this title:
Conditional uses under the R-1 district.
Conditional uses under the R-2 district.
Boarding houses and lodging houses.
Multiple dwellings.
Off street parking lots. (2006 Code §
10-4-3)
10-5-4: R-4 MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT:
   A.   Uses: In the R-4 mobile home park district, premises shall be used only
for the purposes provided in this subsection.
      1.   Permitted Uses: None.
      2.   Conditional Uses: Mobile home parks may be permitted in the R-
4 district if approved pursuant to the procedures and under the conditions set
forth in chapter 2, article A of this title in addition to the requirements set
out in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Regulations: Mobile home parks must comply with the following:
      1.   Each lot or space on which each single mobile home is accommodated
shall have a minimum area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
      2.   Each lot shall have a width of not less than forty feet (40').
      3.   No mobile home park shall be permitted an average density of mobile
home lots of more than eight (8) per acre.
      4.   Each mobile home park shall provide an area of not less than ten
(10) acres.
      5.   Each mobile home park shall provide lots sufficient to maintain the
following minimum requirements:
         a.   No mobile home or any addition or appurtenance thereto shall be
located less than ten feet (10') from the nearest adjacent lot boundary, public
street, alley, or building.
         b.   Space between mobile homes may be used for the parking of motor
vehicles if the space is clearly designated and each vehicle is parked at least
eight feet (8') from the nearest adjacent lot boundary.
      6.   Each mobile home site shall abut or face a driveway, roadway, or
street of a width of not less than twenty four feet (24'), which shall have
unobstructed access to a public street, highway, or alley.
      7.   All appropriate state, county, and municipal sanitation regulations
shall be observed. (2006 Code §
10-4-4)
CHAPTER 6
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-6-1: B-1 Central Business District
10-6-2: B-2 Commercial District
10-6-1: B-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
In the B-1 central business district, premises shall be used only for the
purposes provided in this section.
   A.   Permissive Uses: The following are permissive uses in the B-1 district:
Buildings erected by any unit of government or department of such unit of
government.
Business and professional offices.
Florist shops.
Medical, dental, and other healthcare professional office or clinic.
Off street parking lots.
Personal service shops, including barbershops and beauty parlors.
Pool halls.
Restaurants.
Sale of goods and products primarily at retail.
Taverns and package liquor stores.
   B.   Conditional Uses: The following are conditional uses in the B-
1 district and may be permitted if approved pursuant to the procedures and
under the conditions set forth in chapter 2, article A of this title:
Animal hospitals and animal clinics having no open kennels.
Boarding houses and lodging houses.
Churches.
Dwelling units.
Filling or service stations.
New and used automobile, truck, trailer, boat, recreational vehicle, and mobile
home sales, equipped with a sales office.
Public garages and automobile repair shops.
Storage facilities.
Theaters.
Wholesale merchandising. (2006 Code §
10-4-5)
10-6-2: B-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
In the B-2 commercial district, premises shall be used only for the purposes
provided in this section.
   A.   Permissive Uses: The following are permissive uses in the B-2 district:
Permissive uses under the R-1, R-2, and B-1 districts.
Conditional uses under the R-1 and B-1 districts, except public garages,
automobile repair shops, and storage facilities.
Automobile, truck, trailer, boat, recreational vehicle, and mobile home sales,
equipped with a sales office.
Bowling alleys and skating rinks.
Farm accessory, fence, deck, and related sales, assembly, and distribution.
Farm implements, sale and repair.
Farm stores or feed stores, including accessory storage of liquid or solid
fertilizer.
   B.   Conditional Uses: The following are conditional uses in the B-
2 district and may be permitted if approved pursuant to the procedures and
under the conditions set forth in chapter 2, article A of this title:
Meat processing and cold storage facilities.
Multiple dwellings.
Public garages and automobile repair shops.
Storage facilities.
Truck and trailer services.
Truck terminals and facilities. (2006 Code §
10-4-6)
CHAPTER 7
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-7-1: M-1 Light Industrial District
10-7-2: M-2 Industrial District
10-7-1: M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
In the M-1 light industrial district, premises shall be used only for the
purposes provided in this section; provided, that the uses are not offensive
due to emission of noise, odor, dust, gas, or vibrations. The following are
permissive uses:
Permissive uses under the B-1 and B-2 districts.
Conditional uses under the B-1 and B-2 districts.
Assembly plants.
Open storage of building material, lumber, pipe, and other nonhazardous
material, when the material is enclosed within a solid fence at least six feet
(6') high; such fence to be within the required building lines. (2006 Code §
10-4-7)
10-7-2: M-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
In the M-2 industrial district, premises shall be used only for the purposes
provided in this section; provided, that the uses are not offensive due to
emission of noise, odor, dust, gas, or vibrations.
   A.   Permissive Uses: None.
   B.   Conditional Uses: The following uses may be permitted in the M-
2 district if approved pursuant to the procedures and under the conditions set
forth in chapter 2, article A of this title; and provided, that such
conditional uses shall not be in conflict with any law of the state of
Illinois, ordinance of the county of Knox, or ordinance of the city of
Abingdon:
Ceramic products manufacturing.
Grain elevators.
Junkyards and similar salvage or storage facilities.
All other manufacturing. (2006 Code § 10-4-8)
CHAPTER 8
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
10-8-1: Off Street Parking Spaces And Regulations
10-8-2: Off Street Loading Spaces
10-8-1: OFF STREET PARKING SPACES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Number Of Spaces Required: Off street parking spaces shall be provided
as follows:
      1.   One space on the lot for each dwelling unit or fraction thereof in
the building.
      2.   For two-family dwellings and multi-family dwellings, two (2) spaces
for each dwelling unit or fraction thereof in the dwelling.
      3.   For churches and places of public assembly erected on new sites, one
space on the lot for each six (6) seats in the main auditorium.
      4.   For schools erected on new sites, two (2) spaces for each classroom.
      5.   For clubs, lodges, institutions, and other public and semipublic
buildings, one space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area.
      6.   For the B-2 district, one space for each four hundred (400) square
feet of floor area.
      7.   For the M-1 and M-2 districts, one space for each two (2) employees
of the maximum number employed at any one time.
   B.   Computation Of Number Of Spaces: In computing the number of parking
spaces required, the following rules shall govern:
      1.   Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be
the next whole number.
      2.   In the case of mixed uses of a lot, the parking spaces required
shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed
separately.
   C.   Regulations: The requirements under subsection A of this section are
subject to the following:
      1.   Residential Districts:
         a.   In the R districts, no parking shall be permitted in the area
between the front line of the dwelling and the property line, except on an
approved driveway. An approved driveway is one paved with concrete, asphalt,
gravel, brick, or other permanent low dust surface which does not exceed thirty
feet (30') in width.
         b.   In addition to permitted parking on the driveway in front of a
garage, one parking space perpendicular with the street may be located in front
of the dwelling when side or rear yard parking is not available. The parking
space must be paved in accordance with the requirements of subsection C1a of
this section for a driveway.
      2.   Corner Lot Visibility: Any parking permitted by this section shall
be subject to the provisions of subsection 10-4-7C11 of this title, pertaining
to corner lot visibility.
      3.   Change Or Enlargement Of Use: Whenever a building or use constructed
or established after the effective date hereof is changed or enlarged in floor
area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity, or
otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten percent (10%) or more in the
number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis
of the enlargement or change.
      4.   Nonconforming Buildings:
         a.   Any existing building failing to comply with off street parking
requirements may be remodeled, repaired, and structurally altered, but any
enlargement must provide the required parking spaces.
         b.   Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date
hereof is reconstructed or is enlarged to the extent of twenty percent (20%) or
more in floor area, such building or use, in its entirety, must thereafter
comply with the parking requirements set forth herein. (2006 Code §
10-5-4)
10-8-2: OFF STREET LOADING SPACES:
   A.   Number Of Spaces Required: Off street loading spaces shall be provided
as follows:
      1.   In the B-2 district, one space for each two thousand (2,000) to
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area.
      2.   In the M-1 and M-2 districts, one space for each five thousand
(5,000) to forty thousand (40,000) square feet of floor area.
   B.   Compliance With Provisions: No existing building which is governed by
any of the provisions set out in subsection A of this section shall hereafter
be enlarged or extended unless off street loading space is provided in
accordance with the provisions of this section. (2006 Code §
10-5-4)
CHAPTER 9
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
10-9-1: Determination Of Nonconforming Use
10-9-2: Nonconforming Buildings
10-9-3: Enlargement Of Nonconforming Use
10-9-1: DETERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USE:
   A.   Whenever the existence of a nonconforming use is an issue, such
existence shall be a question of fact, and shall be decided by the zoning board
of appeals or the council, as the case may be, after a hearing. (2006 Code §
10-2-4-5)
   B.   1. The intermittent, temporary, casual, or illegal use of a building or
land shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use;
and
      2.   The existence of a nonconforming use on a part of a lot or tract
shall not be construed to establish a nonconforming use on the entire lot or
tract. (2006 Code § 10-2-4-4)
10-9-2: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS:
   A.   Continuance Of Use; Change Of Use:
      1.   The lawful use of a building existing on the effective date hereof
may be continued although such use does not conform with the provisions hereof.
      2.   If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a
building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or of a more
restricted classification.
      3.   Whenever a nonconforming use is changed to a more restricted use or
to a conforming use, the use shall not thereafter be changed to a less
restricted use.
   B.   Extension Of Use: The nonconforming use of a building may be hereafter
extended throughout those parts thereof which were lawfully and manifestly
arranged or designed for such use prior to the effective date hereof. (2006
Code § 10-2-4-1)
   C.   Discontinuance Of Use: No building or portion thereof used in whole or
in part for a nonconforming use in any residential district, which remains idle
or unused for a continuous period of two (2) years, whether or not the fixtures
or equipment are removed, shall again be used except in conformity with the
regulations of the residential district in which it is located. (2006 Code §
10-2-4-2)
   D.   Restoration Of Damaged Building:
      1.   No building which has been damaged by any cause whatsoever to the
extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of the fair market value of the
building immediately prior to such damage shall be restored except in
conformity with the regulations of this title, and all rights as a
nonconforming use are terminated.
      2.   If a building is damaged by less than fifty percent (50%) of the
fair market value of the building immediately prior to such damage, it may be
repaired or reconstructed and used as before such damage; provided, that such
repair or reconstruction be substantially completed within twelve (12) months
after the date of such damage. (2006 Code § 10-2-4-3)
10-9-3: ENLARGEMENT OF NONCONFORMING USE:
   A.   A nonconforming use in any district may be enlarged by adding to the
building in which such use exists, or may be extended by acquiring additional
adjoining land and constructing thereon a building to be used in connection
with such nonconforming use.
   B.   As a condition precedent to any enlargement or extension of a
nonconforming use, the proposed enlargement or extension shall be presented to
the plan commission for its review and report, which shall be after a public
hearing held in accordance with section
10-2A-6 of this title.
   C.   Any enlargement or extension will:
      1.   Not be detrimental to, or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, or general welfare;
      2.   Not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the
immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted;
      3.   Not substantially diminish and impair property values within the
neighborhood; and
      4.   Not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of
surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
   D.   The person who applies for an enlargement or extension of a
nonconforming use shall pay a filing fee to the city clerk in the sum of fifty
dollars ($50.00), which fee shall not be refundable. (2006 Code § 10-2-4-6)
CHAPTER 10
SIGNS
SECTION:
10-10-1: Definitions
10-10-2: Prohibited Signs
10-10-3: Signs In Residential Districts
10-10-4: Nonconforming Signs
10-10-5: Violation; Penalty
10-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
BANNER: Any sign printed or painted on cloth, plastic, canvas, flags or
pennants and used for attracting the attention of the public.
BILLBOARD: Any sign which, in whole or in part, directs attention to a
business, commodity, service or activity not conducted, sold or offered upon
the premises where such sign is located.
BUSINESS SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a business, profession or
service sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is located, with the
commodity or entertainment being incidental thereto.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall
also include the initial painting of all signs.
FACING: The surface of the sign upon, against or through which the message is
displayed or illustrated on the sign.
PERSON/ENTITY: Shall mean and include any individual, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PREMISES: Any property or real estate, improved or unimproved.
SIGN: Any device or advertising symbol including, but not limited to, exterior
clock, temperature indicator, marquee, canopy, awning, placard, or other
representation, which may or may not contain words, letters, printing, picture,
designs or combinations thereof used in the nature of advertisement,
announcement or directions calculated to attract the attention of the public.
The term "sign" shall not include any display erected by the city of Abingdon,
or any official court or public office notice nor shall it include any flag,
emblem or insignia of a nation, governmental unit, service organization,
historical society, civic organization, library, hospital, school or religious
group.
SIGN OFFICER: Shall mean and include the duly appointed building official or
mayor.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign, with or without structural frame, intended to be
displayed for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. (Ord. 2009-13, 11-16-
2009)
10-10-2: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
   A.   Billboards of any type or design are prohibited. (Ord. 2009-13, 11-16-
2009)
   B.   Signs erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to
obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of the
position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view or be
confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; or which makes use
of lights or any word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to
interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic are prohibited. (Ord. 2009-13, 11-
16-2009; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Signs within the municipal right of way or any street, roadway, highway
or attached to utility, traffic signal poles, or standards except for
governmental or signs erected by the city are prohibited. (Ord. 2009-13, 11-16-
2009)
10-10-3: SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Permitted Signs: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause
to be erected any sign, with or without illumination, in a residential use
district, as now or as may hereinafter be established by the city, except the
following:
      1.   A name and address sign identifying the owner or occupant of a
building dwelling unit, provided the surface area does not exceed four (4)
square feet.
      2.   Residential real estate signs such as "For Sale" or "For Rent"
signs.
      3.   Temporary signs not to exceed two (2) square feet in area on each of
the two (2) display surfaces for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
      4.   One sign only, identifying a contractor, architect, engineer, and
subcontractors engaged in the construction, alteration, rehabilitation or
repair of a building upon the premises upon which the sign is located, provided
such sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area and no more than six
feet (6') in height. Such signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days
following completion of the job or, if applicable in the case of new
construction, occupancy of the building.
      5.   One sign, not to exceed forty five (45) square feet in area, for the
following uses: church, private park, private recreation building, private
school, hospital and home for the aged or similar institutions. Such sign shall
be solely for the purpose of displaying the name of the institution and/or its
activities or services and may be illuminated.
      6.   Any business sign existing as of the effective date hereof. After
the effective date hereof, one business sign which identifies a business, or
use of the property, allowed by a conditional use permit approved by the city.
All signs erected after the effective date hereof shall comply with the size
and other physical restrictions set forth in subsection A5 of this section.
      7.   No trespassing sign, warning sign (e.g., "Beware Of Dog") and such
other sign regulating the use of the property when such sign does not exceed
two (2) square feet.
      8.   Any temporary sign celebrating the occasion of a birth of a child,
birthday, anniversary, wedding, or traditionally accepted patriotic holiday as
well as a national or state holiday.
   B.   Limitations:
      1.   Size: No sign, except as otherwise provided in subsections A5 and A6
of this section, shall exceed twenty (20) square feet in area on each of the
two (2) display surfaces, including cross arm and post, and shall not exceed a
height of six feet (6') as measured from the ground to the top of the sign.
      2.   Number Of Signs: No more than one sign shall be displayed to
designate the location of any property for sale; provided, however, that two
(2) such signs shall be permitted on a corner lot.
      3.   Prohibited Location: No sign shall be placed upon or in a public
right of way or easement for a road, street or highway and, if so placed, may
be removed by or at the direction of the chief of police.
      4.   Illuminated Signs: No sign, except as otherwise expressly provided
herein, shall be illuminated.
      5.   Removal Of Temporary Signs: Signs for "open house" or signs
advertising "occasional sales" shall be removed no later than six (6) hours
after the conclusion of the "open house" or "occasional sale". (Ord. 2009-13,
11-16-2009)
10-10-4: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Every sign or other advertising structure in existence on the effective date
hereof which violates or does not conform to the provisions hereof shall be
removed, altered or replaced so as to conform with the provisions of this
chapter within sixty (60) days if the cost or value of the sign does not exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00). Those persons having nonconforming signs which
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) in cost or value shall have two (2) years
to comply. (Ord. 2009-13, 11-16-2009)
10-10-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to erect or
cause to be erected any sign located within the corporate boundaries of the
city contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Penalty: Any person who violates the terms of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2009-13, 11-16-
2009)
CHAPTER 11
SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
10-11-1: Definitions
10-11-2: Permit Requirements
10-11-3: Barrier Requirements
10-11-4: Existing Pools
10-11-5: Penalty
10-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
BARRIER: A fence, wall, building wall, pool wall, or combination thereof, which
completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming
pool.
SWIMMING POOL: Any structure manufactured and/or intended for use as a swimming
pool or recreational bathing that is over twenty four inches (24") in depth.
This definition is intended to expressly include inground, aboveground and
onground swimming pools. (Ord. 2009-11, 10-5-2009)
10-11-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct a swimming pool or make any
major alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvement to an existing
swimming pool without having first obtained a signed permit therefor from the
city building official.
   B.   Application For Permit: Application for such a permit shall be in
writing on a form prescribed by the city building official and shall contain
such information as shall be deemed by the official for a proper understanding
of the proposed work.
   C.   Permit Fee: The fee for such a permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
   D.   Restrictions On Issuance: No permit shall issue unless the building
official has determined that information and plans for the proposed
construction, alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvement provides
for compliance with all terms, conditions and restrictions imposed in this
chapter. (Ord. 2009-11, 10-5-2009)
10-11-3: BARRIER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All barriers shall be installed and maintained to completely surround
the swimming pool and shall be constructed so as to effectively bar small
children from access to the swimming pool and shall be not less than forty
eight inches (48") high.
   B.   All barriers must be equipped with self-locking gates.
   C.   Where an aboveground pool is, in whole or in part, used as a barrier or
where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure and the means of
access is a ladder or steps:
      1.   The ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or
removed to prevent access; or
      2.   When the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which
meets the requirements herein, then when the ladder or steps are secured,
locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of a four
inch (4") diameter sphere. (Ord. 2009-11, 10-5-2009)
10-11-4: EXISTING POOLS:
All swimming pools existing as of the effective date hereof shall have until
March 1, 2010, to comply with all terms and conditions hereof. (Ord. 2009-11,
10-5-2009)
10-11-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating, disobeying, neglecting or refusing to comply with, or
resisting enforcement of this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2009-11,
10-5-2009)
CHAPTER 12
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Definitions
10-12-2: Permit Requirements
10-12-3: Location
10-12-4: Requirements And Restrictions
10-12-5: Violation
10-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
SATELLITE TELEVISION ANTENNA: An apparatus capable of receiving communications
from a transmitter or a transmitter relay in planetary orbit.
USABLE SATELLITE SIGNAL: A satellite signal which, when viewed on a
conventional television set, is substantially equal in picture quality with
that received from local or area commercial television stations or by way of
cable television. (2006 Code §
10-6-1)
10-12-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
No antenna shall be erected or placed in any way without a building permit.
Application for such permit shall be accompanied by a drawing to scale, showing
the name of the applicant, the actual dimensions of the lot, the size, shape
and location of the proposed antenna, and such other information as may be
necessary or requested by the building official. A record of each application
and drawing shall be kept in the office of the city clerk. (2006 Code §
10-6-2)
10-12-3: LOCATION:
In any zoning district, such antenna shall be located only in the rear yard of
any lot. If a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained from such rear yard,
and that fact is sufficiently shown to the satisfaction of the building
official, the antenna may be placed on the roof of a building; provided, that
the construction and erection is in compliance with all city building and
electrical requirements. (2006 Code § 10-6-3)
10-12-4: REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The antenna shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height, including
any platform or structure on which said antenna is mounted or affixed, and the
antenna may not exceed fifteen feet (15') in diameter. In the event that the
antenna is placed on the roof of a building, it shall not extend more than ten
feet (10') above the height limit established for the zone in which the
building is located.
   B.   No more than one antenna shall be allowed on any lot.
   C.   Each antenna, and the construction and installation thereof, shall
conform to all applicable ordinances of the city.
   D.   Each antenna shall meet all manufacturers' specifications, be of
noncombustible and corrosion resistant material, and be erected in a secure,
wind resistant manner.
   E.   Each antenna must be adequately grounded for protection against a
direct strike of lightning.
   F.   Each antenna shall comply with the rear yard requirements of the
applicable zoning district in which it is placed, as in the case of an
accessory building, and with the applicable area and height regulations of this
title. (2006 Code § 10-6-4)
10-12-5: VIOLATION:
Any violation of this chapter is classified and shall be prosecuted as a
violation of this title. (2006 Code § 10-6-5)
TITLE 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE, AUTHORITY AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purpose
11-1-2: Authority
11-1-3: Definitions
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
The regulations of this title shall be for the purpose of promoting the health,
safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and
future inhabitants of Akron, Colorado, by: the lessening of congestions in the
streets and roads or reducing the waste of excessive amounts of roads; securing
safety from fire and other dangers; providing adequate light and air;
classification of land uses and the distribution of land development and
utilization; protection of tax base; securing economy in governmental
expenditures; and the protection of urban and nonurban development. (1997 Code
§ 17.04.010)
11-1-2: AUTHORITY:
This title is authorized by Colorado Revised Statutes title 31, article 23, as
amended, and is declared to be in accordance with all provisions of these
statutes. (1997 Code § 17.04.020)
11-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular
number include the plural and words in the plural include the singular; the
word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" is mandatory.
The following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building or portion of main building, the use
of which is incidental to that of the main building or dwelling.
ALLEY: A minor public thoroughfare upon which the rear of building lots
generally abuts and which is generally used for service purposes only.
APARTMENT HOTEL: A building or portion thereof designated for or containing
both dwelling units and six (6) or more guestrooms or suites of rooms.
AUTO COURT OR COTTAGE CAMP OR MOTEL: A group of dwellings of not less than two
hundred (200) square feet floor space per unit, facing a common court, place or
street, and designed for or used temporarily for automobile tourists or
transients, with adequate off street parking space for each unit.
AUTOMOBILE SALES AREA: An open area other than a street used for the display or
rental of new or used automobiles to be displayed, sold or rented on the
premises.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or
trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, obsolete or wrecked
vehicles or their parts, but not including the incidental storage of damaged
vehicles in connection with the operation of a repair garage.
BASEMENT HOUSE: A dwelling or structure constructed partly or wholly below the
grade level of any property.
BOARDING, ROOMING OR LODGING HOUSE: A building other than a motel where lodging
and/or meals for five (5) or more persons are provided for compensation.
CORNER LOT: A lot situated at the junction of a front street and a side street.
CURB CUTS: A cut in the curb line for passage of vehicles, not to exceed twelve
feet (12') in width for single drive and thirty feet (30') for double drive.
DRIVE-IN BUSINESS: A place of business where persons are served in automobiles
from a refreshment stand, restaurant, food store and the like.
DWELLING: A structure used as a residence containing not less than a living
room, bedroom, kitchen and a completely equipped bathroom containing a toilet
and a bathtub or shower, lavatory, all connected to the sewer and supplied with
town water and shall also include a "modular unit" or "sectional home" as
defined in this section.
ERECT: Means and includes moving of existing buildings.
FRONT STREET: A street on which the lots of a town block, or subdivision
thereof, generally front.
HOTEL: A building occupied as a more or less temporary abiding place of
individuals who are lodgers with or without meals for compensation, and in
which there are more than ten (10) sleeping rooms, usually occupied singly, and
in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual apartment or room.
JUNKYARD: The use of more than two hundred (200) square feet of area of any lot
or site for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals
or other scrap materials or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of
automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
LOT: Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory building
together with such open spaces as are required under this title and having its
principal frontage on a street or officially approved place.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A preconstructed building unit, or combination of
preconstructed building units, without motive power, designed and commonly used
for residential occupancy by persons in either temporary or permanent location,
which unit or units are manufactured in a factory or at a location other than
the residential site of the completed home.
MODULAR UNIT: A factory fabricated transportable building unit designed to be
used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site into
a modular structure to be used for residential, commercial, educational or
industrial purposes.
NONCONFORMING USE: A building or land lawfully occupied by a use that does not
conform with the regulations of the district in which it is situated.
PORCH: A roofed or unroofed open structure projecting from the front, side or
rear wall of a building. For the purpose of this title, a porch is considered a
part of the principal building and is not permitted to extend into any required
yards.
REAR YARD: A yard unoccupied except by an accessory building as hereinafter
permitted, extending across the full width of the lot between the rear line of
the building and the rear line of the lot.
SECTIONAL HOME: A dwelling made of two (2) modular units, factory fabricated
and transported to the homesite where they are put on a foundation and joined
to make a single house.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the property line and front
line of the building or any projection thereof, excluding steps.
SIDE YARD: A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and
extending from the street line to the rear of the lot.
SIGN: Any advertisement, announcement, direction or communication produced in
whole or in part by the construction, erection, affixing or placing of a
structure on any land or on any other structure, or produced by painting on or
pasting or placing any printed, lettered, pictured, figured or colored
materials on any building, structure or surface; provided, however, that signs
placed or erected by the town or the state for the purpose of showing street
names or traffic directions or regulations or for other municipal or government
purposes shall not be included herein nor shall this include signs which are
part of the architectural design of the building.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of a floor and
the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then
the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF: A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of
which on at least two (2) opposite, exterior walls, are not more than two feet
(2') above the floor of such story.
STREET: A public thoroughfare fifty feet (50') or more in width and not less
than forty feet (40') between curbs.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
substantially permanent location on the soil, but not including utility poles
or garbage or trash disposal units. A manufactured home that is transported to
its site and permanently affixed to the ground, attached to a permanent
concrete foundation around the perimeter, so that it is no longer capable of
being drawn over the public highways, and which has become real property as
described in Colorado Revised Statutes section 38-29-114(2), and which
manufactured home is of substantially equal value to other improvements in the
immediate neighborhood, shall be considered as a structure.
TEMPORARY: Less than twelve (12) months.
YARD: An open space unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, which
is on the same lot with a building, except as otherwise provided herein. (1997
Code § 17.04.030)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11-2-1: Enforcement
11-2-2: Interpretation And Conflict Of Provisions
11-2-3: Boundaries Of Districts
11-2-4: Permit Requirements; Fees
11-2-5: Certificate Of Occupancy
11-2-6: Inspections And Tests
11-2-7: Changes And Amendments
11-2-8: Notice Of Filing Application For Variance
11-2-1: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to see that this title is
enforced. Appeal from the decision of the building inspector may be made to the
board of adjustment as provided in section
11-3-3 of this title. (1997 Code § 17.48.120)
11-2-2: INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
morals, order, convenience, happiness, prosperity and general welfare. It is
not intended by this title to interfere with, or abrogate or annul any
easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however,
that wherever this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or requires larger open
spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or
permits, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this title
shall govern. (1997 Code § 17.48.090)
11-2-3: BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts, as shown on the building zone map attached to the ordinance codified
in this title and made a part of this title, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise
shown, and where the designation on the map attached to the ordinance codified
in this title and made a part of this title indicates that the various
districts are approximately bounded by street or alley lines, the streets shall
be construed to be the boundary of such district.
   B.   Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated and where the
property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks, and lots, the
district boundaries shall be construed to be lot lines; and where the
designation on the map attached to the ordinance codified in this title and
made a part of this title indicates that the various districts are
approximately bounded by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the
boundary of such district, unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the
map. (1997 Code § 17.48.100)
11-2-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful to construct or alter any building or
structure in the town, excepting fences, when the cost of such construction
exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), or where the effect of such construction
or alteration is to enlarge the capacity or affect the bearing walls or the
roof thereof, without having first secured a permit therefor. (1997 Code §
17.48.010)
   B.   Application For Permit: Application for such permits shall be made to
the office of the town clerk and should be accompanied by plans and
specifications in duplicate showing the work to be done. Such plans shall be
verified by the signature of both the owner of the premises and the contractor
in charge of the operation. (1997 Code § 17.48.020)
   C.   Plan Approval With Application: Such applications with plans shall be
referred to the building inspector, who shall examine same to determine whether
or not the proposed construction or alteration will comply with the ordinance
provisions relative thereto. Upon approval, one set of plans shall be returned
to the applicant with a permit and the other shall be retained by the building
inspector. No permit shall be issued until after approval of the plans. (1997
Code § 17.48.030)
   D.   Variations To Plans And Specifications: It is unlawful to vary
materially from the submitted plans and specifications unless the variations
are submitted in an amended plan to the building inspector and approved by him.
(1997 Code § 17.48.040)
   E.   Plat Required: Applications for building permits shall be accompanied
by a plat in duplicate drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot
to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected, and such other
information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these
regulations. A careful record of such applications shall be kept in the office
of the building inspector. (1997 Code § 17.48.080)
   F.   Permit Fees: The fees for building permits shall be set by resolution
of the board of trustees. (1997 Code § 17.48.060; amd. 2016 Code)
11-2-5: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Certificate Required; Issuance: Certificate of occupancy for the use of
vacant land or the change in the use of land as herein provided shall be
applied for before any such land shall be occupied or used, and a certificate
of occupancy shall be issued within ten (10) days after the application has
been made, provided such use is in conformity with the provisions of this
title.
   B.   Statement Of Compliance; Records Kept:
      1.   Certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed
use of a building or land, complies with all the building and health laws and
ordinances and with the provisions of this title.
      2.   A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of
the building inspector, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person
having a proprietary or tenant's interest in the building affected.
      3.   No fee shall be charged for an original certificate applied for
coincident with the application for a building permit; for all other
certificates or for copies of the original certificate there shall be a fee
charged of one dollar ($1.00) each.
   C.   Excavation Permit: No permit for excavation for any building shall be
issued before application has been made for certificate of occupancy. (1997
Code § 17.48.070)
11-2-6: INSPECTIONS AND TESTS:
The building inspector shall make or cause to be made such inspections as are
necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this title, and shall
make any tests or examinations of materials or methods to be used for the
purpose of seeing that they comply with the provisions of this title. (1997
Code § 17.48.050)
11-2-7: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Procedure Outlined: The board of trustees may, from time to time, on
its own motion or on petition, after public notice and hearing as provided by
law, amend, supplement or change the boundaries or regulations herein or
subsequently established. Whenever the owners of fifty percent (50%) or more of
the frontage in any district or part thereof present a petition duly signed and
acknowledged to the board of trustees, requesting an amendment, supplement or
change of the regulation prescribed for such district or part thereof, it shall
be the duty of the board of trustees to vote upon such petition within ninety
(90) days after the filing by the petitioners with the board of trustees; in
the case of a protest to the proposed amendment, supplement or change be
presented duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%),
or more, either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or
those immediately adjacent in the area thereof, extending one hundred feet
(100') from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment or change
shall not be passed except by two-thirds (2/3) vote of the board of trustees.
   B.   Publication Of Notice: Whenever under this section, it shall be
necessary to publish notice of public hearing in connection with changes or
amendments in the zoning regulations or zoning classification, the person or
persons applying for the change shall pay to the town the cost of the
publication. (1997 Code § 17.48.110)
11-2-8: NOTICE OF FILING APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE:
A written notice of the filing of an application for a variance from the
application of the zoning regulations shall be sent by the town clerk to all
landowners on the same block and to all landowners whose land is adjacent to
the street of the property described in any such application. Notice shall be
sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid. Notice shall also be
posted at town hall in the same manner as notices of regular or special
meetings of the board of trustees. Notice shall be sent and shall be posted at
least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. In the event that adjacent
property is held in common ownership, notice shall be sent to the appropriate
homeowners' or condominium association. (Ord. 499, 2-7-2011)
CHAPTER 3
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
11-3-1: Board Established; Terms; Meetings
11-3-2: Jurisdiction
11-3-3: Appeals; Notice
11-3-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; TERMS; MEETINGS:
   A.   Established; Membership; Terms: The board of adjustment is established.
The word "board", when used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean the
board of adjustment. The board shall consist of five (5) members and shall be
appointed by the mayor with the approval of the board of trustees, each to be
appointed for a term of three (3) years, except that the board first appointed,
two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, two (2)
members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, and one member for a
term of one year.
   B.   Quorum; Voting: The presence of three (3) members shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum and when three (3) only are present, their unanimous vote
shall be required to make a decision.
   C.   Meetings; Rules Of Procedure: Meetings of the board shall be held at
the call of the chairman, the request of the building inspector or by any party
wishing to appeal the decision of the building inspector. The board shall adopt
its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings, showing
the action of each question considered.
   D.   Clerk Of Board: The town clerk shall act as clerk of the board. (Ord.
531, 9-1-2015)
11-3-2: JURISDICTION:
In specific cases, the board of adjustment may authorize by permit a variation
of the application of the use, height, and area district regulation herein
established in harmony with their general purpose and intent as follows:
   A.   Permit a temporary building for commerce or for industry in a residence
district which is incidental to a residential development, such permit to be
issued for not more than a period of one year.
   B.   Permit the erection and use of a building or the use of land in any
location for a public service corporation for public utility purpose which the
board admits reasonably necessary for the public convenience and welfare.
   C.   Interpret the provisions of this title in such a way as to carry out
the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the building zone map, fixing
the several districts accompanying and made part of this title where the street
layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the
building zone map aforesaid.
   D.   Where there are no practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in
the way of carrying out the strict letter of this title, the board of
adjustment shall have the power in passing upon appeals to vary or modify the
application of any of the regulations or provisions of this title relating to
use, construction or alterations of buildings or structures or the use of land
so that the spirit of this title shall be observed, public safety and welfare
secured, and substantial justice done. (1997 Code § 17.44.030)
11-3-3: APPEALS; NOTICE:
   A.   Appeal From Ruling Of Building Inspector: Appeal from the ruling of the
building inspector concerning the enforcement of the provisions of this title
may be made to the board of adjustment within thirty (30) days from the date of
the ruling by the building inspector. The applicant shall file with the
building inspector and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal,
specifying the grounds thereof. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit
to the board all papers constituting the record from which the appealed action
was taken.
   B.   Appeals As To Class Of Certain Districts: When any district has been
classified or is about to be classified, the owners thereof may appeal to the
board for a higher classification. It shall be the duty of the board to
carefully examine all the facts and to determine all present usages which are
below the requirements of the higher class requested and the board shall have
authority to require the elimination or correction of any one, any part, or all
of the nonconforming usages as may be justified by the circumstances before
such higher classification is assigned to such district. (1997 Code §
17.44.020)
   C.   Notice Sent And Posted: A written notice of an appeal to or an appeal
from the board of adjustment shall be sent by the town clerk to all landowners
on the same block and to all landowners whose land is adjacent to the street of
the property described in any such appeal. Notice shall be sent by first class
United States mail, postage prepaid. Notice shall also be posted at town hall
in the same manner as notices of regular or special meetings of the board of
trustees. Notice shall be sent and shall be posted at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the hearing. In the event that adjacent property is held in common
ownership, notice shall be sent to the appropriate homeowners' or condominium
association. (Ord. 499, 2-7-2011)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL DESIGN AND USE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Nonconforming Uses
11-4-2: Area Exceptions
11-4-3: Akron-Washington County Airport Clear Zone
11-4-4: Modular Units And Sectional Homes
11-4-5: Basement Houses And Moving Houses
11-4-6: Setback On Corner Lots
11-4-1: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Existing Large Residences: In the A residence district, large
residences which exist at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in
this title may be used as two- family dwellings; provided, however, that the
provisions of this title as to the lot area per family and the floor area per
dwelling are observed.
   B.   Existing Land Uses: The lawful use of land existing at the time of the
passage of said ordinance, although such use does not conform to the provisions
hereof, may be continued, but if such nonconforming use is discontinued, any
future use of the land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
title.
   C.   Existing Use Of Buildings: The lawful use of a building or part
thereof, existing at the time of the passage of said ordinance, may be
continued although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof, and such
use may be extended throughout the building, provided no structural
alterations, except those required by law or ordinance, are made therein.
   D.   Changing Building Use: Whenever a nonconforming use of a building has
been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall
not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use. When a building, the use of
which does not conform to the use regulations of this title, is damaged by
fire, explosion, flood, act of God, or a public enemy, to the extent of more
than seventy five percent (75%) of its fair value, it shall not be restored
except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is
situated.
   E.   Reconstruction Of Church Buildings: Nothing in this section, however,
shall prevent the reconstruction of church buildings existing at the time of
the passage of said ordinance. (1997 Code § 17.40.010)
11-4-2: AREA EXCEPTIONS:
The area regulations in the various districts shall be subject to the following
exceptions, and regulations:
   A.   In the C residence district, a living room and bedroom may be combined.
   B.   Building on through lots and running from street to street may waive
the requirements of rear yard by furnishing required open space in lieu of such
required rear yard.
   C.   Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest
point to the sky unobstructed, except for the ordinary projection of sills,
cornices, ornamental features and eaves; provided, however, that none of the
above projections shall project into a court more than six inches (6") nor into
a minimum side yard more than twenty four inches (24").
   D.   No cornice shall project over the street line more than five percent
(5%) of the width of such street, and shall in no case project more than four
feet (4'); provided, further, no projection, sign or fixture shall interfere
with the proper driving or parking of legal vehicles.
   E.   An accessory building may occupy not more than thirty percent (30%) of
the rear yard, and shall not be closer to the main building than seven feet
(7') unless it is made a portion of the main building.
   F.   No yard, court or other open space provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of these regulations shall be used as
a yard, court or other open space for another building. (1997 Code § 17.40.020)
11-4-3: AKRON-WASHINGTON COUNTY AIRPORT CLEAR ZONE:
   A.   Akron-Washington County Airport Restriction: No structure will be
constructed on any land in the area of the Akron- Washington County Airport
which could be used for an incompatible land use. No structure shall be
permitted which in any way would interfere with the clear zone as established
and as same may be amended from time to time by federal aviation administration
rules and regulations.
   B.   Landfills And Treatment Plants Near Runway: No landfills or treatment
plants will be constructed within ten thousand feet (10,000') of any runway at
the airport. (1997 Code § 17.40.030)
11-4-4: MODULAR UNITS AND SECTIONAL HOMES:
   A.   Modular Units: Any modular unit or sectional home which bears the
certificate from the state of Colorado, division of housing, that it is a
factory built unit and that it complies with the Colorado standards for factory
built construction shall be considered as a permanent structure and may be
placed in any location in any district within the town; provided, that it
complies with the required use, dwelling area, height, rear yard, side yard and
setback provisions of this title.
   B.   Mobile Homes: A mobile home which bears the certification from the
state of Colorado, division of housing, that it is a mobile home and is
constructed under mobile home construction standards of the state of Colorado,
and also any mobile home, modular unit or sectional home which does not bear
any certification from the state of Colorado shall be considered as a mobile
home and may be placed only within districts D, E or F. (1997 Code § 17.40.040)
11-4-5: BASEMENT HOUSES AND MOVING HOUSES:
   A.   Basement Houses Prohibited: No "basement house", as defined in this
title, shall be erected in the town.
   B.   Moving Houses; Requirements:
      1.   No house, already constructed or partially constructed, shall be
moved into or within the town without the approval of the board of adjustment.
      2.   Before moving a house into the town, or from one lot to a different
lot within the town, application shall be made to the board of adjustment.
      3.   The application shall be accompanied by a detailed set of plans and
specifications of the finished house. (1997 Code § 17.40.050)
11-4-6: SETBACK ON CORNER LOTS:
On all corner lots within all areas within the town, the following setback
regulations shall apply:
   A.   There shall be a forty two inch (42") setback from both corners for a
chainlink fence which shall be no more than forty eight inches (48") high.
   B.   Private fences shall have a forty two inch (42") setback from the curb
and an eleven foot (11') setback from the corner itself with a diagonal clear
space between the two (2) 11-foot setbacks.
   C.   Buildings will be placed and bushes and other vegetation will be
trimmed to allow the same clear view to motorists as provided in subsections A
and B of this section. (Ord. 460, 7-7-2003)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Districts Established; Map; General Regulations
11-5-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED; MAP; GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Districts Established; Annexations:
      1.   In order to regulate and restrict the location of trades, callings,
industries and location of buildings designated for specific uses, and in order
to regulate and limit the height of the buildings hereinafter erected or
structurally altered, to regulate and determine the area of yards and other
open spaces about buildings, the town is divided into major districts known as:
AA residence district
A residence district
B residence district
C residence district
D business and commercial district
E industrial district
F mobile home park district
R ranchette district
(1997 Code § 17.08.010; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   Provided, however, that any area annexed to the town after the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall by such
annexation be automatically classified as an AA residence district; provided
further, that the petition for annexation may incorporate a request for a
different zoning and if the zoning request in the petition to annex is approved
by the town board in the annexing ordinance, the new zoning shall apply to the
area annexed. (1997 Code § 17.08.010)
   B.   Map; Restrictions And Requirements: The town is divided into districts
as shown upon the map attached to the ordinance codified in this section, being
designated as the "building zone map", and the map and all notations,
references and other things shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this
title as if the matter and things set forth by the map were fully described
herein, except as hereinafter provided: (1997 Code § 17.08.010; amd. 2016 Code)
      1.   No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered,
nor shall any building or premises be used for any purpose other than is
permitted in the district in which such building or premises is located.
      2.   No building shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed in
height the limit herein established for any district in which such building is
located.
      3.   No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or
other open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this title, nor shall the
lot area per family be reduced in any manner except in conformity with the area
regulations established for the district in which such building is located.
      4.   No garage larger than a three (3) car garage shall be built in any
district without first being allowed through variance. The height of any garage
shall be appropriate to the adjacent home (i.e., single-story homes shall have
single-story garages, two-story homes may have two-story garages, etc.).
      5.   The primary entrance to the dwelling must face the street upon which
the address is based.
      6.   Covenants shall be required and must be presented before acceptance
of any subdivision plat or approval of any annexation plat.
      7.   Any variance which shall be granted by the board of adjustment
allowing for a nonconforming use shall be in writing, with specific provisions
included therein.
      8.   Any business granted by variance shall be subject to an annual fee,
to be set from time to time by the board of trustees in the policies of the
town. (1997 Code § 17.08.010)
ARTICLE A.  AA RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-5A-1: Permitted Uses And Regulations
11-5A-2: Dwelling Area Per Family
11-5A-3: Height
11-5A-4: Rear Yard
11-5A-5: Side Yard
11-5A-6: Setback
11-5A-7: Corner Lots
11-5A-8: Lot Area
11-5A-9: Finish
11-5A-1: PERMITTED USES AND REGULATIONS:
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or
structurally altered, unless otherwise provided in this title, except for one
or more of the following uses:
   A.   One-family dwellings.
   B.   Schools (elementary and high).
   C.   Churches; provided, that before a new church may be constructed upon
the property, where no church was there before located, the written consent of
sixty percent (60%) of the persons owning property within three hundred feet
(300') of such location shall first be obtained.
   D.   Accessory buildings including one private garage which may be multiple
spaces when located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front property line
or a private garage within or attached to a dwelling.
   E.   Parks and playgrounds. (1997 Code § 17.12.010)
11-5A-2: DWELLING AREA PER FAMILY:
The total dwelling area per family shall be not less than one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet of living area above grade, excluding basement.
(1997 Code § 17.12.020)
11-5A-3: HEIGHT:
No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed thirty five
feet (35') in height nor two (2) stories above foundations or basement. (1997
Code § 17.12.030)
11-5A-4: REAR YARD:
There shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet (10'). (1997 Code §
17.12.040)
11-5A-5: SIDE YARD:
There shall be a side yard on each side of a building of not less than five
feet (5') in width. (1997 Code § 17.12.050)
11-5A-6: SETBACK:
There shall be a setback of not less than twenty feet (20'); provided, however,
that where lots comprising twenty five percent (25%) or more of the frontage of
any block are developed with buildings having a predominant setback, no
building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall project beyond the
predominant setback line so established; provided further, that this regulation
shall not be interpreted so as to require a setback of more than fifty feet
(50'). (1997 Code § 17.12.060)
11-5A-7: CORNER LOTS:
On corner lots, the front of the building shall comply with the setback
requirement of the street upon which the front of the building faces. The side
of the building shall be set back as per the requirements for the setback for
the front of the building. (1997 Code § 17.12.070)
11-5A-8: LOT AREA:
Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall provide a lot
area of not less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet per family. (1997 Code
§ 17.12.080)
11-5A-9: FINISH:
All structures, including accessory buildings or structures, shall be finished
in a neat and workmanlike manner by paint, stucco or other finish suitable for
the type of materials used in their construction. (1997 Code § 17.12.090)
ARTICLE B.  A RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-5B-1: Permitted Uses And Regulations
11-5B-2: Dwelling Area Per Family
11-5B-3: Height
11-5B-4: Rear Yard
11-5B-5: Side Yard
11-5B-6: Setback
11-5B-7: Corner Lots
11-5B-8: Lot Area Per Family
11-5B-9: Finish
11-5B-1: PERMITTED USES AND REGULATIONS:
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or
structurally altered, unless otherwise provided for in this title, except for
one or more of the following uses:
   A.   Any use permitted in AA residence district.
   B.   The keeping of not more than two (2) roomers, boarders, convalescent
patients or tourists for compensation in a single-family dwelling.
   C.   Home occupations:
      1.   Customary home offices when situated in the same dwelling or garage;
provided, that the office is not used for a general practice, but only
occasionally in conjunction with a principal office elsewhere.
      2.   Computer based or telecommunications based businesses when all work
is done by telecommunications or satellite, and home visits by business
associates, clients or customers is only incidental and is not on a regular
basis.
      3.   Foster family care of not more than two (2) children simultaneously.
      4.   Home visits for all businesses allowed or granted shall be only
incidental to the operation of the business, with the exception of daycare,
homecare and private instruction, in which case home visits may be on a regular
basis, but only incidental; included shall be studio room use for music, voice,
dance, art, or academic instruction of not more than two (2) students at any
one time.
      5.   Daycare homes, staffed by occupant only, as permitted under Colorado
state regulations.
      6.   Single operator custom millinery, tailoring, sewing of fabric for
custom apparel and custom home furnishings and upholstering.
   D.   All home occupations permitted in subsection C of this section shall be
subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   Such use shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling or garage and
carried on by the inhabitants thereof and no others.
      2.   Such use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
building for dwelling or garage purposes and shall not change the character
thereof.
      3.   Such office shall not constitute over fifty percent (50%) of the
first floor space, daycare homes excluded.
      4.   There shall be no advertising signs or other display or indications
of home occupation.
      5.   There shall be no retaining or wholesaling of stock, supplies or
products conducted on the premises.
      6.   There shall be no exterior storage on the premises of material used
in the home occupation, nor any highly explosive, toxic or combustible
material.
      7.   There shall be no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors,
heat, or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line.
      8.   There shall be no body or mechanical repair of motor vehicles, to
include any modification, assembly or painting of motor vehicles nor repair of
internal combustion engines.
      9.   Should any home occupation be granted by variance that includes
studios or rooms for instruction, it shall provide additional off street
parking adequate to accommodate all needs created by the home occupation.
      10.   The hours of such uses and such occupation and the manner of such
use and noise are not such as to interfere with the peace, quiet or dignity of
the neighborhood and the adjoining properties. (1997 Code § 17.16.010)
11-5B-2: DWELLING AREA PER FAMILY:
The total dwelling area per family shall not be less than one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet of living area above grade, excluding basement.
(1997 Code § 17.16.020)
11-5B-3: HEIGHT:
No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed thirty five
feet (35') in height nor two (2) stories above the foundation or basement.
(1997 Code § 17.16.030)
11-5B-4: REAR YARD:
There shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet (10'). (1997 Code §
17.16.040)
11-5B-5: SIDE YARD:
There shall be a side yard on each side of a building not less than five feet
(5') in width, except that an existing structure may be rebuilt, structurally
altered, or extended along the same line, within the five foot (5') limit,
provided the structure is no closer to the adjoining property line than was the
original structure and provided it is completed within two (2) years of the
time the existing structure is removed or construction commenced. (1997 Code §
17.16.050)
11-5B-6: SETBACK:
There shall be a setback of not less than twenty feet (20'); provided, however,
that where lots comprising twenty five percent (25%) or more of the frontage of
any block are developed with buildings having a predominant setback, no
building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall project beyond the
predominant setback line so established; provided further, that this regulation
shall not be interpreted so as to require a setback of more than fifty feet
(50'). (1997 Code § 17.16.060)
11-5B-7: CORNER LOTS:
On corner lots, the dwelling shall set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from
the front of the lot, subject to provisions in setback, as provided in section
11-5B-6 of this article, and no setback from the street side of the lot. (1997
Code § 17.16.070)
11-5B-8: LOT AREA PER FAMILY:
Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall provide a lot
area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet per family; provided,
however, that where a lot has less than herein required, as shown by the last
recorded sale at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this
title, the lot may be occupied by not more than one family. (1997 Code §
17.16.080)
11-5B-9: FINISH:
All structures, including accessory buildings and structures, shall be finished
in a neat and workmanlike manner by paint, stucco or other finish suitable for
the type of materials used in their construction. (1997 Code § 17.16.090)
ARTICLE C.  B RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-5C-1: Permitted Uses And Regulations
11-5C-2: Dwelling Area Per Family
11-5C-3: Height
11-5C-4: Rear Yard
11-5C-5: Side Yard
11-5C-6: Setback
11-5C-7: Corner Lots
11-5C-8: Lot Area Per Dwelling
11-5C-9: Finish
11-5C-1: PERMITTED USES AND REGULATIONS:
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or
structurally altered, unless otherwise provided for in this title, except for
one or more of the following uses:
   A.   Any use permitted in the A residence district.
   B.   Churches.
   C.   Two-family dwellings.
   D.   Home occupations. Customary home occupation of a physician, dentist or
other professional person or artist when situated in the same dwelling;
provided, that:
      1.   The office is conducted in conjunction with the use of a dwelling
unit as a home occupant.
      2.   The office is not used for a general practice of medicine, surgery,
dentistry, osteopathic or chiropractic treatment, but may be used for
consultation as an adjunct to a principal office located elsewhere.
      3.   The hours of such uses and such office and the manner of use and
noise are not such as to interfere with the peace, quiet or dignity of the
neighborhood and the adjoining properties.
   E.   Home occupations subject to the restrictions in subsection 11-5B-1D of
this chapter (A residence district regulations):
      1.   Daycare homes for two (2) elder adults in addition to residents of
the dwelling.
      2.   Placard style window signs only are allowed and must be preapproved.
Size cannot exceed one point five feet by two feet (1.5' x 2') in size. (1997
Code § 17.20.010)
11-5C-2: DWELLING AREA PER FAMILY:
The total dwelling area per family shall be not less than one thousand (1,000)
square feet measured on the outside walls. (1997 Code § 17.20.020)
11-5C-3: HEIGHT:
No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed thirty five
feet (35') in height nor two (2) stories above the foundation level or
basement. (1997 Code § 17.20.030)
11-5C-4: REAR YARD:
There shall be a rear yard not less than ten feet (10'). (1997 Code §
17.20.040)
11-5C-5: SIDE YARD:
There shall be a side yard on each side of a building not less than five feet
(5') in width, except that an existing structure may be rebuilt, structurally
altered, or extended along the same line, within the five foot (5') limit,
provided the structure is no closer to the adjoining property line than was the
original structure and provided it is completed within two (2) years of the
time the existing structure is removed or construction commenced. (1997 Code §
17.20.050)
11-5C-6: SETBACK:
There shall be a setback of not less than twenty feet (20'); provided, however,
that where lots comprising twenty five percent (25%) or more of the frontage of
any block are developed with buildings having a predominant setback, no
buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall project beyond the
predominant setback line so established; provided further, that this regulation
shall not be interpreted so as to require a setback of more than forty feet
(40'). (1997 Code § 17.20.060)
11-5C-7: CORNER LOTS:
The regulations for the A residence district shall apply here. (1997 Code §
17.20.070)
11-5C-8: LOT AREA PER DWELLING:
Every dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall provide a lot
area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet; provided, however, that
where a lot has less area than herein required, as shown by the last recorded
sale at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this title, the
lot may be occupied by not more than one family. (1997 Code § 17.20.080)
11-5C-9: FINISH:
All structures, including accessory buildings and structures, shall be finished
in a neat and workmanlike manner by paint, stucco or other finish suitable for
the type of materials used in their construction. (1997 Code § 17.20.090)
ARTICLE D.  C RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-5D-1: Permitted Uses And Regulations
11-5D-2: Dwelling Area Per Family
11-5D-3: Height
11-5D-4: Side Yard
11-5D-5: Setback
11-5D-6: Corner Lots
11-5D-7: Lot Area Per Family
11-5D-8: Parking
11-5D-9: Finish
11-5D-1: PERMITTED USES AND REGULATIONS:
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or
structurally altered unless otherwise provided for in this title, except one or
more of the following uses:
   A.   Any use permitted in the B residence district.
   B.   Apartment houses.
   C.   Hotels.
   D.   Hospitals, clinics and professional and business offices.
   E.   Boarding and rooming houses.
   F.   Daycare centers and institutions of an educational, philanthropic or
eleemosynary nature.
   G.   Private clubs, fraternities, lodges, excepting those of which the chief
activity is a service customarily carried on as a business.
   H.   Accessory buildings and uses incident to any of the above uses when
located on the same lot and not involving the conduct of a business.
   I.   Mortuaries.
   J.   The keeping of not more than two (2) roomers, boarders, convalescent
patients or tourists for compensation in a single-family dwelling.
   K.   The selling of products and craftwork manufactured and created by the
occupant.
   L.   One operator beauty shops.
   M.   Fine arts studios.
   N.   All signs must be preapproved, and cannot exceed four feet by six feet
(4' x 6') in size. (1997 Code § 17.24.010)
11-5D-2: DWELLING AREA PER FAMILY:
The total dwelling area per family shall not be less than eight hundred (800)
square feet, measured on the outside walls. (1997 Code § 17.24.020)
11-5D-3: HEIGHT:
No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed forty feet
(40') or more than three (3) stories in height. (1997 Code § 17.24.030)
11-5D-4: SIDE YARD:
There shall be a side yard on each side of a building not less than five feet
(5') in width, except that an existing structure may be rebuilt, structurally
altered, or extended along the same line, within the five foot (5') limit,
provided the structure is no closer to the adjoining property line than was the
original structure and provided it is completed within two (2) years of the
time the existing structure is removed or construction commenced; provided
further, that on a lot having a width of less than forty feet (40') as shown by
the last recorded sale, there shall be a side yard on each side of a building
of not less than three feet (3') in width, subject to the same conditions as to
rebuilding, structural alteration or extension. (1997 Code § 17.24.040)
11-5D-5: SETBACK:
There shall be a setback of not less than twenty feet (20') subject to the
provision in regard to predominant setback in the B residence district. (1997
Code § 17.24.050)
11-5D-6: CORNER LOTS:
The same as requirements for B residence district. (1997 Code § 17.24.060)
11-5D-7: LOT AREA PER FAMILY:
For one- and/or two-family dwellings, the minimum lot area per family shall be
two thousand seven hundred fifty (2,750) square feet. For apartment houses, the
minimum lot area per family shall be five hundred (500) square feet. (1997 Code
§ 17.24.070)
11-5D-8: PARKING:
For apartment houses, the owner shall provide off street parking for at least
one automobile for each family dwelling unit. (1997 Code § 17.24.080)
11-5D-9: FINISH:
All structures, including accessory buildings and structures, shall be finished
in a neat and workmanlike manner by paint, stucco or other finish suitable for
the type of materials used in their construction. (1997 Code § 17.24.090)
ARTICLE E.  D BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-5E-1: Permitted Uses And Regulations
11-5E-2: Height
11-5E-3: Side Yard
11-5E-4: Setback
11-5E-5: Lot Area Per Family
11-5E-1: PERMITTED USES AND REGULATIONS:
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or
structurally altered unless otherwise provided for in this title, except for
one or more of the following uses:
   A.   Any use permitted in the C residence district.
   B.   Retail business stores and shops.
   C.   Banks, office buildings, studios and hotels.
   D.   Gasoline and oil service stations.
   E.   Restaurant, cafes, tearooms and other places serving food.
   F.   Theaters and amusement houses.
   G.   Personal offices, or service shops, such as barber, shoeshine, beauty
parlors.
   H.   Public buildings, assembly halls or auditoriums.
   I.   Baking confectionery, dressmaking, dyeing, laundry, tailoring,
upholstery, cleaning or other similar establishments, provided all foods or
other products manufactured or processed shall be sold at retail on the
premises; and further provided, that all such manufacturing or processing shall
be done on the premises.
   J.   Bus stations, garages, automobile sales rooms and parking lots, trailer
sales lots, used car lots, taxi stands.
   K.   Feed and seed stores.
   L.   Cottage camps or motels.
   M.   Retail cold storage locker plants, provided slaughtering activities
shall not be permitted.
   N.   Any similar lawful use which, in the opinion of the board of adjustment
is not objectionable to nearby property by reason of odor, dust, smoke fumes,
gas, noise or vibration, or is not hazardous to the health and property of the
surrounding area through danger of fire or explosion. (1997 Code § 17.28.010)
11-5E-2: HEIGHT:
No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed forty feet
(40') or three (3) stories in height. (1997 Code § 17.28.020)
11-5E-3: SIDE YARD:
For business buildings, no side yard shall be required; but if provided, shall
be not less than five feet (5'). For residences, the side yard shall be the
same as required in the C residence district. (1997 Code § 17.28.030)
11-5E-4: SETBACK:
There are no setback requirements for a business building. For residence
buildings, the setback shall be the same as in the C residence district. (1997
Code § 17.28.040)
11-5E-5: LOT AREA PER FAMILY:
For one- and/or two-family dwellings, the minimum lot area per family shall be
two thousand seven hundred fifty (2,750) square feet. For apartment houses, the
minimum lot area per family shall be five hundred (500) square feet. (1997 Code
§ 17.28.050)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE F.  E INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-5F-1: Permitted Uses And Regulations
11-5F-1: PERMITTED USES AND REGULATIONS:
Buildings and land may be used for any purpose whatsoever, not in conflict with
any ordinance of the town regulating nuisances; provided, however, that no
building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following uses
until and unless the locations of such uses shall have been approved by the
board of adjustment:
A. Stockyard or slaughter of animals or fowl.
B. Explosives, manufacture or storage.
C. Petroleum refining or processing.
D. Garbage, offal or dead animal reduction or dumping.
E. The processing, disposal, storage or manufacture of anything which in itself
by process of manufacture or in its completed stage is noxious, constitutes a
fire hazard or is dangerous for any reason. (1997 Code § 17.32.010)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE G.  R RANCHETTE DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-5G-1: Permitted Uses And Regulations
11-5G-2: Dwelling Area Per Family
11-5G-3: Height
11-5G-4: Improvement Location
11-5G-5: Lot Area
11-5G-6: Sanitary Sewer
11-5G-7: Livestock; Fencing
11-5G-8: Roads And Drainage
11-5G-1: PERMITTED USES AND REGULATIONS:
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or
structurally altered, unless as provided in this title, except for one or more
of the following uses:
   A.   One-family dwelling.
   B.   Schools (elementary and high).
   C.   Churches; provided, that before a new church may be constructed upon
the property, where no church was there before located, the written consent of
sixty percent (60%) of the persons owning property within three hundred feet
(300') of such location shall first be obtained.
   D.   Accessory buildings not to exceed three (3) in number including a
garage. Any structure, garage, barn, shed, stall or other outbuilding shall be
attached to permanent cement footing, caisson, and/or pole foundation. (1997
Code § 17.10.010)
11-5G-2: DWELLING AREA PER FAMILY:
Each residential structure shall be a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square
feet measured on the outside walls. A two- story home or larger must have a
minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet on ground floor level and a minimum
of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of living space. (1997 Code §
17.10.020)
11-5G-3: HEIGHT:
No buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed thirty five
feet (35') in height or more than two (2) stories above foundations or
basement. (1997 Code § 17.10.030)
11-5G-4: IMPROVEMENT LOCATION:
No structure shall be erected less than ten feet (10') from the property line
on all sides. (1997 Code § 17.10.040)
11-5G-5: LOT AREA:
Lots will be a minimum of two and one-half (21/2) acres which shall include
rights of way for roads, water line and utility easements. (1997 Code §
17.10.050)
11-5G-6: SANITARY SEWER:
It is understood that current regulations of the Colorado department of health
permit a septic tank on any property containing two and one-half (21/2) acres
or more. The owners of property in this zone shall be required to install and
maintain their own septic system, leachfield and associated waste disposal
facility which will comply with the rules and regulations of the Northeast
Colorado health department and shall be approved by them before installation.
The town shall have no obligation to provide sanitary sewer services to any
lot. (1997 Code § 17.10.060)
11-5G-7: LIVESTOCK; FENCING:
   A.   Animal Units Limited: No more than five (5) animal units shall be
maintained, pastured or held at any one time. An "animal unit" is defined as
one horse or cow, three (3) hogs and sheep, and ten (10) chickens or turkeys.
   B.   Lots Maintained Odor And Nuisance Free: All lots shall be maintained
free from odor or other livestock associated nuisances. All manure from
livestock shall be maintained, used and/or disposed of in such a manner to keep
any odor from becoming a nuisance. All stables, corrals, and other structures
must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
   C.   Overgrazing: Overgrazing shall not be permitted on any lot. (1997 Code
§ 17.10.070)
   D.   Fencing: No livestock or domestic animal shall be allowed to run or fly
at large upon the property of another. Any property owner keeping domestic
animals shall be responsible for providing adequate fencing to keep the
livestock within the owner's property. No fencing shall be located within the
established road and/or utility easement areas. (1997 Code § 17.10.080)
11-5G-8: ROADS AND DRAINAGE:
It is understood that the person or persons seeking this zoning shall provide
for adequate drainage of the property and the town will have no obligation to
pave the dedicated streets. (1997 Code § 17.10.090)
CHAPTER 6
MOBILE HOMES, MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS AND PARKS
ARTICLE A.  MOBILE HOMES GENERALLY
SECTION:
11-6A-1: Purpose
11-6A-2: Definitions
11-6A-3: Location Of Mobile Homes
11-6A-4: Procedure For New Mobile Home Development
11-6A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter and chapter 7 of this title, is to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the people of the town. Furthermore, it is the
intent of said chapters and articles to achieve the following:
   A.   To make provision for an alternative choice in housing.
   B.   To encourage efficient and functional use of land for mobile home parks
and subdivisions.
   C.   To minimize potential impacts on surrounding land uses through the site
plan process. (1997 Code § 17.36.010)
11-6A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases in this chapter and chapter 7 of this title have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The designated building inspector of the town.
COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission of the town.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision intended as a unit for transfer of property
ownership or for development.
MOBILE HOME: Manufactured housing designated for long term residential use and
built on a chassis so that it can be transported to a site and be connected to
public utility systems.
MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT: A mobile home park or a mobile home subdivision.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land under single ownership or control, and
licensed as a mobile home park as provided for in this chapter.
MOBILE HOME PARK PERMITS: A written permit issued by the building official
permitting the construction, alteration or operation of a mobile home park.
MOBILE HOME SPACE: A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the
accommodation of one mobile home.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed and intended to provide
individual lots for residential occupancy in a mobile home.
TOWN BOARD: The town board of trustees.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle designed primarily for use as a portable temporary
dwelling unit for travel, recreational or camping purposes, either self-
propelled or mounted on or towed by another powered vehicle.
TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: An area clearly defined and separate from a mobile home
park area, with individual parking spaces for not less than twenty (20) travel
trailers, which may or may not have facilities for a temporary hookup of
electrical and plumbing outlets, commonly known as a camping area. (1997 Code §
17.36.020; amd. 2016 Code)
11-6A-3: LOCATION OF MOBILE HOMES:
   A.   Location In Mobile Home Developments: Mobile homes shall be located in
mobile home developments approved by the town in accordance with procedures set
forth in this chapter. The location and establishment of mobile home
developments shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this title.
Further, no mobile home shall be occupied for dwelling purposes unless the
mobile home is properly placed in a mobile home space or lot and is connected
to water, sewage, electric and gas utilities as appropriate.
   B.   Parking Outside Developments Restricted: Except as otherwise provided
for in this code, no mobile home shall be parked anywhere in the town. (1997
Code § 17.36.030)
11-6A-4: PROCEDURE FOR NEW MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Site Plan Submittal And Approval: Before any permits can be issued for
construction of a mobile home development, a site plan shall be submitted and
approved by the town board.
   B.   Approval Of Subdivision Plat: Applicants for mobile home subdivisions,
in addition to meeting site plan requirements as stated in subsection A of this
section, shall obtain town board approval of a subdivision plat in accordance
with the provisions of the land subdivision regulations of the town.
   C.   Existing Parks:
      1.   Not Affected: Mobile home parks legally existing on the date of
adoption of this chapter shall not be affected by the provisions of this
chapter unless:
         a.   An expansion of the park is requested; or
         b.   An increase in the number of mobile home spaces over that
approved on their mobile home park permit requested.
      2.   Annual Licensing And Fees: Mobile home parks legally existing on the
date of adoption of this chapter shall be subject to the annual licensing
process and fees as set forth in this chapter. (1997 Code § 17.36.040)
ARTICLE B.  MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
11-6B-1: Applicability
11-6B-2: Bulk Requirements
11-6B-3: Off Street Parking Requirements
11-6B-4: Street And Sidewalk Design Standards
11-6B-5: Utility Design Requirements
11-6B-6: Building Code Requirements
11-6B-7: Homeowners' Association
11-6B-1: APPLICABILITY:
The following standards and requirements shall apply to mobile home
subdivisions. (1997 Code § 17.36.050)
11-6B-2: BULK REQUIREMENTS:
The following are the minimum requirements for mobile home subdivisions.
Aesthetic, environmental or facility design may necessitate exceeding the
minimum specified.
   A.   Parcel size: Five (5) acres.
   B.   Parcel street frontage: Fifty feet (50').
   C.   Singlewide unit lot size: Four thousand (4,000) square feet.
   D.   Singlewide unit lot frontage: Forty feet (40').
   E.   Doublewide unit lot space: Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
   F.   Doublewide unit lot frontage: Fifty feet (50').
   G.   Front setback from property line: Fifteen feet (15').
   H.   Rear setback: Ten feet (10').
   I.   Side setback: Five feet (5').
   J.   Usable open space per lot: One thousand two hundred (1,200) square
feet.
   K.   Side and rear spacing of mobile homes shall provide for a minimum of
twenty feet (20') between units.
   L.   The required lot frontage may be measured along the front setback line;
provided, however, the lot width at the street line, as measured in a straight
line where the lot lines intersect the street lines, is a minimum of twenty
feet (20').
   M.   Only one mobile home dwelling unit shall be allowed on each lot. (1997
Code § 17.36.060)
11-6B-3: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every mobile home lot shall include two (2) paved off street parking
spaces located five feet (5') to the rear of the front lot line. In order to
meet this requirement, tandem parking design can be utilized.
   B.   Where open space community facilities or other amenity is provided,
provision shall be made for user parking off the street in accordance with the
provision of this title. (1997 Code § 17.36.070)
11-6B-4: STREET AND SIDEWALK DESIGN STANDARDS:
All streets in the mobile home subdivision shall be dedicated to the public and
built to town street construction standards and specifications, and also the
following:
   A.   Sidewalk width shall be four feet (4') plus a one foot (1') gutter pan.
   B.   The cul-de-sac right of way diameter shall be eighty feet (80'). (1997
Code § 17.36.080)
11-6B-5: UTILITY DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
All public facilities shall be installed underground in accordance with the
uniform plumbing code of the Colorado department of health, the national
electrical code and town standards for single-family residential service. (1997
Code § 17.36.090)
11-6B-6: BUILDING CODE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Certification: All mobile homes in mobile home subdivisions shall be
certified as meeting the mobile home construction and safety standards of the
U.S. department of housing and urban development.
   B.   Permit Requirements; Fees:
      1.   Prior to moving any mobile home into a mobile home subdivision, the
owner or the other authorized person shall obtain a permit issued by the
building inspector. The permit shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) days
following its issuance. No permit shall be issued to set up a mobile home
unless the mobile home to be set up is in conformance with the approved site
plan of the mobile home subdivision. This permit shall include provisions that
the mobile home owner shall be responsible for any damages to streets,
sidewalks or other public areas or structures within the mobile home
subdivision that may be caused in moving the mobile home onto the lot.
      2.   A permit shall be required to move a mobile home from a mobile home
lot. The building inspector shall issue these permits and the permit shall
include provisions that the owner shall be responsible for any damages to
streets, sidewalks or other public areas or structures within the mobile home
subdivision that may be caused in moving the mobile home from a lot. The permit
shall also be conditioned upon proper disconnection from public utilities.
      3.   Fees for any of the permits required by this section shall be
established by the town board by resolution from time to time.
   C.   Skirting: Skirting of an acceptable quality shall be attached to all
mobile homes within ninety (90) days of the date of issuance of the permit.
   D.   Tie Down Requirements: Mobile homes shall be tied down in accordance
with the stabilization and anchorage instructions furnished by the mobile home
manufacturers.
   E.   Inspection; Certificate Of Occupancy: Prior to occupancy, the building
inspector shall inspect each mobile home to determine compliance with this
article. No occupancy shall be permitted or certificate of occupancy issued
until the inspection and all connections to public utilities have been made.
(1997 Code § 17.36.100)
11-6B-7: HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
All mobile home subdivision developers shall establish an association of
property owners. The association shall satisfy standards established by the
town board by resolution to include, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Mandatory participation in association of property owners to maintain
all common areas, buffer areas and vacant lots within the subdivision to
enforce restrictive covenants;
   B.   Binding effect on all future property owners;
   C.   Perpetual existence;
   D.   Unaffected by any change in zoning or land use;
   E.   Assurance of adequate maintenance;
   F.   Enforceable by the town by appropriate legal action; and
   G.   That if maintenance or preservation of common areas or lots no longer
complies with the provision of the association's document, the town shall take
all necessary action to assure compliance and assess the association all costs
incurred by the town for such purposes, including reasonable attorney fees.
(1997 Code § 17.36.110)
ARTICLE C.  MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION:
11-6C-1: Office And Register Required
11-6C-2: Permit Requirements; Fees
11-6C-3: Standards
11-6C-4: Bulk Requirements
11-6C-5: Space Markers
11-6C-6: Street Design Standards
11-6C-7: Off Street Parking
11-6C-8: Utility Design Requirements
11-6C-9: Mobile Home Stands
11-6C-10: Outdoor Living Area
11-6C-11: Tenant Storage
11-6C-12: Building Requirements
11-6C-13: Street Names And Addresses
11-6C-14: Solid Waste Disposal
11-6C-15: Revocation Of Permit
11-6C-1: OFFICE AND REGISTER REQUIRED:
   A.   Park Permit And Certificate Of Occupancy Posted: Every mobile home park
shall have an office in which a copy of the park permit and certificate of
occupancy shall be posted and the park registrar shall be kept in such office.
   B.   Register Of Occupancy: It shall be the duty of the owner to keep a
register of park occupancy which shall be current at all times and contain the
following information:
      1.   Full name and address in the park of the owner of the mobile home or
his tenant or agent;
      2.   The make, model, serial number, year and dimension of each mobile
home; and
      3.   The date of arrival and departure of each mobile home and
destination. (1997 Code § 17.36.260)
11-6C-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to construct, operate,
maintain or alter a mobile home park in the town without first having secured a
permit from the town to do so.
   B.   Application; Required Information: Application for a mobile home park
permit shall be made in writing to the town clerk and shall contain the
following information:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant.
      2.   The name and operator of the mobile home park.
      3.   A copy of the site plan to be approved by the town board and
recorded at the county clerk and recorder's office. Mobile home parks existing
on the date of adoption of this chapter shall utilize plans already on file
with the building inspector unless changes are required.
   C.   Certification Of Taxes And Assessments Paid: No permit may be issued
for a mobile home park unless a certificate is presented that shows all
property taxes, real and personal, and all special assessments have been paid
to date.
   D.   Term Of Permit; Fees: All annual operating permits shall expire on
April 30. Application for permit renewal shall be made at least thirty (30)
days prior to the expiration date. The application for such permit, or renewal
thereof, shall be accompanied by an annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for
the first twenty (20) mobile home spaces or part thereof, and two dollars fifty
cents ($2.50) for each additional mobile home space in the existing or proposed
mobile home park.
   E.   Permits Nontransferable: No mobile home park permit shall be
transferable or assignable.
   F.   Issuance: If the building inspector determines that the mobile home
park is in compliance with all provisions of this article and other applicable
regulations, he shall issue a mobile home park permit. (1997 Code § 17.36.120)
11-6C-3: STANDARDS:
The standards set out in this article shall apply to all mobile home parks
which shall be subject to review and approval through the site plan process.
(1997 Code § 17.36.130)
11-6C-4: BULK REQUIREMENTS:
The following are minimum requirements for all mobile home parks:
 
                 Park Site Mobile Home Space
Minimum area      5 acres   4,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 100 feet  40 feet, singlewide
 
   A.   Minimum Yards:
      1.   The distance between any building or mobile home from a property
line of the park shall be twenty feet (20').
      2.   The front setback of a mobile home, exclusive of the towing hitch,
shall be fifteen feet (15') from the back of the curb on interior streets or
drives.
      3.   Side and rear spacing shall provide for a distance of twenty feet
(20') between units.
      4.   There shall be a minimum setback of eighteen feet (18') between any
service facility or mobile home park permanent building and any mobile home.
(1997 Code § 17.36.140)
11-6C-5: SPACE MARKERS:
Each mobile home space shall be clearly marked on the ground by permanent
stakes, markers or other suitable means. (1997 Code § 17.36.150)
11-6C-6: STREET DESIGN STANDARDS:
All interior streets in mobile home parks shall be privately owned and
maintained by the mobile home park owner and shall be built to town street
construction standards and specifications, and also the following:
   A.   Sidewalk width shall be four feet (4') plus a one foot (1') gutter pan.
   B.   Cul-de-sac right of way diameter shall be eighty feet (80').
   C.   Paved walks shall be provided to each mobile home stand from the
street. (1997 Code § 17.36.160)
11-6C-7: OFF STREET PARKING:
   A.   Every mobile home park space shall have one paved off street parking
space adjacent to the mobile home stand. There shall be one additional
designated parking space for each mobile home space within one hundred feet
(100') of the space for exclusive use of its occupants.
   B.   Where open space, community facilities or other amenity is provided,
provision shall be made for user parking off the street in accordance with the
provisions of this title. (1997 Code § 17.36.170)
11-6C-8: UTILITY DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All public utilities shall be installed in accordance with the plumbing
code of the Colorado department of health, the national electrical code and
town standards.
   B.   Each mobile home shall have a separate meter for water service. (1997
Code § 17.36.180)
11-6C-9: MOBILE HOME STANDS:
   A.   The mobile home stand in the mobile home space shall be improved to
provide an adequate foundation for the placement and tie down of the mobile
home, to secure the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation and
overturning.
   B.   The mobile home stand shall not bear, shift or settle unevenly under
the weight of the mobile home due to frost action, inadequate drainage,
vibration or other forces acting on the superstructure.
   C.   The mobile home stand shall be provided with anchors and tie downs such
as cast in place concrete "dead men", eyelets imbedded in concrete foundations
or runways, screw augers, arrowhead anchors or other devices securing the
stability of the mobile home.
   D.   Anchors and tie downs shall be placed at least at each corner of the
mobile home stand and at the midpoints of the mobile home stand, for a total of
at least six (6) tie down points, each able to sustain a minimum tensile
strength of two thousand eight hundred (2,800) pounds.
   E.   The location of each mobile home stand shall be at such elevation,
distance and angle in relation to an access street that placement and removal
of the mobile home is practical. (1997 Code § 17.36.190)
11-6C-10: OUTDOOR LIVING AREA:
   A.   An outdoor living area shall be provided on each space equal to at
least ten percent (10%) of its area; provided, that in no case shall such area
be less than three hundred (300) square feet or required to be more than five
hundred (500) square feet.
   B.   Such outdoor living area shall be properly drained, located for
convenience and optimum use and walled, fenced or planted to provide reasonable
privacy. Within such area, a section suitably surfaced shall be provided, not
less than one hundred (100) square feet in area or ten feet (10') in width.
This section may be covered in whole or in part by a roof. (1997 Code §
17.36.200)
11-6C-11: TENANT STORAGE:
   A.   A separate uniform tenant storage structure shall be provided for each
space, located on each space or in compounds not more than one hundred feet
(100') from each mobile home stand serving no more than four (4) mobile homes.
   B.   There shall be a minimum of two hundred twenty four (224) cubic feet of
storage area provided for each mobile home space.
   C.   Design and location shall enhance the appearance of the park and the
structure shall be constructed of suitable weather resistant materials. (1997
Code § 17.36.210)
11-6C-12: BUILDING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   HUD Standards Not Required: Mobile homes in mobile home parks shall not
be required to meet department of housing and urban development standards.
   B.   Skirting: All mobile homes shall be skirted, but such skirting shall
not attach the mobile home permanently to the ground, provide a harborage for
rodents or create a fire hazard.
   C.   Additions:
      1.   Additions to increase the floor areas of mobile homes within the
mobile home park shall be permitted except that such additional room, including
cabanas, patios or porches, does not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the square
foot area of the mobile home.
      2.   All additions shall comply with minimum yard requirements, and a
building permit shall be required in advance for any such addition.
   D.   Inspection; Certificate Of Occupancy: Prior to occupancy, the building
inspector shall inspect each mobile home to determine compliance with this
article. No occupancy shall be permitted or certificate of occupancy issued
until the inspection and all connections to public utilities have been made.
Fees for this inspection shall be established by the town board from time to
time. (1997 Code § 17.36.220)
11-6C-13: STREET NAMES AND ADDRESSES:
All mobile home park streets shall be named on the plan submitted by the owner
for approval. Each space shall be numerically designated for address and mail
purposes and signs furnished and installed by mobile home owner. (1997 Code §
17.36.230)
11-6C-14: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Compliance With Town, State Or Federal Regulations: The owner of any
mobile home park shall be responsible for the promulgation and enforcement of
rules and regulations governing solid waste storage and handling that meet or
exceed town, state or federal regulations.
   B.   Container Requirements: The owner shall provide containers for the
storage of solid wastes awaiting collection. Containers are to be sized to
completely contain all solid wastes that are generated on the premises. Such
containers shall conform to all applicable town specifications of regulations
including size, sanitary conditions, physical conditions, and container
closure.
   C.   Container Location; Collection:
      1.   The owner shall provide an adequate location or locations for such
containers which shall facilitate the collection of solid wastes from the park.
Such locations shall be accessible to collection vehicles and to occupants of
the park.
      2.   The collection vehicle should be able to remain on a public street
or alley and be able to stop directly adjacent to the container location. If
private drives must be used, they should provide sufficient space around parked
vehicles for easy operation of the collection vehicle without backing the
vehicle.
   D.   Sanitary Condition Of Collection Points: The collection points,
including the containers located therein, shall be kept in a neat and sanitary
condition by the owner or his agent. (1997 Code § 17.36.240)
11-6C-15: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Owner Responsibility: It shall be the responsibility of the owner to
ensure that all requirements of this article are met and maintained.
   B.   Notice Of Violation: When it appears to the building inspector, the
chief of the fire department, or the chief of the police department that any
person holding a license under this article has violated any of the provisions
of this article or any health or safety regulation of the town, a written
notice shall be served upon such owner in person or by certified mail
specifying the violation of this article or any health or safety regulation and
requiring him to appear before the town board at a time specified therein not
less than ten (10) days after such service, and to show cause why such license
should not be suspended or revoked. At such time, the owner and the fire,
police and building inspector of the town may produce such evidence as may be
relevant to determine whether the violation contained in the charge has been
committed. If the town board finds that such violation has been committed, the
board shall also advise the owner and the owner shall be permitted to continue
operation, but if the town board finds from the evidence that such violation
has been committed, the board shall so advise the owner and may suspend or
revoke the license.
   C.   Operation Without License Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person
whose license has been revoked or suspended to operate, continue to operate or
offer to operate any mobile home park after the date of such revocation or
during the term of suspension, as the case may be. (1997 Code § 17.36.250)
ARTICLE D.  SITE PLAN
SECTION:
11-6D-1: Plan Contents
11-6D-2: Site Plan Requirements
11-6D-3: Site Plan Review Procedure
11-6D-1: PLAN CONTENTS:
Before any permit is issued for construction of a mobile home development, a
site plan and required documentation shall be submitted to and approved by the
town board. The plan shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor or
registered professional engineer and shall be drawn to a scale of no less than
one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and shall include, as a minimum,
the following:
   A.   North arrow, date of plan, engineer's scale and legend.
   B.   Boundaries and area of mobile home development, legal description of
property, and total spaces in the area.
   C.   Names of adjacent public streets, roads, and existing zoning of
adjacent property.
   D.   Name and address of fee owner and record owner of the proposed mobile
home development; and name, address and phone number of firm or individual
responsible for site plan.
   E.   Topography, showing existing and proposed grades, at one foot (1')
intervals.
   F.   All required setback lines, shown as dashed lines.
   G.   Landscaping and buffer areas.
   H.   Location and dimensions of all mobile home lots or spaces and a
schedule of units per acre.
   I.   Lot and block numbering system of lots or numbering system for each
mobile home space.
   J.   Location and dimension of existing and proposed rights of way,
easements and proposed street names.
   K.   Location and plan of any buildings to be constructed in the mobile home
development.
   L.   Surface drainage and storm sewer plan.
   M.   Paving and draining plans showing the directions and calculated
quantities of runoff. Street and drainage construction shall be to the
specifications of the town as to location and grade. Drainage improvements
shall be sufficient to contain drainage flows.
   N.   Plans and profiles of all roads and main storm drainage and sanitary
sewer facilities.
   O.   Location and dimension of trash disposal areas or enclosures.
   P.   Location and size of proposed water and sewer service connections.
   Q.   Either proposed homeowners' association and restrictive covenants for a
mobile home subdivision or tenant rules and regulations and plans for operation
of mobile home park. (1997 Code § 17.36.270)
11-6D-2: SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Traffic Flow: Principal vehicular points shall be designed to encourage
smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and minimum hazards to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. In general, minor streets shall not be
connected with the streets outside the district in such a way as to encourage
the use of such minor streets by substantial amounts of through traffic. No
site within the park shall have direct vehicular access to a street bordering
the development. There shall be at least two (2) connections to the public
street system.
   B.   Access For Pedestrians And Cyclists: Access for pedestrians and
cyclists to and from the mobile home development shall be by safe and
convenient routes. Such ways need not be adjacent or limited to the vicinity of
vehicular access points. Where there are crossings of such ways and vehicular
routes at the perimeters of mobile home developments, such crossings shall be
safely located, marked and controlled, and where such ways are exposed to
substantial vehicular traffic, safeguards may be required to prevent crossings
except at designated points. Bicycle paths, if provided, shall be related to
the pedestrian way system that street crossings are combined.
   C.   Buffers And Screening:
      1.   Where mobile home developments adjoin public streets located along
exterior boundaries, a landscaped buffer at least ten feet (10') wide shall
satisfy open space requirements for individual dwellings, but shall not contain
carports, recreational shelters, storage structures, or any other structures
generally prohibited in yards adjacent to streets in residential districts. No
direct vehicular access to individual lots shall be permitted through such
yards, and no group parking facilities or active recreation areas shall be
allowed therein.
      2.   Where mobile home developments are so located that one or more
boundaries adjoin neighboring residential districts without an intervening
street, alley or other permanent open space at least twenty feet (20') in
width, a buffer at least ten feet (10') wide shall be provided.
      3.   Along the perimeter of mobile home developments, walls or vegetative
screening shall be provided where needed to protect residents from undesirable
views, lighting, noise or other off site influences, or to separate occupants
of adjoining residential districts from the potentially inconsistent land use
characteristics of mobile home parks and residential districts. In particular,
extensive off street parking areas and service areas for loading and unloading
of other than passenger vehicles, and storage and collection of trash and
garbage, shall be screened.
   D.   Lighting: In mobile home parks only, adequate light shall be provided
to illuminate streets, driveways and walkways for the safe movement of vehicles
and pedestrians at night. (1997 Code § 17.36.280)
11-6D-3: SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE:
   A.   Mobile Home Development:
      1.   Plan Submission; Fee: The site plan of the proposed mobile home
development shall be submitted in six (6) copies to the building official. The
fee to be paid at submittal shall be determined by the town board by resolution
from time to time.
      2.   Decision Of Town Board: The town board may receive the site plan at
a regular meeting after it determines that the site plan is complete. The town
board shall approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the site plan within
sixty five (65) days after date of receipt of the site plan.
      3.   Site Plan Binding: The site plan as approved by the town board shall
be binding and shall not be changed during the construction of the mobile home
development. Substantial changes from an approved plan shall be approved by the
town board.
   B.   Mobile Home Subdivision: In the case of a mobile home subdivision, the
requirements of the site plan and site plan approval may be incorporated into
any required plat and considered as one document. (1997 Code § 17.36.290)
CHAPTER 7
TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS AND PUBLIC CAMPGROUNDS
ARTICLE A.  TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
SECTION:
11-7A-1: Enforcement; Right Of Entry
11-7A-2: Licensing Requirements; Fees
11-7A-3: Parking Travel Trailers And Motor Homes
11-7A-4: General Park Requirements
11-7A-1: ENFORCEMENT; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
   A.   Enforcement: It is the duty of the building inspector to enforce all
provisions of this article, except as otherwise provided herein. (1997 Code §
17.36.330)
   B.   Right Of Entry; Inspection: For such purpose, the building inspector or
his duly authorized representative shall have the right and be empowered to
enter any premises on which any mobile home or travel trailer is located, or is
about to be located, and to inspect the same and all accommodations connected
therewith at reasonable times. (1997 Code § 17.36.330; amd. 2016 Code)
11-7A-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   A.   License Required; Term; Certificate Of Occupancy:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain or
permit to be established, operated or maintained upon any property owned or
controlled by such person, a travel trailer park in the town, without having
first secured a license from the town board to do so.
      2.   Prior to issuance of the initial license for a travel trailer park,
the building inspector shall determine that the applicant has complied with the
provisions of this article and this title.
      3.   The certificate of occupancy shall be attached to the register of
such park and a copy shall be maintained on file in the office of the town
clerk.
      4.   All licenses shall expire on April 30. Application for license
renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration.
   B.   Application For License; Fees:
      1.   The application for such license, or the renewal thereof, shall be
filed with the building official and shall be accompanied by an annual fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first twenty (20) travel trailer spaces, or part
thereof, and two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) for each additional travel trailer
space in the existing or proposed travel trailer park. The cost of any license
having less than six (6) months to run before the expiration date, as herein
provided, shall be reduced by fifty percent (50%).
      2.   The application for a license, or a renewal thereof, shall be made
on forms furnished by the town clerk and shall include the name, address and
signature of the owner in fee of the tract; name, address, and signature of
applicant, if other than owner; and legal description of the premises upon
which the travel trailer park is, or will be, located.
   C.   Plan Approval: No license may be issued for a travel trailer park
unless the plans for such park have been approved according to the requirements
of this title.
   D.   Proof Of Payment Of Taxes And Assessments: No license may be issued for
a travel trailer park unless a certificate is presented that shows that
property taxes, real and personal, and all special assessments have been paid
to date.
   E.   License Nontransferable: No license issued for a travel trailer park
shall be transferable or assignable.
   F.   Responsibilities Of Park Owner: The owner or operator of a travel
trailer park shall be, and at all times remain, responsible for all utilities
and buildings, thereon.
   G.   Revocation Of License: A license issued to a travel trailer park may be
revoked in accordance with the provisions of section
11-6C-15 of this title. (1997 Code § 17.36.300)
11-7A-3: PARKING TRAVEL TRAILERS AND MOTOR HOMES:
No travel trailer, motor home, camper coach, camper trailer, trailer coach or
the like, whether self-propelled or without motive power, either attached to or
detached from the towing vehicle, shall park or be parked within the town,
except in a licensed and approved travel trailer park as specified by this
article, or upon any alley or public ground within the town; nor shall the same
be parked on any street or streets within the town for a period in excess of
seventy two (72) hours within any seven (7) consecutive days; provided,
however, this section shall not be construed to prohibit the parking of
uninhabited, unused travel trailers, motor homes, or the like, upon private
property for the purpose of storage or sale when done so in compliance with all
other applicable provisions of this article. (1997 Code § 17.36.310)
11-7A-4: GENERAL PARK REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Service Building:
      1.   Travel trailer parks shall each provide a service building
containing separate showers and sanitary facilities within two hundred feet
(200') of any travel trailer parking space. (1997 Code § 17.36.320)
      2.   The service building shall be constructed to the requirements of the
international building code as adopted by the town, and requirements of the
Colorado department of health. (1997 Code § 17.36.320; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Utility Hookups; Disposal Of Human Excrement: Each travel trailer space
shall provide a utility hookup, including electricity, water and sewer, for
each travel trailer. No toilet, washing or bathing facility within the travel
trailer shall be used unless it is connected with the town sanitary sewer or is
a self-contained unit. No human excrement, wash water, garbage or trash shall
be deposited or thrown on the ground.
   C.   Size Of Individual Spaces: The site of individual spaces for parking of
travel trailers shall be a minimum size of twenty feet by sixty feet (20' x
60').
   D.   Time Limit For Parking: Travel trailers shall not occupy a parking site
in such a park for more than thirty (30) days from initial occupancy.
   E.   Maintenance Of Service Buildings And Grounds: All service buildings and
the grounds of the park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and
kept free of any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the
public, or constitute a nuisance or fire hazard.
   F.   Mobile Home Used As Caretaker Office Or Residence: One mobile home may
be placed in a travel trailer park and occupied as a residence or office by the
caretaker or owner of the park. Such mobile home shall comply with the
provisions of this article.
   G.   Solid Waste Storage And Handling: The owner of any travel trailer park
shall be responsible for the promulgation and enforcement of rules and
regulations governing solid waste storage and handling that will meet or exceed
town, state and federal regulations.
      1.   The owner shall provide containers for storage of solid wastes
awaiting collection. Containers are to be sized to completely contain all solid
wastes that are generated on the park. Such containers must conform to all
applicable town specifications or regulations including, but not limited to,
size, sanitary conditions, physical conditions and container closure.
      2.   The owner shall provide an adequate location or locations for such
containers which shall facilitate the collection of solid wastes from the
premises. Such locations shall be accessible to collection crews and occupants
of the premises. The collection vehicle should be able to remain on a public
street or alley and to stop directly adjacent to the container location. If
private drives must be used, they should provide sufficient space around parked
vehicles for each operation of the collection vehicle without backing the
vehicle.
      3.   The collection points, including the containers located therein,
shall be kept in a neat and sanitary condition by the owner or his agent. (1997
Code § 17.36.320)
ARTICLE B.  PUBLIC CAMPGROUNDS
SECTION:
11-7B-1: Definitions
11-7B-2: Length Of Stay
11-7B-3: Charges
11-7B-4: Camping Spaces
11-7B-5: Litter
11-7B-6: Fires
11-7B-7: Violations; Penalties
11-7B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
DAY: A twenty four (24) hour period, or any part thereof.
PUBLIC CAMPGROUND: A public area maintained, operated and controlled by the
town to provide for the overnight camping of tourists and other travelers,
designed primarily to provide space for travel trailers and tents. (1997 Code §
17.36.340)
11-7B-2: LENGTH OF STAY:
It is unlawful for any person to occupy any space in any public campground for
longer than seven (7) consecutive days. A person shall be deemed to have
occupied space within the campground for one full day if he has occupied space
in the campground for any part of a day. However, for a break to occur in the
occupation of a space, a person must have removed himself and his tent, trailer
or other shelter or accommodations for one full day. (1997 Code § 17.36.350)
11-7B-3: CHARGES:
   A.   The first twenty four (24) hours of occupancy shall be free. (1997 Code
§ 17.36.360)
   B.   Thereafter, a charge established by board of trustees by resolution
from time to time shall be levied and paid in advance for occupancy of each
space for each day or part thereof. (1997 Code § 17.36.360; amd. 2016 Code)
11-7B-4: CAMPING SPACES:
   A.   All public campgrounds shall be divided into spaces which shall be
appropriately marked and to be readily apparent.
   B.   All vehicles, travel trailers and tents shall be placed or parked in
such spaces and no other place in the public campgrounds. (1997 Code §
17.36.370)
11-7B-5: LITTER:
It is unlawful for any person to place, throw or in any other manner deposit
upon any public campground any waste, garbage, refuse, excrement or litter of
any nature whatsoever, and all persons shall keep the area around their vehicle
and within the space occupied by them free from all debris and litter of any
nature. (1997 Code § 17.36.380)
11-7B-6: FIRES:
It is unlawful for any persons to build any fires on any public campgrounds
except in places specifically provided therefor. (1997 Code § 17.36.390)
11-7B-7: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person who violates any provision of this article
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1997 Code § 17.36.400; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Each Day Separate Violation: Each day any person occupies a space
within a public campground beyond seven (7) consecutive days, as provided in
this article, shall be deemed a separate violation of this article.
   C.   Removal Of Violators From Campground: In addition to any other remedies
in this article, the town, through its police department, may remove any
violators from the public campgrounds and exclude them therefrom. If the
violators, upon request, refuse to remove themselves and their vehicles and
belongings, the vehicles and belongings may be removed from the public
campground, impounded, and the cost therefor collected from the violator's
costs prior to the return of such items. (1997 Code § 17.36.400)
TITLE 12
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
12-1-1: Statutory Authorization
12-1-2: Findings Of Fact
12-1-3: Statement Of Purpose
12-1-4: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
12-1-5: Definitions
12-1-6: Lands To Which Chapter Applies
12-1-7: Basis For Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas
12-1-8: Compliance Required
12-1-9: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
12-1-10: Interpretation
12-1-11: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
12-1-12: Floodplain Administrator
12-1-13: Floodplain Development Permit
12-1-14: Variance Procedures
12-1-15: General Standards For Flood Hazard Reduction
12-1-16: Specific Standards For Flood Hazard Reduction
12-1-17: Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones)
12-1-18: Floodways
12-1-19: Alteration Of Watercourse
12-1-20: Properties Removed From Floodplain By Fill
12-1-21: Subdivision Proposals
12-1-22: Critical Facilities
12-1-23: Penalties For Noncompliance
12-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state of Colorado has, in Colorado Revised Statutes
title 29, article 20, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units
to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the board of
trustees for the town does hereby adopt the floodplain management regulations
set out in this chapter. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation,
which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
   B.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or
otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and general
welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to critical facilities, infrastructure, and other
public facilities such as water, sewer, and gas mains; electric and
communications stations; and streets and bridges located in floodplains;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is located in a
flood hazard area. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-4: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or that cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities;
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application:
ADDITION: Any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the
square footage of an existing structure.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: A fan shaped sediment deposit formed by a stream that
flows from a steep mountain valley or gorge onto a plain or the junction of a
tributary stream with the main stream. Alluvial fans contain active stream
channels and boulder bars, and recently abandoned channels. Alluvial fans are
predominantly formed by alluvial deposits and are modified by infrequent sheet
flood, channel avulsions and other stream processes.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated zone AO or AH on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) chance or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation shown on a FEMA flood insurance rate
map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30,
and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that
has a one percent (1%) chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given
year.
BASEMENT: Any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level)
on all sides.
CHANNEL: The physical confine of stream or waterway consisting of a bed and
stream banks, existing in a variety of geometries.
CHANNELIZATION: The artificial creation, enlargement or realignment of a stream
channel.
CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS (CFR): The codification of the general and
permanent rules published in the federal register by the executive departments
and agencies of the federal government. It is divided into fifty (50) titles
that represent broad areas subject to federal regulation.
COMMUNITY: Any political subdivision in the state of Colorado that has
authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations through
zoning, including, but not limited to, cities, towns, unincorporated areas in
the counties, Indian tribes and drainage and flood control districts.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): FEMA's comment on a proposed
project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map, that would, upon
construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding
source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory
floodplain.
CRITICAL FACILITY: A structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on
which it is situated, as specified in section
12-1-22 of this chapter, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to
public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the
community at any time before, during and after a flood. See section
12-1-22 of this chapter.
DFIRM DATABASE: Database (usually spreadsheets containing data and analyses
that accompany DFIRMs). The FEMA mapping specifications and guidelines outline
requirements for the development and maintenance of DFIRM databases.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM): FEMA digital floodplain map. These
digital maps serve as "regulatory floodplain maps" for insurance and floodplain
management purposes.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building: a) built, in the case of a building
in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the
elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and
piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and b) adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a
flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE,
A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building
elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency, the agency responsible for
administering the national flood insurance program.
FEDERAL REGISTER: The official daily publication for rules, proposed rules, and
notices of federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and
other presidential documents.
500-YEAR FLOOD: A flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2 percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2 percent chance
annual flood). The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen
once every five hundred (500) years.
500-YEAR FLOODPLAIN: The area of land susceptible to being inundated as a
result of the occurrence of a 500-year flood.
FLOOD CONTROL STRUCTURE: A physical structure designed and built expressly or
partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting, or guiding flood flows
along a particular waterway. These specialized flood modifying works are those
constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The official report provided by the federal
emergency management agency. The report contains the flood insurance rate map
as well as flood profiles for studied flooding sources that can be used to
determine base flood elevations for some areas.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of water from channels and reservoir spillways;
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source; or
   C.   Mudslides or mudflows that occur from excess surface water that is
combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over
the surface of normally dry land areas (such as earth carried by a current of
water and deposited along the path of the current).
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: The community official designated by title to
administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit required before construction or
development begins within any special flood hazard area (SFHA). If FEMA has not
defined the SFHA within a community, the community shall require permits for
all proposed construction or other development in the community including the
placement of manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such
construction or other development is proposed within flood prone areas. Permits
are required to ensure that proposed development projects meet the requirements
of the NFIP and this chapter.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated as
the result of a flood, including the area of land over which floodwater would
flow from the spillway of a reservoir.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and/or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height. The Colorado statewide standard for the designated height to
be used for all newly studied reaches shall be one-half foot (1/2') (6 inches).
Letters of map revision to existing floodway delineations may continue to use
the floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway
delineation.
FREEBOARD: The vertical distance in feet above a predicted water surface
elevation intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown
factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height
calculated for a selected size flood such as debris blockage of bridge openings
and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
  1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior; or
  2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): FEMA's official revision of an effective flood
insurance rate map (FIRM), or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM), or both.
LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that
affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and
thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the
effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area
(SFHA).
LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F): FEMA's modification of the
special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway.
LEVEE: A manmade embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in
accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the
flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee
structure to be reflected on the FEMA FIRMs as providing flood protection, the
levee structure must meet the requirements set forth in 44 CFR 65.10.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). Any floor used for living purposes which includes working, storage,
sleeping, cooking and eating, or recreation or any combination thereof. This
includes any floor that could be converted to such a use such as a basement or
crawl space. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium
for a building, home or business. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure,
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor;
provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of
the national flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEET (MSDS): A form with data regarding the properties of
a particular substance. An important component of product stewardship and
workplace safety, it is intended to provide workers and emergency personnel
with procedures for handling or working with that substance in a safe manner,
and includes information such as physical data (melting point, boiling point,
flashpoint, etc.), toxicity, health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage,
disposal, protective equipment, and spill handling procedures.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the North
American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP): FEMA's program of flood insurance
coverage and floodplain management administered in conjunction with the Robert
T. Stafford relief and emergency assistance act. The NFIP has applicable
federal regulations promulgated in title 44 of the code of federal regulations.
The U.S. congress established the NFIP in 1968 with the passage of the national
flood insurance act of 1968.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
NO RISE CERTIFICATION: A record of the results of an engineering analysis
conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a
floodway. A no rise certification must be supported by technical data and
signed by a registered Colorado professional engineer. The supporting technical
data should be based on the standard step backwater computer model used to
develop the 100-year floodway shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or
flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM).
100-YEAR FLOOD: A flood having a recurrence interval that has a one percent
(1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (1 percent
annual chance flood). The terms "one hundred year flood" and "one percent
chance flood" are synonymous with the term "100-year flood". The term does not
imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every one hundred (100)
years.
100-YEAR FLOODPLAIN: The area of land susceptible to being inundated as a
result of the occurrence of a 100-year flood.
PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR): FEMA's action whereby one or more map panels are
physically revised and republished. A PMR is used to change flood risk zones,
floodplain and/or floodway delineations, flood elevations, and/or planimetric
features.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year,
i.e., the 100-year floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The date the building permit was issued, including
substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure just prior to
when the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. The value of the structure shall be determined by the local
jurisdiction having land use authority in the area of interest. This includes
structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure"; provided, that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
THRESHOLD PLANNING QUANTITY (TPQ): A quantity designated for each chemical on
the list of extremely hazardous substances that triggers notification by
facilities to the state that such facilities are subject to emergency planning
requirements.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter
when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this chapter. (For full requirements, see section 60.6 of the national flood
insurance program regulations.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the national flood insurance program
regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American vertical
datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
(Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-6: LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas and areas removed
from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on
fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of Akron, Colorado. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-7: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
The special flood hazard areas identified by the federal emergency management
agency on the flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) for the town of Akron, Colorado,
dated April 1, 1988, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter. These special flood hazard areas
identified by the FIS and attendant mapping are the minimum area of
applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies designated and
approved by the board of trustees for the town. The floodplain administrator
shall keep a copy of the flood insurance study (FIS), DFIRMs, FIRMs and/or
FBFMs on file and available for public inspection. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-8: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed within the special flood hazard area without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Nothing herein shall
prevent the board of trustees from taking such lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation. These regulations meet the minimum
requirements as set forth by the Colorado water conservation board and the
national flood insurance program. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-9: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 508, 4-
1-2013)
12-1-10: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-11: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   A.   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
   B.   This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard
area or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community
or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-12: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Designation: The town clerk is hereby appointed as floodplain
administrator to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (national flood insurance
program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities: Duties and responsibilities of the
floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter, including the actual elevation (in relation
to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures and any floodproofing certificate required by
subsection 12-1-13B of this chapter.
      2.   Review, approve, or deny all applications for floodplain development
permits required by adoption of this chapter.
      3.   Review floodplain development permit applications to determine
whether a proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured
homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
      4.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
      5.   Inspect all development at appropriate times during the period of
construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter,
including proper elevation of the structure.
      6.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the special flood hazard area (for example, where there appears
to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the
floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
      7.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with section
12-1-7 of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions
of sections
12-1-15 through
12-1-22 of this chapter.
      8.   For waterways with base flood elevations for which a regulatory
floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within
zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one-half foot (1/2') at any point within
the community.
      9.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12 of the
national flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half foot (1/2');
provided, that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision
through FEMA (conditional letter of map revision), fulfills the requirements
for such revisions as established under the provisions of section 65.12 and
receives FEMA approval.
      10.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency, which is the Colorado water conservation board, prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to FEMA.
      11.   Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-13: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: A floodplain development permit shall be required to
ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Application; Required Information: Application for a floodplain
development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms
furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate
drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed
landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the
placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation
to special flood hazard area.
      1.   Additionally, the following information is required:
         a.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures.
         b.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed.
         c.   A certificate from a registered Colorado professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of subsection 12-1-16B of this chapter.
         d.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
         e.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
subsection 12-1-12B of this chapter.
      2.   Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the
floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this
chapter and the following relevant factors:
         a.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
         b.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
         c.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
         d.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
         e.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
         f.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems.
         g.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
         h.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
         i.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
         j.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
for that area. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-14: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and
render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
   B.   The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   C.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may
appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   D.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency
management agency upon request.
   E.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or
the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   F.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, provided the relevant factors in subsection 12-1-13B of
this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the
one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
   G.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter as stated in section
12-1-3 of this chapter.
   H.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   I.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   J.   Prerequisites for granting variances:
      1.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      2.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      3.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   K.   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use; provided, that:
      1.   The criteria outlined in subsections A through I of this section are
met; and
      2.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-15: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required for
all new construction and substantial improvements:
   A.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   B.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   C.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage.
   D.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   E.   All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices
which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured
homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over
the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
   F.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   G.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters.
   H.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-16: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in: a) section
12-1-7; b) subsection 12-1-12B7; or c) section
12-1-21 of this chapter, the following provisions are required:
   A.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement),
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to one foot (1') above
the base flood elevation. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of
the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered
Colorado professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor. Such certification
shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction:
      1.   With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in section
12-1-22 of this chapter, new construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing,
and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including
ductwork), elevated to one foot (1') above the base flood elevation or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that at
one foot (1') above the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
      2.   A registered Colorado professional engineer or architect shall
develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the
construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this
subsection. Such certification shall be maintained by the floodplain
administrator, as proposed in subsection 12-1-13B of this chapter.
   C.   Enclosures:
      1.   New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      2.   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered Colorado professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
   D.   Manufactured Homes:
      1.   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved
within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: a) outside of
a manufactured home park or subdivision; b) in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision; c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are
elevated to one foot (1') above the base flood elevation and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
      2.   All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in
an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE
on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection D1
of this section, shall be elevated so that either:
         a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service
facilities (including ductwork), are one foot (1') above the base flood
elevation; or
         b.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
   E.   Recreational Vehicles:
      1.   All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH,
and AE on the community's FIRM either:
         a.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days;
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         c.   Meet the permit requirements of subsection 12-1-13B of this
chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes"
in subsection D of this section.
      2.   A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
   F.   Prior Approved Activities: Any activity for which a floodplain
development permit was issued by the town or a CLOMR was issued by FEMA prior
to the effective date hereof may be completed according to the standards in
place at the time of the permit or CLOMR issuance and will not be considered in
violation of this chapter if it meets such standards. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-17: AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES):
Located within the special flood hazard area established in section
12-1-7 of this chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one foot (1')
to three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the
path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following
provisions apply:
   A.   Residential Construction: All new construction and substantial
improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor (including
basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least one foot (1') above the depth number specified
in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 3 feet if no depth number is
specified). Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor. Such certification shall be
submitted to the floodplain administrator.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction:
      1.   With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in section
12-1-22 of this chapter, all new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement),
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least one foot (1') above the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 3 feet if no depth number is specified), or
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that
the structure is watertight to at least one foot (1') above the base flood
level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. A registered Colorado professional
engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in subsection 12-
1-13B of this chapter, are satisfied.
      2.   Within zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes are required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-18: FLOODWAYS:
Floodways are administrative limits and tools used to regulate existing and
future floodplain development. The state of Colorado has adopted floodway
standards that are more stringent than the FEMA minimum standard (see
definition of "floodway" in section
12-1-5 of this chapter). Located within special flood hazard areas established
in section
12-1-7 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is
an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions
shall apply:
   A.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed by a licensed Colorado professional engineer and in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase (requires a no rise certification) in flood
levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   B.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of sections
12-1-15 through
12-1-22 of this chapter.
   C.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12 of the national
flood insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the
adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood
elevations; provided, that the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway
revision through FEMA. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-19: ALTERATION OF WATERCOURSE:
For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a special flood
hazard area, the following standards apply:
   A.   Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider
issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition, and channel migration and
properly mitigate potential problems through the project as well as upstream
and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment
transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate,
to assist in determining the most appropriate design.
   B.   Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual
100-year floodplain.
   C.   Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a
project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain
and be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local floodplain
rules, regulations and ordinances.
   D.   Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a
registered Colorado professional engineer or certified professional
hydrologist.
   E.   All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all
applicable federal, state and municipal floodplain requirements and
regulations.
   F.   Within the regulatory floodway, stream alteration activities shall not
be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a floodway
analysis and report, sealed by a registered Colorado professional engineer,
that there is not more than a 0.00 foot rise in the proposed conditions
compared to existing conditions floodway resulting from the project, otherwise
known as a no rise certification, unless the community first applies for a
CLOMR and floodway revision in accordance with section
12-1-18 of this chapter.
   G.   Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated portions of
watercourses so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. (Ord. 508,
4-1-2013)
12-1-20: PROPERTIES REMOVED FROM FLOODPLAIN BY FILL:
A floodplain development permit shall not be issued for the construction of a
new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from
the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill
(LOMR-F), unless such new structure or addition complies with the following:
   A.   Residential Construction: The lowest floor (including basement),
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities (including ductwork) must be elevated to one foot (1')
above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: The lowest floor (including basement),
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities (including ductwork) must be elevated to one foot (1')
above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill, or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that
the structure or addition is watertight to at least one foot (1') above the
base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads or effects of buoyancy. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-21: SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS:
   A.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision
or other development proposal is in a flood prone area, the proposal shall
minimize flood damage.
   B.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain
development permit requirements of section
12-1-13 of this chapter, and the provisions of sections
12-1-15 through
12-1-22 of this chapter.
   C.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section
12-1-7 or subsection 12-1-12B of this chapter.
   D.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
   E.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-22: CRITICAL FACILITIES:
   A.   Definition: A critical facility is a structure or related
infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in rule
6 of the rules and regulations for regulatory floodplains in Colorado, that if
flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or
interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time
before, during and after a flood.
   B.   Classification Of Critical Facilities: It is the responsibility of the
board of trustees to identify and confirm that specific structures in their
community meet the following criteria:
Critical facilities are classified under the following categories: 1) essential
services; 2) hazardous materials; 3) at risk populations; and 4) vital to
restoring normal services.
      1.   Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency
response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications,
public utility plant facilities, and transportation lifelines. These facilities
consist of:
         a.   Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations,
emergency vehicle and equipment storage, and, emergency operation centers);
         b.   Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent
care centers having emergency treatment functions, and nonambulatory surgical
structures but excluding clinics, doctor's offices, and nonurgent care medical
structures that do not provide these functions);
         c.   Designated emergency shelters;
         d.   Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment
for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio,
and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines,
cables, and conduits);
         e.   Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution
(hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and
gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines,
transmission lines, distribution lines, and service lines); and
         f.   Air transportation lifelines - airports (municipal and larger),
helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated
infrastructure (aviation control towers, air traffic control centers, and
emergency equipment aircraft hangars).
Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants
(WWTP), nonpotable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric
power generating plants and related appurtenances.
Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the board of trustees that the facility is an element of a
redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a
minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available
(either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental
agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are
either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with the
provisions of this chapter, and an operations plan is in effect that states how
redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a
flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the board of
trustees on an as needed basis upon request.
      2.   Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or
store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water reactive
materials. These facilities may include:
         a.   Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant,
pharmaceutical manufacturing);
         b.   Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive,
toxic and/or water reactive materials;
         c.   Refineries;
         d.   Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and
         e.   Aboveground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers.
Facilities shall be determined to be critical facilities if they produce or
store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is
required by the occupational safety and health administration (OSHA) to keep a
material safety data sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in
the workplace, and the chemical(s) is stored in quantities equal to or greater
than the threshold planning quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that
facility shall be considered to be a critical facility. The TPQ for these
chemicals is: either five hundred (500) pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is
lower) for the three hundred fifty six (356) chemicals listed under 40 CFR
section 302 (2010), also known as extremely hazardous substances (EHS); or ten
thousand (10,000) pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent
with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the Colorado
department of health and environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found
in 29 CFR section 1910 (2010). The environmental protection agency (EPA)
regulation "designation, reportable quantities, and notification", 40 CFR
section 302 (2010), and OSHA regulation "occupational safety and health
standards", 29 CFR section 1910 (2010), are incorporated herein by reference
and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation of
this chapter, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations.
Specific exemptions to this category include:
            (1)   Finished consumer products within retail centers and
households containing hazardous materials intended for household use, and
agricultural products intended for agricultural use.
            (2)   Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials
for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local authority
having jurisdiction by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified
professional (as determined by the local jurisdiction having land use
authority) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a
major threat to the public.
            (3)   Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage, and distribution centers
that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products.
These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also
function as critical facilities under another category outlined in this
chapter.
      3.   At risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care,
and schools. These facilities consist of:
         a.   Eldercare (nursing homes).
         b.   Congregate care serving twelve (12) or more individuals (daycare
and assisted living).
         c.   Public and private schools (preschools, K-12 schools, before
school and after school care serving 12 or more children).
      4.   Facilities vital to restoring normal services including government
operations. These facilities consist of:
         a.   Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails,
building permitting and inspection services, community administration and
management, maintenance and equipment centers).
         b.   Essential structures for public colleges and universities
(dormitories, offices, and classrooms only).
These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the board of trustees
that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will
not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that
redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or
available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the
alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or
are compliant with this chapter, and an operations plan is in effect that
states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in
the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the
board of trustees on an as needed basis upon request.
   C.   Protection For Critical Facilities: All new and substantially improved
critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the
special flood hazard area shall be regulated to a higher standard than
structures not determined to be critical facilities. For the purposes of this
chapter, protection shall include one of the following:
      1.   Location outside the special flood hazard area; or
      2.   Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two feet
(2') above the base flood elevation.
   D.   Ingress And Egress For New Critical Facilities: New critical facilities
shall, when practicable as determined by the board of trustees, have continuous
noninundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services)
during a 100-year flood event. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
12-1-23: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
   A.   Compliance With Chapter: No structure or land shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. (Ord. 508, 4-
1-2013)
   B.   Penalty Imposed: A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each and every day a violation of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, exists, or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 508, 4-1-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Remedial Action: The town is specifically authorized to seek an
injunction, abatement, restitution, or any other remedy necessary to prevent,
enjoin, abate, or remove the violation. Any remedies provided for herein shall
be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies
provided by law or in equity. (Ord. 508, 4-1-2013)
